LAKE IN THE HILLS ZONING CODE
2002 EDITION
Section Title
1 Title
2 Code Purposes
3 Definitions
4 General Provisions
5 Use Districts
6 A-1 Agricultural District
7 Residential Districts
8 Business Districts
9 Manufacturing Districts
10 Special Districts
11 Permitted and Conditional Use Chart
12 Temporary Uses
13 Accessory Structures
14 Antennas, Amateur Radio Facilities, Satellite Dishes,
Personal Wireless Service Facilities
15 Fences
16 Signs
17 Home Occupations
18 Off-Street Parking and Loading
19 Performance Standards
20 Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
21 Administration
22 Amendments
23 Variations
24 Conditional Uses
25 Planned Developments
26 Landscape Standards
27 Small Wind Energy Systems
28 Collection Bins
29 Fees
30 Interpretation; Conflicts
31 Violations, Penalty
32 Validity
VILLAGE OF LAKE IN THE HILLS ZONING CODE
2002 EDITION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1 Title
Section 2 Code Purposes
Section 3 Definitions
Section 4 General Provisions
4.1 Scope of Regulations
4.2 Permits
4.3 Height, Bulk and Lot Coverage
4.4 Lot Area and Dimension
4.5 Location of Buildings
4.6 Buildings Under Construction
4.7 Dwelling Units on Zoning Lot
4.8 Lot Coverage Exception
Section 5 Use Districts
5.1 Zoning Districts
5.2 Zoning Maps
5.3 New or Annexed Land
Section 6 A-1 Agricultural District
6.1 Purpose
6.2 Permitted and Conditional Uses
6.3 Bulk, Lot Area, and Yard Requirements
6.4 Dwelling Standards
6.5 Temporary Uses and Home Occupations,
Accessory Structures and Uses
6.6 Parking and Loading Requirements
6.7 Sign Regulations
6.8 Agricultural Bulk Chart
6.9 Dwelling Standards Chart
Section 7 Residential Districts
7.1 Purpose
7.2 Zoning Districts
7.3 General Provisions
7.4 Residential Bulk Chart, Part 1
7.5 Residential Bulk Chart, Part 2
7.6 Dwelling Standards Chart
Section 8 Business Districts
8.1 Purpose
8.2 Zoning Districts
8.3 General Provisions
8.4 Business Districts Bulk Chart
Section 9 Manufacturing Districts
9.1 Purposes
9.2 Zoning District Classifications
9.3 General Provisions
9.4 Manufacturing Districts Bulk Chart
Section 10 Special Districts
10.1 Open Space District
10.2 Institutional Buildings District
10.3 Airport District 1
10.4 Airport District 2
10.5 Special Districts Bulk Chart
Section 11 Permitted and Conditional Use Chart
Section 12 Temporary Uses
12.1 General Provisions
12.2 Application and Approval
12.3 Special Temporary Uses
12.4 Temporary Use Chart
Section 13 Accessory Structures
13.1 Authorization
13.2 General Provisions
13.3 Size, Floor Area
13.4 Exemption for Village Owned or Operated
Buildings
13.5 Permitted Accessory Structures
Section 14 Antennas, Amateur Radio Facilities, Satellite
Dishes, Personal Wireless Service Facilities
14.1 Code Compliance Required
14.2 Antennas
14.3 Parabolic/Satellite Television Antennas
14.4 Radio, Television Transmitting Antennas,
Personal Wireless Service Facilities Antennas
Section 15 Fences
15.1 General Provisions
15.2 Construction Standards
15.3 Permitted Fencing
15.4 Vision Obstructions Prohibited
15.5 Exemptions
15.6 Fences, Interior Lot
15.7 Fences, Corner Lot
15.8 Fences, Through (Interior) Lot
15.9 Fences, Through (Corner) Lot
15.10 Fences, Through (Entire Block) Lot
15.11 Fences, Reversed Corner Lot
15.12 Perimeter Fencing
15.13 Dog Pounds, Runs & Enclosures
15.14 Separation Walls/Fencing (Multiple Family,
Business, Manufacturing Property)
15.15 Lakefront Fencing
15.16 Illustrations
Section 16 Signs
16.1 Purpose
16.2 Zoning District Signs
16.3 General Provisions
16.4 Prohibited Signs
16.5 Exempt Signs
16.6 Temporary Signs
16.7 Illumination and Maintenance
16.8 Permits
16.9 Removal of Signs
16.10 Additional Requirements
16.11 Sign Chart
Section 17 Home Occupations
17.1 Purposes
17.2 Certain Home Occupations Authorized
17.3 Use Limitations
Section 18 Off Street Parking and Loading
18.1 Purposes
18.2 General Provisions
18.3 Minimum Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
18.4 Additional Parking Regulations
18.5 Location of Parking Areas
18.6 Parking Setbacks
18.7 Off-Street Loading Facilities
18.8 Minimum Loading Space Requirements
18.9 Minimum Off Street Parking Space Requirements
Section 19 Performance Standards
19.1 Purpose
19.2 Noise
19.3 Air Pollution
19.4 Water Pollution
19.5 Open Burning
19.6 Odors
19.7 Noxious Gases
19.8 Glare and Heat
19.9 Vibrations
Section 20 Non-Conforming Buildings And Uses
20.1 General Provisions
20.2 Continuance of Use
20.3 Discontinuance of Use
20.4 Change of Use
20.5 Termination and Removal of Non-Conforming
Buildings, Structures or Uses
20.6 Repairs and Alterations
20.7 Damage and Destruction
20.8 Additions and Enlargements
20.9 Exceptions
20.10 Non-Conforming Signs
Section 21 Administration
21.1 Enforcing Officer
21.2 Building Permits
21.3 Certificates of Use and Occupancy
21.4 Continuance of Existing Uses
21.5 Appeals
21.6 Public Hearing Notices
Section 22 Amendments
22.1 Authority
22.2 Application
22.3 Fee
22.4 Public Hearing
22.5 Findings of Fact
22.6 Written Protest
22.7 Board of Trustees Action
Section 23 Variations
23.1 Authority
23.2 Application
23.3 Authorized Variation
23.4 Fee
23.5 Public Hearing
23.6 Standards
23.7 Findings of Fact
23.8 Conditions
23.9 Board of Trustees Action
23.10 Expiration
Section 24 Conditional Uses
24.1 Purpose
24.2 Authority
24.3 Application
24.4 Fee
24.5 Public Hearing
24.6 Findings of Fact
24.7 Conditions
24.8 Board of Trustees
24.9 Termination of Conditional Uses
24.10 Adult Entertainment Establishments
Section 25 Planned Developments
25.1 Purpose
25.2 Where Permitted
25.3 Planned Development Standards
25.4 Exceptions
25.5 Application Process
25.6 Development Plan Standards
25.7 Approval of Development Plans
25.8 Minor Modification of Development Plans
25.9 Failure to Begin Planned Development
Section 26 Landscape Standards
26.1 Purpose and Intent
26.2 Events Triggering Landscape Requirements
26.3 Definitions
26.4 Perimeter Landscape
26.5 Table
26.6 Table
26.7 Screening
26.8 Environmental Buffers
26.9 Table
26.10 Parking Lot Landscaping
26.11 Stormwater Management Areas
26.12 Landscaping Around Signs
26.13 Tree Preservation
26.14 Flexibility In Applying Standards
26.15 Planting Specifications
26.16 General Maintenance
26.17 Plant Lists
Section 27 Small Wind Energy Systems
27.1 Code Compliance Required
27.2 Standards For Roof-Mounted Small Wind Energy
Systems
27.3 Standards For Ground-Mounted Small Wind
Energy Systems1
27.4 Appearance Standards
27.5 Airport Hazard Zoning Limitations
27.6 Non-Interference With Telecommunication
27.7 Disuse/Dismantling
27.8 Illustrations
Section 28 Collection Bins
28.1 License Required
28.2 License Application and Issuance
28.3 Standards
28.4 Maintenance
Section 29 Fees
Section 30 Interpretation/Conflicts
Section 31 Violations, Penalty
Section 32 Validity
Section 1, Page 1
LAKE IN THE HILLS ZONING CODE
2002 EDITION
SECTION 1
TITLE
This Zoning Code shall be known, cited and referred to as the
Lake in the Hills Zoning Code.
Section 2, Page 2
SECTION 2
CODE PURPOSES
This Zoning Code is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals,
comfort and general welfare of the residents of the
Village.
B. To divide the Village into zones and districts and to
restrict and regulate therein the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings,
structures and land for residence, business,
manufacturing and other specified uses.
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business and manufacturing areas within the
Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas.
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of
access to property.
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lots, and to determine
the area of open spaces surrounding buildings and
structures necessary to provide adequate light and air
and to protect the public health.
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings
designed for residential, business, manufacturing or other
uses, and the location of other structures with respect to
building lines.
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or
structures shall conform.
H. To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible
with the character of development or intended uses
within specified zoning districts.
Section 2, Page 2
I. To prevent additions to, alterations of, or remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid
the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder.
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by
providing for the off-street parking of motor
vehicles, other vehicles, boats and trailers and
providing for the loading and unloading of commercial
vehicles.
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards in the interest of the public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare.
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of structures, so far as is practical and appropriate in
each zoning district, by regulating the uses and bulk of
buildings and structures in relation to the land
surrounding them.
M. To conserve the taxable value of land, buildings and
structures throughout the Village.
N. To provide for the elimination of non-conforming uses of
land, buildings and structures which non-conforming uses
adversely affect the character and value of desirable
conforming development in each zoning district.
O. To define and limit the powers and duties of the
administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.
Section 3, Page 1
SECTION 3
DEFINITIONS
In the construction and interpretation of this Zoning Code, the
following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
Words or phrases not defined herein shall be defined as provided
in the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language,
Fourth Edition.
Words used or defined in one tense shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
Words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and words in the plural number shall include the
singular number.
Abut: To touch or lie immediately next to, to share a common
wall or lot line, or to be separated by only a street, alley, or
drainage course.
Accessory Building or Use: A building or use that is
subordinate in extent and purpose to, that is located on the
same lot, and that is customarily found incident to the
principal building or use, when permitted by district
regulations.
Acreage: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre
or more which has not been subdivided or platted.
Addition: A physical enlargement of an existing structure.
Adult Booth: Any area of an Adult Entertainment Establishment
set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more
walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or
otherwise demonstrate any Adult Materials or to view any live
performance that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of Specified
Anatomical Areas or the conduct or simulation of Specified
Sexual Activities.
Adult Cabaret: Any Commercial Establishment that as a
substantial or significant portion of its business features or
provides any of the following:
Section 3, Page 2
1. Persons who appear Semi-nude.
2. Live performances that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of Specified Anatomical
Areas or the conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual
Activities.
3. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes,
slides, computer displays, or other visual
representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure, depiction, or description of Specified
Anatomical Areas, or the conduct or simulation of
Specified Sexual Activities.
Adult Entertainment Establishment: An Adult Cabaret, Adult
Store, or Adult Theater, as defined in this Section.
Adult Material: Any of the following, whether new or used:
1. (a) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or digitally-stored materials; or
(b) Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes,
slides, computer displays, or other visual
representations or recordings of any kind, that
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the exposure, depiction, or description of
Specified Anatomical Areas, or the conduct or
simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
2. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that
are designed for use in connection with Specified
Sexual Activities, or that depict or describe
Specified Anatomical Areas.
Adult Store: Any Commercial Establishment (1) that contains one
or more Adult Booths; or (2) where 25 percent or more of its
stock is devoted to the sale, rental, viewing or display of
Adult Materials.
Adult Theater: Any Commercial Establishment in which 25 percent
or more of its business features or provides (1) films, motion
pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual
Section 3, Page 3
representations or recordings that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or
description of Specified Anatomical Areas, or the conduct or
simulation of Specified Sexual Activities; or (2) live
performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of Specified
Anatomical Areas or the conduct or simulation of Specified
Sexual Activities.
A-Frame Sign: Any upright, rigid supporting frame in the form
of a triangle or inverted “V”.
Agriculture: The science, art, and business of cultivating
soil, and producing crops.
Airport: Any landing area, runway or other facility (including
heliports), designed, used or intended to be used either
publicly or privately by any person or persons for the landing
and taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways,
aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary
accessory buildings, uses and open spaces.
Alcoholic Liquor: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a
human being.
Alley: A public right-of-way, that affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
Alteration: Any construction or renovation to an existing
structure other than repair or an addition. "Alteration"
includes, but is not limited to, remodeling, renovation,
rehabilitation, re-construction, historic preservation, historic
reconstruction, historic restoration, changes or rearrangement
of the structural parts or elements, extraordinary repairs,
plumbing fixture changes, and changes or rearrangements in the
plan configuration of walls and full-height partitions. The
following work is not considered to be an alteration unless it
affects the use of the building or facility: normal
maintenance, reroofing, interior or exterior redecoration,
changes to mechanical and electrical systems, replacement of
plumbing, piping, or valves, asbestos removal, or installation
of fire sprinkler systems.
Section 3, Page 4
Animal Use: A use that provides services for animals excluding
agricultural activities and retail sales of merchandise (kennel,
shelter, veterinary, pet care facility etc).
Animal Shelter: A facility used to house or contain stray,
homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats or other comparable
household pets and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a
public body, a humane society, animal welfare society, or other
non-profit organization devoted to the protection and humane
treatment of animals.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms, other than a one family
dwelling which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be
used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen, bath and
toilet facilities, permanently installed, must always be
included for each apartment.
Approved Hard Surface: A continuous, monolithic, hard surface
for the purposes of parking or storage, that consists of a
minimum of 4 inches of compacted gravel base material, covered
by a minimum surfacing material of 4 inches of concrete, or 6
inches of compacted gravel with 2 inches of asphalt or
continuous brick pavers, or an equivalent surfacing material as
determined by the Community Services Director or designee.
Assembly – Civic/Social Organizations: A group of persons
gathered together for a common reason, as for a legislative,
educational or social purpose
Attention-Getting Device: Any pennant, flag, valance, banner,
propeller, spinner, streamer, search light, balloon and similar
device or ornamentation designed for purposes of promotions,
advertising or attracting attention.
Attraction Panels With Changeable Letters: Panels on which
individual letters may be temporarily affixed in order to advertise
events, special sales, products or other facts non-essential
to identify the basic business conducted on the premises.
Automotive Service: Any use which cleans, services, repairs,
fixes, alters, modifies or replaces in whole or parts of
automobiles.
Awning: A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, that projects
from the wall of a building.
Section 3, Page 5
Banner Sign: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic,
paper or canvas and used for attracting the attention of the
public. All banner signs shall be considered temporary signs.
Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground.
Where more than one-half of its height is above the established
curb level or, when curb level has not been established, above
the average level of the adjoining ground, a basement shall be
counted and considered as a story for the purposes of height
measurement.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment: An operator-occupied residence
providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more
than 5 guest rooms for a continuous period of 30 days or less.
Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, rooming houses,
or food service establishments.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a
street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rightsof-
way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of waterways or a
corporate boundary line of the Village.
Board of Trustees: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake
in the Hills.
Boat: Any device used or capable of being used for navigation
on water.
Building: Any structure with substantial walls and roof
securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides
from any other structures by space or by walls in which there
are not communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is
designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, chattels, equipment, materials or other
personal property. Any structure with interior areas not
normally accessible for human inhabitation, such as gas holders,
oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil
cracking towers and other similar structures, are not considered
buildings.
Buildable Area: The space remaining on a zoning lot after
having satisfied the minimum open space requirements of this
Zoning Code.
Section 3, Page 6
Building Code: The Lake in the Hills Municipal Building Code,
as amended from time to time.
Building, Completely Enclosed: A building separated on all
sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or
other structures, enclosed by a permanent roof and by exterior
walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and exit or
entrance doors.
Building Frontage: The distance between side building lines
(building width) measured at the front building line.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the
sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade opposite the
middle of the front of the building to the highest point of any
portion of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line
of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves
and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where
the building is set back from the street line, the height of the
building may be measured from the average elevation of the
finished lot grade at the front of the building.
Building Integrated Solar Energy System: A solar energy system
that consists of integrated solar modules into the building
envelope, where solar panels themselves act as a building
material (i.e. roof shingles or photovoltaic film) or structural
element (i.e. façade).
Building, Principal: A building in which the principal use of
the zoning lot is conducted.
Building Setback Line: A line parallel to the front, sides or
rear lines of a zoning lot at a distance from such front, side,
or rear lines equal to the required yard or setback established
in this Zoning Code , of which no building, structure or
accessory structure can be placed unless otherwise allowed by
this code.
Business Center: See the definition for "shopping/business
center."
Campground: A recreational area where 3 or more tents, cabins,
recreational vehicles or other permanent or non-permanent type
shelters are erected and maintained for camping or where space
Section 3, Page 7
is provided for camping, temporary parking of recreational
vehicles or placing of such tents, cabins, recreational vehicles
or other permanent or non-permanent type shelters of any kind
for a total of 10 or more persons for 6 or more camping days
during a calendar year. It shall include any structure, tent,
vehicle, enclosure, appurtenances or recreational equipment
related to or used or intended for use as a part of such
campground and an area upon which no more than 4 mobile homes
are located for permanent habitation as defined in the Mobile
Home and Mobile Home Park Act. (210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.)
Cannabis Cultivation Center: a facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to
provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis. All Cannabis
Cultivation Centers shall comply with the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (Public Act 098-0122) and all
rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
Cannabis Dispensing Organization: a facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire
medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the
purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related
supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying
patients. All Medical Cannabis Dispensary Establishments shall
comply with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (Public Act 098-0122) and all rules and regulations
adopted in accordance thereto.
Canopy: Any structure other than an awning, projecting over
private or public property and carried by a frame supported by
the ground, sidewalk or building superstructure.
Cellar: A cellar is a story having more than one-half of its
height below the curb level or below the highest level of the
adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for
the purpose of height measurement.
Cemetery: Any land or structure dedicated to and used, or
intended to be used, for the interment of human remains.
Child Care Institution: A child care facility where more than 7
children are received and maintained for the purpose of
Section 3, Page 8
providing them with care or training or both. The term "child
care institution" includes residential schools, primarily
serving ambulatory handicapped children, and those operating a
full calendar year, but does not include:
Any State-operated institution for child care
established by legislative action;
Any juvenile detention or shelter care home
established and operated by any county or by any
public body or agency.
Any institution, home, place or facility operating
under a license pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act
(210 ILCS 45/1-101)et seq.
Any bona fide boarding school in which children are
primarily taught branches of education corresponding
to those taught in public schools, grades one through
12, or taught in public elementary schools, high
schools, or both elementary and high schools, and
which operates on a regular academic school year
basis. Any facility licensed as a "group home" as
defined in this Zoning Code.
Club: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not
for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common
purpose other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors,
kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of
dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a
building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with
suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and
equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests.
Collection Bin: An unattended container, receptacle, or similar
device that is used for soliciting and collecting clothing,
shoes, books, small household items or other salvageable
personal property. This term does not include any unattended
collection bin located within a building, which is permitted by
right.
Section 3, Page 9
Commercial Vehicle: Any vehicle having a registration other
than a passenger, motorcycle, recreational, “B”, or “D” plated
vehicle or a “TA” plated trailer under the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code and is further restricted in Section 18.4-
1 of this Zoning Code.
Curb Level: The level of the established curb in front of the
building measured at the center of such front. Where a building
faces on more than one street, the curb level shall be the
average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of
each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building
shall be considered the curb level.
Day Care Center: Any child care facility which regularly
provides day care for less than 24 hours per day for (1) more
than 8 children in a family home, or (2) more than 3 children in
a facility other than a family home, including senior citizen
buildings. The term does not include (a) programs operated by
public or private elementary schools or secondary level schools
or institutions of higher learning which serve children who
shall have attained the age of 3 years; (b) programs or that
portion of the program which serves children who shall have
attained the age of 3 years and which are recognized by the
State Board of Education; (c) educational program or program or
programs serving children who shall have attained the age of 3
years and which are operated by a school which is registered
with the State Board of Education and which is recognized or
accredited by a recognized national or multi-state educational
organization or association which regularly recognizes or
accredits schools; (d) programs which exclusively serve, or that
portion of the program which serves, handicapped children who
shall have attained the age of 3 years but are less than 21
years of age and which are registered and approved as meeting
standards of the State Board of Education; (e) facilities
operated in connection with a shopping center or service,
religious services, or other similar facility, where transient
children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians
of the children are occupied on the premises and readily
available; (f) any type of day care center that is conducted on
federal government premises; (g) special activities programs,
including athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities
conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic,
charitable and governmental organizations; (h) part day child
care facilities, as defined in Section 2.10 of State act; or (i)
Section 3, Page 10
programs or that portion of the program which (1) serves
children who shall have attained the age of 3 years, (2) is
operated by churches or religious institutions as described in
Section 501(c)(3) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code (26
U.S.C.A. 501) (3) receives no governmental aid, (4) is operated
as a component of a religious, nonprofit elementary school, (5)
operates primarily to provide religious education, and (6) meets
appropriate state or local health and fire safety standards.
For the purposes of (a), (b), (c), (d), and (i) of this
definition, "children who shall have attained the age of 3
years" shall mean children who are 3 years of age, but less than
4 years of age, at the time of enrollment in the program.
Director of Community Development: The Village of Lake in the
Hills Director of Community Development, Community Services
Director, or designee.
Drive-Through: An establishment or part thereof in which patrons
order commodities or process transactions at a window or
electronic device used for communication or is served while
still in their vehicles (fast food restaurants, banks,
pharmacies etc.).
Driveway: A private or public way that leads to a house, garage
or other building from a road, street or alley.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed and used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels or rooming houses.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units, each of which may
connect to a common corridor or entranceway.
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached: A building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units, each of which has a
separate entrance to the exterior and its own ground floor
living space.
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached: A building designed
exclusively for use and occupancy by one family, and entirely
separated from any other dwelling by space.
Section 3, Page 11
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed to provide dwelling
units for occupancy by two families living independently of each
other.
Dwelling Unit: A single unit of residence which provides a
kitchen or food preparation area, in addition to rooms and
spaces for living, bathing and sleeping.
Election Campaign Sign: A temporary sign announcing or
supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any
national, state, or local election.
Electrical Code: The Village of Lake in the Hills Electrical
Code, as amended from time to time.
Entertainment: An establishment which sells or provides
entertainment on site and for indoor purposes (arcades,
amusement rides, laser tag, go-carts, movie theaters, bowling
alleys, skating rinks, dance halls, etc.)
Entryway Sign: A permanent sign or other approved entryway
feature located at the principal roadway entrance or entrances
to a particular business center, manufacturing center or
subdivision.
Externally Illuminated Sign: A sign illuminated by a source of
light which is cast upon or falls upon the surface of the sign
to illuminate by reflection only.
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding
servants) who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption,
living together and maintaining a common household, but not
including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
Farm: A parcel of land having an area of five acres or more
which is partly under cultivation or a parcel 10 acres or more
which is fenced and utilized as pasture, with or without
buildings or structures located thereon.
Farming: The utilization of land for the growing and harvesting
of crops or the keeping of domestic animals, or both.
Section 3, Page 12
Fence: A structure erected for the purpose of enclosing or
visually defining an area.
Flashing Sign: Any illuminated sign on or in which such
illumination is not kept stationary or constant or intensity and
color at all times, and shall include blinking, strobing,
flashing, animated, alternating, fading-in and –out, and other
similar operations of lights or light sources. For purposes of
this code, a time and temperature sign shall not be defined as a
Flashing Sign.
Flea Market: An occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer
goods, new and used, for sale to the public, not to include
private garage sales.
Flood Plain: The area adjoining a river, stream, drainage
channel, pond or a low area which is subject to flooding.
Floodway: The channel or bed of a river, stream, drainage
channel or pond and those portions of the flood plains adjoining
which are required to efficiently carry and discharge the flow
of the river, stream, drainage channel or pond.
Flood Water: The water of any river, stream, drainage channel,
low area or pond which is above or outside the channel or banks
of said river, stream, drainage channel or pond.
Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two buildings, but not including: open porches, breezeways,
interior parking spaces, basements where more than one-half of
the height is below grade level, or any space where the floorto-
ceiling height is less than five feet.
Food Pantry: A facility operated by a non-profit organization
that distributes donated food and sundry grocery products.
Frontage: All of the property abutting on one side of a street
between two specific points.
Gas Station: A place where gasoline and/or fuel oil, stored
only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease,
for operation of automobiles, are offered for sale directly to
Section 3, Page 13
the public on the premises and including minor accessories and
services for automobiles. Gas stations shall not include sale
or storage for longer than 72 hours of motor vehicles not in
operating condition.
Grade Level: Any area at the main entrance level, excluding
utility rooms, cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
Ground Sign: A sign completely or principally self-supported by
posts or other supports independent of any building or other
structure and anchored in or upon the ground.
Group Home, Type 1: Shall mean a structure or building
constructed as a single family residence and used to provide
accommodations on a relatively permanent basis for up to five
(5) unrelated persons, consisting of individuals who are
undergoing treatment or rehabilitation for disabilities, and
their live-in staff. Visiting staff who do not reside within the
group home shall not be counted for purposes of determining the
number of residents. Services provided within a Type 1 Group
Home shall be restricted to the residents of the facility. A
Type 1 Group Home does not include dormitory uses or
accommodations provided for individuals who are students of a
college, university, monastery or other
educational/institutional use. It does not include residences
that serve as an alternative to incarceration for persons
convicted of criminal offenses, or residences for persons whose
primary reason for placement therein is the treatment of a
communicable disease. A Type 1 Group Home must have all
applicable licenses and certifications from county, state and
federal government entities. A Type 1 Group Home must not be
located within 1,300 feet of another Group Home (Type 1 or 2),
not allow more than two residents per bedroom and must have a
minimum of 75 sq. ft. of bedroom space per resident.
Group Home, Type 2: Shall mean a structure or facility for more
than five (5) unrelated persons including their live-in staff,
and which contains common cooking facilities and common living
and eating areas. A Type 2 Group Home may include, but is not
limited to convents, residents for developmentally disabled
persons, residences for individuals who are undergoing treatment
or rehabilitation for disabilities, orphanages and monasteries.
It does not include residences that serve as an alternative to
Section 3, Page 14
incarceration for persons convicted of criminal offenses, or
residences for persons whose primary reason for placement
therein is the treatment of a communicable disease. A Type 2
Group Home must have all applicable licenses and certifications
from county, state and federal government entities. A Type 2
Group Home must not be located within 1,300 feet of another
Group Home (Type 1 or 2), not allow more than two residents per
bedroom and must have a minimum of 75 sq. ft. of bedroom space
per resident.
Guest House: Living quarters within a detached accessory
building located on the same premises with the principal
building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the
premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor be
rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
Home Occupations: Any business, profession, occupation, or
activity which is conducted wholly within a residential
structure, that is clearly secondary and incidental to the use
of that structure as a dwelling unit, and does not change the
character of the residence or adversely affect the residential
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Horticulture: The production and storage of fruits, vegetables,
grains, ornamental trees or other crops but not including the
keeping or production of livestock.
Hotel/Motel: Every building or other structure kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place
where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations
are offered for pay to travelers and guests, whether transient,
permanent or residential, in which twenty-five (25) or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests
and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining
rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in
connection therewith.
Householder: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the
owner or lessee thereof.
Inflatable Sign: Any sign or inflatable device designed to be
filled with air or other gas, used singly or in clusters,
displayed to attract the attention of the public.
Section 3, Page 15
Inoperable Motor Vehicle: Any motor vehicle from which, for a
period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts
have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts
have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
In-season :That period of time from April 1st through November
30th within a calendar year.
Internally Illuminated Sign: A sign, all or any part of which
the letters or design of which is illuminated with incandescent,
neon or other types of lamps; or a sign with painted, flush or
raised letters lighted by an electric lamp or lamps attached
thereto; or a sign having a border of incandescent or
fluorescent lamps thereto attached and reflecting light thereon;
or a transparent sign whether lighted by electricity or other
illuminating feature.
Kennel: Any premises where three or more dogs, at any one time,
over three months of age, are accepted for boarding, breeding,
training or sale, including overnight boarding, provided that
the operator is properly licensed by the State of Illinois. If
located outside of a Business (zoning) District, 600 square feet
or 25 percent of the floor area (as outlined in Section 18.2-6B)
occupied by the facility, whichever is less, may be used for
retail sales related to dog care.
Land Use or Master Plan or Comprehensive Plan: The long range
plan for the desirable use of land in the Village of Lake in the
Hills as officially adopted and as amended from time to time;
the purpose of such plan being, among other things, to serve as
a guide in the zoning and progressive changes in the zoning of
land to meet the Village's changing needs, in the subdividing
and use of undeveloped land and in the acquisition of rights-ofways
or sites for public purposes such as streets, parks,
schools and public buildings.
Line of Buildings: (for the purpose of measuring a required
yard) A line parallel to the nearest lot line drawn through the
point of a building or group of buildings nearest to such lot
line, exclusive of such features specified as being permitted to
extend into a yard.
Livestock: Any animals or fowl, except dogs, cats and birds
owned by a resident of the premises and kept as pets.
Section 3, Page 16
Loading and Unloading Space, Off-Street: An open, hard-surfaced
area of land other than a street or a public way, the principal
use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor
trucks, tractors and trailers to avoid undue interference with
the public use of streets and alleys.
Long Term Care Facility: A home, institution, building,
residence, or any other place, whether operated for profit or
not, or a county home for the infirm and chronically ill, or any
similar institution operated by a political subdivision of the
State of Illinois, which provides personal care, sheltered care
or nursing for 3 or more persons, not related to the owner by
blood or marriage. It includes skilled nursing facilities and
intermediate care facilities as those terms are defined in Title
XVIII of Title XIX of the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C.A. 1395 et seq. and 1396 et seq.).
Lot: When used alone a lot shall mean a zoning lot unless the
context of this Zoning Code clearly indicates otherwise.
Lot, Corner: A parcel of land situated at the intersection of
two or more streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a
block.
Lot Coverage: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the
principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
Lot Frontage: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a
lot along a public or private street. For a corner lot, the
front shall be the narrowest side edge of the lot fronting on a
street. However, a corner lot owner may orient his building
toward either street provided proper setbacks are maintained.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner
lot.
Lot Line: A lot line is a perimeter line of a lot.
Lot Line, Front: The front property line of a lot, which abuts
an existing or dedicated street. In the case of a corner lot or
flag lot, the front lot line shall be as established on the plat
of subdivision. If a front lot line was not established on the
Section 3, Page 17
plat of subdivision, the front lot line shall be established by
the owner at the time of the application for a building permit.
The front lot line for a flag lot may be established on a lot
line which is not a street frontage and which is generally
either parallel or perpendicular to the street right-of-way.
Lot Line, Interior: A side lot line common with another lot.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line or lines most nearly parallel to
and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than
front or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot
line or a rear lot line.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts
upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.
Lot, Through: A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
Lot, Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the right angles to the lot depth at the established
front building line.
Lot, Zoning: See Zoning Lot.
Manufacturing: Any manufacturing use or process including
assembling, fabricating, altering, converting, finishing,
processing, treating and packaging, except any use or process
hereinafter specifically excluded, and providing that such use
will not be hazardous, offensive or objectionable by reason of
odor, dust, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, radiation,
refuse matter or water-carried waste.
Marquee: Any permanent, fixed projection over public or private
property serving the purpose of shelter and protection from the
weather, other than a canopy.
Mining: The extraction of sand, gravel or other material from
the land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more, and removal
from the site.
Mobile Home: A structure transportable in one or more sections,
that is seven feet or more in width and 20 feet or more in
Section 3, Page 18
length, and that is built on a permanent chassis, and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation
and whether or not on wheels, when connected to the required
facilities, and includes such plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems as may be contained therein.
Mobile Home Park: A tract of land or two or more contiguous
tracts of land which contain sites with the necessary utilities
for five or more independent mobile homes for habitation either
free or charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any
building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for
use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
Motorcycle: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the
use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than 3
wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
Motor Vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled except
for vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs,
low-speed electric bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles.
Nightclub: A commercial establishment where food and/or
alcoholic liquor are sold to be consumed on the premises and in
which dancing and/or live entertainment takes place.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure: Any structure lawfully
existing as of the effective date of this Zoning Code, which
would not conform to the applicable regulations if the structure
were to be erected under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
Non-Conforming Use: Use of land, buildings or structures
lawfully existing as of the effective date of this Zoning Code
which does not comply with the regulations of this Zoning Code.
Nursery School: An institution providing a regular program of
instruction for children from three years of age through the
first grade.
Occupant: Any person living in, sleeping in or having actual
possession of a building or portion thereof.
Off-season: That period of time from December 1st to March 31st of
the subsequent year.
Section 3, Page 19
Off-Season Storage: Temporary storage of any mobile home, boat,
trailer or recreational vehicle during the off-season, as
defined herein.
Office/Service – Business/Professional: An establishment that
uses space for conducting the affairs of a business, profession,
service industry or government.
Octave Band: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies
into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
Outdoor Sales/Open Sales Lot: Land devoted to the display of
non-accessory goods for sale, rent, lease, advertising or trade
where such goods are not entirely enclosed within a building.
Outdoor Storage: Materials, products or goods stored outdoors on
site which are associated with and accessory to the principle
use. Vehicles used in relation to the principle use,
construction equipment and other equipment used in the principle
uses operation shall also be considered an accessory use and
outdoor storage. When vehicles are considered a principle use
for outdoor storage it shall include all licensed vehicles.
Outdoor Use: Any service/processing areas or any use that is not
fully enclosed within a building on site which is associated
with and accessory to the principal use.
Parcel Frontage: The distance between side lot lines (lot
width) measured at the front lot line or along the set back
line, whichever is less.
Parking Space: A suitably surfaced or permanently maintained
area on privately owned property of sufficient size to store one
automobile either within or outside of a building.
Party Wall: A single or double wall which separates two
independent units.
Pennant: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic,
paper, canvas, or other light material typically designed to
move when subject to pressure by the wind, and used for
attracting the attention of the public.
Permanent Sign: Any ground or wall sign that is substantially
anchored to the ground with concrete piers or foundations or the
Section 3, Page 20
equivalent, or any wall sign substantially attached to a
building with bolts, rivets or the equivalent or any awning,
canopy, marquee or under-canopy sign or any other sign that is
designed, constructed and intended to be so located or affixed
for an indefinite time.
Planned Development: Land may be developed as a Planned
Development as regulated in the Planned Development Section of
this ordinance. Unless otherwise stated herein, land shall be
developed as a Planned Development as regulated in the Planned
Development Section of this Ordinance if it is greater than four
(4) acres in area. If the land is owned and operated by a
governmental entity and is greater than two (2) acres in size it
shall be developed as a Planned Development as regulated in the
Planned Development Section of this Ordinance. If the land is
zoned for manufacturing and is greater than five (5) acres in
size it shall be developed as a Planned Development as regulated
in the Planned Development Section of this Ordinance.
Porch: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or
walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in
part.
Portable Sign: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building structure or the ground; a sign designed to be moved
from place to place. Portable signs include, but are not
limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to
be self-supporting and moveable and signs commonly trailer
mounted, which are designed to be moved from place to place.
Portable signs shall also include hand held signs and persons in
costumes.
Premises: Any or part of a lot, plot or parcel or tract of
land, including the buildings and structures, or part of a
building or structure, thereon.
Projecting sign: A sign supported by a building or other structure
and which projects over any street, sidewalk, alley or
other private or public way easement that projects more than 12
inches from the face of any building, structure or supporting
wall.
Property Line: The legal boundary line separating one parcel of
land from another.
Section 3, Page 21
Protected Uses:
1. A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of
worship.
2. A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary
school.
3. A child care facility, licensed by the Illinois
Department of Children & Family Services.
4. A public park, playground, playing field, or forest
preserve.
5. A public or private cemetery.
6. A public housing facility.
Public Land: Land owned or leased by a governmental unit.
Public Use: Any local, regional, state, or federal agency,
office or service (for example, Village Hall, Police Station,
Fire Station, Library, Post Office, Public School, public
utility etc.).
Recreation Center, indoor: A facility whose main purpose is to
provide the general public with leisure-time activities and
where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the activity,
except facilities otherwise referenced in this Zoning Code.
Recreation Equipment: Play apparatus such as swing sets,
slides, and boxes, poles for nets, picnic tables, lawn chairs,
barbecue stands and similar apparatuses, but not including tree
houses, swimming pools, playhouses exceeding 25 square feet of
floor area and sheds utilized for storage of equipment.
Recreation, Private: Any recreation for which a fee is
collected.
Recreational Vehicle: Any vehicle designed as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either
has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by a motor
vehicle. All terrain vehicles are classified as recreational
vehicles for the purposes of this zoning code and/or vehicles
Section 3, Page 22
with “RV” licenses plates. A recreational vehicle includes but
is not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck
camper, motor home, golf carts, and other off-road vehicles that
do not require license plates.
Religious Use: A building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, where persons assemble for religious worship
and which building, together with its accessory buildings and
uses, is maintained by a religious body organized to sustain
worship.
Remote Control Race Track - An indoor or outdoor race track,
usually fashioned from a combination of clay, other soils, rubber
and other materials customarily used in remote control race
tracks, which provides for the recreational use, by residents and
guests, of remote controlled cars and trucks, and for the racing
of miniature motorized cars and trucks, in a supervised and
professionally maintained race course.
Residence: Every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised, or held out to the public as a place where food is
regularly served, and without sleeping accommodations, such
space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and
serve suitable food for its guests.
Class I: Sit down, substantially all the patrons sit at
tables inside.
Class II: A predominant percentage of patrons sit down
inside, although some may carry out food.
Class III: A predominant number of patrons carry out food
although some inside seating is provided.
Class IV: All patrons carry food out.
Class V: Concession shops without seating, selling ice
cream, popcorn and comparable items as the primary use.
Section 3, Page 23
Restrictive Covenant: A contract between parties that
constitutes a restriction on the use of property for the benefit
of the owners, other persons or the Village.
Retail Sales: The buying of goods or merchandise for resale to
the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Roadside Stand: A structure not permanently fixed to the
ground, covered or uncovered and not wholly enclosed, and used
solely for the sale of farm products produced on the premises.
No such roadside stand shall be more than 300 square feet in
ground area and there shall be no more than one roadside stand
on any one premises.
Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed upon, supported or
maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof of a building
or structure. This definition shall include signs upon
penthouses or upon screening devices for mechanical and HVAC
equipment.
Rooming House: A building or portion of a building other than a
hotel, motel, apartment hotel, or residential hotel, in which
sleeping accommodations not constituting an apartment are
furnished for four or more persons who rent such accommodations
at a specified rate for a specified time, and who occupy the
premises as a permanent place of abode rather than on a
temporary basis for a short term period of occupancy. An
apartment is herein defined as a self-contained unit with
private bath and cooking facilities.
Self-Storage Facility: Any real property designed and used for
the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to
occupants who are to have access to such for the purpose of
storing and removing personal property.
Semi-nude: A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers
no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel
such as hats, gloves, and socks.
Senior Housing: Residential age-restricted facility for persons
aged 55 and older.
Section 3, Page 24
Setback: See "building set back line."
Shopping/Business Center: Any group of three or more buildings
with a common entrance way on a business zoned lot.
Sign: Any object, device, surface, display, structure, fabric
or painting used for identification, description, illustration,
announcement, declaration or display either illuminated or nonilluminated
located inside or outside an establishment used to
advertise, identify, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service,
event or location by way means including words, letters,
characters, colors, designs, illumination, images or symbols
which are construction of permeant, temporary, solid, flexible
or living materials.
Solar Energy System: The components and subsystems required to
convert solar energy into electricity or thermal energy suitable
for use. The area of the system includes all the land inside the
perimeter of the system, which extends to any fencing used
solely to enclose the components of the system. The term
applies, but is not limited to solar photovoltaic systems, solar
thermal systems, and solar hot water systems. Single function
systems less than 10 square feet in area (i.e. a single remote
light fixture) are excluded.
Solar Energy System, Class 1: Class 1 Solar Energy Systems
include the following:
1. Roof or building mounted on any code compliant structure.
2. Ground mounted on an area of up to 50 percent of the
footprint of the primary structure on the parcel but no more
than one acre and compliant with maximum lot coverage
standards in this zoning ordinance.
3. Covering permanent parking lot or other hardscape areas.
4. Building integrated systems
Solar Energy System, Class 2: Class 2 Solar Energy Systems are
ground mounted systems that exceed the area limitation of Level
1 but meet the area restrictions listed below:
1. Agricultural Districts – not greater than 10 acres
2. Airport Districts – not greater than 10 acres
3. Institutional Building District – not greater than 10 acres
4. Manufacturing Districts – not greater than 10 acres
Section 3, Page 25
Solar Energy System, Class 3: Any solar energy system which
does not meet the definitions for Solar Energy System, Class 1
or Class 2
Snowmobile: A self-propelled vehicle for travel on snow or ice.
Social service agency: A facility operated by a non-profit
organization that provides services such as training,
counseling, and therapies for people with learning and/or
physical disabilities, their families and their caregivers. Up
to 25 percent of the floor area (as outlined in Section 18.2-6B)
occupied by the facility may be used for retail sales operated by
and for the benefit of the non-profit organization. This term does
not include facilities that offer overnight care or living
quarters, care by a licensed physician, distribution centers or
employment agencies.
Sound, impulsive: A single pressure peak or a single burst of
transmitted vibrations that has a duration of less than one
second.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Any of the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, but not including any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress,
blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed.
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device
or covering that, when worn, simulates human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Specified Sexual Activities: Any of the following:
1. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
Section 3, Page 26
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
4. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation,
arousal, or tumescence.
5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with
any of the activities set forth in paragraphs 1, 2, 3,
or 4 of this definition.
Stock-in-Trade: All the merchandise and equipment kept on hand
and used in carrying on a business.
Storage: The stationary placement of any mobile home, boat,
trailer or recreation vehicle for a continuous period in excess
of 48 hours, Monday through Friday.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and
the ceiling above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet
in height shall be considered as an additional story for each 14
feet or fraction thereof.
Story, Half: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or
mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite
exterior walls are not more than 4 1/2 feet above the finished
floor of such story.
Streamer: A long, narrow flag, or pennant.
Street: A street is a public way other than an alley. Streets
may be classified as minor streets, collector streets, arterial
roadways or commercial/industrial streets as defined in the Lake
in the Hills Subdivision Control Ordinance.
Street, Private: A street that is not dedicated, used or held
for use for public travel.
Street, Frontage: A marginal access street that is generally
parallel and adjacent to a major street.
Street Width: The width of the right-of-way, measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
Section 3, Page 27
Structural Alteration: A change or alteration, other than
incidental repairs, that affect or may affect the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams,
girders or foundations.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something
having location on the ground.
Structure, Non-Conforming: See Non-Conforming building or
structure.
Tavern: A commercial establishment where alcoholic liquor is
sold to be consumed on the premises; food may be sold, but is
incidental to the business. (Also see: Nightclub.)
Temporary Parking: The stationary placement of any mobile home,
boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle for a continuous period
of less than 48 hours, Monday through Friday.
Temporary sign: Any sign that is fully portable and designed,
constructed or erected for display for a limited and usually
fixed duration of time, or as otherwise defined and permitted in
Section 16 herein.
Terrace, Open: A level and narrow plane or platform, that, for
the purpose of this Zoning Code, is located adjacent to one or
more faces of the principal structure and that is constructed
not more than four feet in height above the average level of the
adjoining ground.
Trailer: Every vehicle without motive power in operation,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle.
Transportation Service: An establishment that offers
transportation services directly to the consumer (for example,
livery, taxi, limousine, bus, train, ambulance etc.).
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land or building
thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is
occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the
performance of such activity as defined by the performance
standards of this Zoning Code.
Section 3, Page 28
Use, Conditional: Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts,
businesses, professions and uses specifically designated in each
zoning district that may require reasonable but special,
peculiar, unusual or extraordinary limitations, facilities,
plans, structures, conditions, modifications or regulations for
the promotion or preservation of the public welfare, health,
convenience or safety, and therefore may be permitted in such
use district only by the issuance of a conditional use permit in
accordance with the standards and requirements of this Zoning
Code.
Use, Non-Conforming: See non-conforming use.
Use, Permitted: A use specifically designated by this Zoning
Code that may be lawfully established or maintained in a
particular district, provided it conforms with all of the
regulations of such district.
Use, Principal: The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Utility, Public: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal
department duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to
the public cable television, electricity, gas, sewers, steam,
telephone, telegraph, transportation or water including
buildings or structures with such utilities.
Veterinary clinic, small animals: A facility maintained by or
for the use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis,
treatment, or prevention of animal diseases, wherein the animals
are limited to dogs, cats, or other comparable household pets,
and wherein the overnight care and boarding of said animals is
prohibited except when necessary in the medical treatment of the
animals.
Village: The Village of Lake in the Hills, McHenry County,
Illinois.
Wall Sign: A sign mounted or attached to the outside surface of
a wall or building in a plane parallel to that of the supporting
wall.
Warehouse/Distribution/Trucking: The storage of materials or
equipment within a structure or enclosure and distribution by
means of air, rail or road.
Section 3, Page 29
Wind energy system, ground-mounted: A SWES (see definition
below under Wind energy system, small, on-site) which is affixed
to a tower or pole which is anchored to a foundation in the
ground.
Wind energy system, roof-mounted: A SWES (see definition below
under Wind energy system, small, on-site) which is affixed to a
tower or pole which is anchored to a building’s structural
system.
Wind energy system, small, on-site (SWES): (Also known as
windmill or wind turbine.) Any manufactured device rated to a
capacity of 100 kW or less that converts wind power to another
form of energy, such as electricity or heat, for use primarily
on the building and property where it is located, allowing any
excess energy to tie into the electrical grid via net metering.
Window Sign: A sign painted on, attached or affixed to or
placed upon the interior or exterior of or located within 12
inches of the interior side of a window or glass door and/or is
displayed for the purpose of attracting the attention of the
passerby to a sale, or to promotional items, or for other products
or services.
Window Surface Area: The area of a building façade which is
occupied by a window(s) or glass door(s).
Wholesale: The selling of goods, equipment and materials in
bulk to a retailer.
Yard: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal
building or group of buildings that is unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise
specifically permitted by this Zoning Code, and that extends
along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the
zoning lot is located.
Yard, Front: A yard extending across the full width of a lot
line adjacent to a public or private street.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of a rear
lot line.
Section 3, Page 30
Yard, Side: A yard extending across the full width of a side
lot line.
Yard Sign: A type of temporary ground sign comprised of one or
two support rods, posts, or poles not exceeding four (4) by four
(4) inches or five (5) inches in diameter with a message surface
not exceeding six (6) square feet or four (4) feet in height .
Zoning Code: The Lake in the Hills Zoning Ordinance, as amended
from time to time.
Zoning District: A geographical area within the limits of the
Village in which the regulations and requirements governing the
use of land are uniform.
Zoning Map: The map incorporated into this Zoning Code
designating zoning districts.
Zoning Lot: A plot of ground, made up of one or more parcels,
that is, may be, or is intended to be occupied by a use,
building or buildings including the open spaces required by this
Zoning Code.
Section 4, Page 1
SECTION 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.1 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
Except as provided in Section 4.9 herein, no building or
structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed
or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which
the building or land is located.
4.2 PERMITS:
No application for a building permit or other permit or license
or for a certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the
Director of Community Development or designee, and no permit or
license shall be issued by any other Village department that
would authorize the use or change in use of any land or building
contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code, or the erection,
moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building
designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in any manner
contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code.
4.3 HEIGHT, BULK AND LOT COVERAGE:
4.3-1 Height: No building shall be erected,
reconstructed, relocated or structurally altered
so as to have a greater height, a higher ratio of
lot coverage or smaller open space about it than
permissible under the limitations set forth
herein for the district in which such building is
located, except that cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers or stage towers and
necessary mechanical appurtenances, shall be
permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions
when erected in accordance with all other
ordinances of the Village.
4.3-2 Change of Ownership: No space allocated to a
building or dwelling group for the purpose of
complying with the side, rear or front yard, or
court or other open space or lot area requireSection
4, Page 2
ments of this Zoning Code, shall thereafter, by
reason of change in ownership or for any other
reason, be used to satisfy the yard, court, open
space or lot area requirements of any other
building or dwelling group.
4.4 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION:
4.4-1 When two or more parcels of land, each of which
lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for
a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located, are
contiguous and are held in single ownership, they
shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
For the purpose of this Section, single ownership
of separate lots of record includes ownership by
a spouse or child or by land trust of which there
is a common beneficial owner, or a land trust as
to which a child or spouse is a beneficial owner.
4.4-2 Any single lot zoned R-2 which was of record on
September 12, 1974 that does not meet the minimum
requirements for lot width or total lot area may
be utilized for a permitted use provided that the
total lot area exceeds 7,000 square feet and 55
feet at the front building setback line with each
sideyard width not less than six feet, and the
lot otherwise meets all other requirements as
specified in this ordinance.
4.5 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS:
Except as otherwise provided for in this Zoning Code, every
building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of
land which abuts upon a public or private street or permanent
easement of access to a public or private street, which easement
shall have a minimum width of 28 feet unless a permanent
easement of lesser width was of record prior to December 11,
1986.
Section 4, Page 3
4.6 BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to require any
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any
building which has been fully and properly approved by the
Village before, and on which actual construction has commenced
and been diligently pursued prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Code; provided however, that such building shall be
completed within the timeframes established within the Municipal
Code, Chapter 24.
4.7 DWELLING UNITS ON ZONING LOT:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to
provide dwelling units shall be located on a zoning lot and in
no case shall there be more than one such building on one zoning
lot, unless it is approved as part of a Planned Development.
4.8 LOT COVERAGE EXCEPTION
When any eminent domain proceeding brought by the Village
results in an acquisition of fee simple title within the side
yard of a lot which results in such side yard being less than
the required side yard setback within the relevant zoning
district, a variation from the otherwise required setback shall
be granted by the Village between the new property line
resulting from such eminent domain proceeding and the existing
building, if any on such lost, and reflected in an ordinance
approved by the Village.
Section 5, Page 1
SECTION 5
USE DISTRICTS
5.1 ZONING DISTRICTS:
To carry out the purposes and provisions of this Zoning Code,
the Village is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
A-1..........Agricultural District
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
RE-5.........Residential Estate District
RE-2.........Residential Estate District
RE-1.........Residential Estate District
R-1A.........One Family Dwelling District
R-1B.........One Family Dwelling District
R-2..........One Family Dwelling District
R-3..........Two Family Dwelling District
R-4..........Multiple Family Dwelling District
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
B-1..........Transitional Business District
B-2..........Business District, Neighborhood Convenience
B-3..........Business District, General
B-4..........Business District, Commercial
B-5..........Office Business District
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
M-1..........Limited Manufacturing District
M-2..........General Manufacturing District
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
OS..........Open Space District
IB..........Institutional Buildings District
AD1.........Airport District 1
AD2.........Airport District 2
Section 5, Page 2
5.2 ZONING MAP:
5.2-1 Map Incorporated: The locations and boundaries of the
districts established herein are depicted on the
Official Lake in the Hills Zoning Map which is hereby
incorporated into this Zoning Code. The Zoning Map,
together with all notations, references and other
information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto,
shall be a part of this Zoning Code and shall have the
same force and effect as if the Zoning Map, together
with all notations, references and other information
shown thereon, were fully set forth and described
herein.
5.2-2 Omitted Land: It is intended that this Zoning Code
include all land in the established zoning districts.
Any area located within the corporate limits of the
Village not yet shown on the zoning map shall be
considered RE-5 Residential Estate District.
5.2-3 Boundary Lines: Wherever any uncertainty exists as to
the boundary of any use district as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundary lines are indicated as
following streets, alleys or similar rights-ofway,
they shall be construed as following the
center lines thereof.
B. Where district boundary lines are indicated as
approximately following lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where a lot is held in one ownership, is of
record at the effective date of this Zoning Code
and divided by a district boundary line, the
entire lot shall be construed to be within the
lesser restricted zoning district; provided that
this provision shall not apply if it decreases
the area of the lesser restricted portion of the
lot by more than 20 percent.
Section 5, Page 3
D. Where district boundary lines do not coincide with
the location of streets or lot lines, the district
boundaries shall be determined by the use of the
scale indicated on the Zoning Map.
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines
shall be construed to follow such shore lines,
and in the event of change in the shore line
shall be construed as moving with the actual
shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately
in the center of streams, rivers, canals, lakes,
or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow the center lines of such streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water.
5.2-4 Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, Railroad
Rights-of-Way, and Properties under Lakes and Streams:
All streets, alleys, public ways, railroad rights-ofway,
and properties under lakes and streams, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be in the
same zone as the property immediately abutting upon
such alleys, streets, public ways, railroad rights-ofway,
and properties under lakes and streams, Where
the center line of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary,
the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise
specifically designated, shall be the same as that of
the abutting property up to such center line.
5.3 NEW OR ANNEXED LAND:
All land annexed to the Village after the effective date of this
Zoning Code shall be classified automatically after such
annexation in the RE-5 Residential Estate District until such
time as the Board of Trustees amends the classification of such
land in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
Section 6, Page 1
SECTION 6
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
6.1 PURPOSES:
The A-1 Agricultural District is designed to maintain an
environment where agricultural purposes may be served.
Agricultural purposes consist of the art or science of
cultivating the ground, including harvesting of crops and
rearing and management of livestock; tillage; husbandry;
farming; in a broader sense, the science and art of the
production of plants and animals useful to humans, including to
a variable extent the preparation of these products for human
use. In the broad use it includes farming, horticulture and
forestry, together with such subjects as butter and cheese
making, horse husbandry, etc. An agricultural purpose does not
include the extraction of sand, gravel or limestone, even when
such an activity is related to an agricultural purpose.
6.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
See Section 11 of this Zoning Code. Uses in this zoning
district may be served by individual well and septic systems
where public utilities are not available within the distances
established in the Municipal Code.
6.3 BULK, LOT AREA, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
See the Agricultural Bulk Chart at the end of Section 6 of this
Zoning Code.
6.4 DWELLING STANDARDS:
See the Dwelling Standards chart at the end of Section 6 of this
Zoning Code.
6.5 TEMPORARY USES AND HOME OCCUPATIONS, ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
AND USES:
Temporary uses and home occupations, accessory structures and
uses, are permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District subject to
the provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 17 of this Zoning Code.
Section 6, Page 2
6.6 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
See the parking and loading requirements in Section 18 of this
Zoning Code.
6.7 SIGN REGULATIONS:
Signs are permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District subject to
the provisions of Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
6.8 AGRICULTURAL BULK CHART
Lot/Parcel Area,
Frontage
Yard Requirements 1
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard2
Minimum
Rear Yard
Minimum
Side Yard
Max. land
coverage of
buildings &
structures
District Acres or
Square Feet
Feet Feet Feet Feet Cumulative
(percent)
A-1 40 acres 330 50 3 75 50 N/A
1. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the foregoing area, frontage and yard requirements are
met, satisfied and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement.
2. See definition of Yard, Front.
3. The minimum requirements for a front yard abutting the road or street in the A-1 Agricultural District is
50 feet from the established right of way or 80 feet from the center line, whichever is greater.
Bulk Limits
Height Limit for Principal
Use
Height Limit for Accessory Use
1
Zoning District Feet Stories Feet Stories
Section 6, Page 3
Bulk Limits
Height Limit for Principal
Use
Height Limit for Accessory Use
1
A-1 35 2.5 60 3.5
1. Height Exceptions:
Amateur radio facilities (as set forth in Section 14).
6.9
DWELLING STANDARDS CHART
Minimum gross floor area
Single Family Detached Dwelling
One Story Two Story
A-1 2750 sq. ft. 3200 sq. ft.
Section 7, Page 1
SECTION 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
7.1 PURPOSE:
The Residential Districts set forth herein are established in order
to protect public health and promote public safety, convenience,
comfort, morals, prosperity and welfare. These general goals
include, among others, the following specific purposes.
A. To protect residential areas against fire, explosion,
noxious fumes, offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations,
dust, heat, glare and other objectionable factors.
B. To protect residential areas to the extent possible and
appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor
vehicle traffic, especially through traffic, and to
alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.
C. To protect residential areas against undue congestion of
public streets and other public facilities by controlling
the density of population through regulation of the bulk
of buildings.
D. To protect and promote the public health and comfort by
providing for ample light and air to buildings and the
windows thereof.
E. To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for
usable open space with residential development on the
same zoning lot.
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to
meet the probable need for future residential expansion
and to meet the need for necessary and desirable services
in the vicinity of residences, which increase safety and
amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
G. To promote the best use and development of residential
land in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to
promote stability of residential development and protect
the character and desirable development and protect the
value of land and improvements and so strengthen the
economic base of the Village.
7.2 ZONING DISTRICTS:
Section 7, Page 2
The following Residential Zoning Districts are hereby established:
RE-5 ............. Residential Estate District
RE-2 ............. Residential Estate District
RE-1 ............. Residential Estate District
R-1A ............. One Family Dwelling District
R-1B ............. One Family Dwelling District
R-2 ............. One Family Dwelling District
R-3 ............. Two Family Dwelling District
R-4 ............. Multiple Family Dwelling District
7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7.3.1 Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and
conditional uses are listed in Section 11 of this
Zoning Code.
7.3.2 Bulk Lot Area, Yard Requirements: Bulk lot area
and yard requirements are listed in the Residential
Bulk Chart at the end of Section 7 of this Zoning
Code.
7.3.3 Dwelling Standards: Dwelling standards are listed
in the Dwelling Standards chart at the end of
Section 7 of this Zoning Code.
7.3.4 Accessory Structures and Uses, Temporary Uses, Home
Occupations: Temporary uses, accessory structures
and uses, and home occupations are permitted in the
residential districts subject to the provisions of
Sections 12, 13, 14 and 17 of this Zoning Code.
7.3.5 Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and loading
requirements are established in Section 18 of this
Zoning Code.
7.3.6 Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in
residential districts subject to the provisions of
Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
7.3.7 Septic, Private Water Systems: In the RE-5, RE-2
and RE-1 zoning districts, there may be an approved
septic system and/or water system where public
utilities are not available within the required
distances established in the Municipal Code.
7.3.8 Obstructions: In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts,
the following shall not be considered as
Section 7, Page 3
obstructions when located within or over required
yards:
a. Steps (not over four feet in height and used
for ingress/egress);
b. Open parking areas;
c. Bay windows, eaves, gutters and down spouts
(projecting not more than 12 inches into the
required side yards or 24 inches into the
required front yard or rear yard); and
d. Fences, subject to the regulations contained
in Section 15 of this Zoning Code.
e. An open terrace, but not including a roofedover
porch or terrace, may occupy a front
yard, provided the unoccupied portion of the
front yard has a depth of not less than
fifteen (15) feet.
7.3.9 Storage Areas Required: In the R-3 and R-4 zoning
districts, where individual garages or basements
are not provided, an area must be set aside and
maintained for storage within the structure. This
area shall be easily accessible from the outside
and it shall be subdivided into lockable spaces,
one space per dwelling unit, with a minimum of 40
square feet.
Section 7, Page 4
7.4
RESIDENTIAL BULK CHART, PART 1
Lot/Parcel Area,
Frontage
Yard Requirements1
District
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard 2,3
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Minimum
Side
Yard
Each
Side
Max. land
coverage
of buildings
&
structures

RE-5 5 acres 330 100 75 50 10%
RE-2 2 acres 175 75 50 30 15%
RE-1 1 acre 150 50 50 30 25%
R-1A 16,000
sf
100 30 30 10%/15’6 30%
R-1B 12,000
sf
90 25 25 10%/10’6 35%
R-25 10,000
sf
80 25 25 10%/10’6 35%
R-3 (Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
unit)
10,000
sf
80 25 25 10%/10'6 40%
R-3 (Two
family
dwelling
unit)
12,000
sf
100 25 25 10%/10'6 40%
R-4
(Multiple
family
dwelling,
Singlefamily
attached
dwelling
unit) 
3,800 sf
per unit
or
10,000
sf,
whichever
is
greater
150 30 75 15'7 40%
1. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the foregoing area,
frontage and yard requirements are satisfied and maintained in connection
with such building, structure or enlargement.
Section 7, Page 5
2. See definition of Yard, Front.
3. In R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts only, where lots comprising 40
percent or more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are
developed with existing buildings having front yards with a variation of
less than 15 feet, the average of such front yards shall establish the
minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case shall a
front yard of more than 40 feet be required.
4. No inner court or courts completely surrounded on all sides by a building
shall be permitted. Outer courts are permitted provided the depth of the
court is no greater than the width of the court.
5. Except as provided in Section 4.
6. Whichever is greater.
7. The combined total of side yards shall not be less than 15 feet for all
multiple family dwellings of two stories or less in height. For each
additional story, the side yard on each side of the building shall be
increased by two feet in width.
8. When a R-4 Multiple Family Dwelling District is contiguous to a lot that
is zoned RE-5, RE-2, RE-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2 or R-3, each multiple family
dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 200 feet from the boundary line of
each such zoning district.
Section 7, Page 6
7.5
RESIDENTIAL BULK CHART, PART 2
Bulk Limits
Height Limit for
Principal Structure
Height Limit for Accessory
Structure 1,2,3
Zoning District Feet Stories Feet Stories
RE-5 35 2.5 16 1
RE-2 35 2.5 16 1
RE-1 35 2.5 16 1
R-1A 25 2.5 16 1
R-1B
25 2 16 1
R-2 25 2 16 1
R-3 (Single-family
dwelling unit)
25 2 16 1
R-3 (Two family
dwelling unit)
25 2 16 1
R-4 (Multi-family
dwelling, Single-family
attached dwelling unit)
40 3 16 1
1. Height Exceptions: The following structures or parts thereof are exempt
from the height limitations of this section except as limited by an
airport authority or similar agency, and the provisions of this Zoning
Code or other village ordinance relative to airports:
A. Amateur radio facilities (as found in Section 13).
2. In residential zoning districts no accessory structure shall be higher
than the principal building.
3. Additional height limitations for accessory structures may be found in
Section 13 “Accessory Structures” of this code.
Section 7, Page 6
7.6
DWELLING STANDARDS CHART
Minimum gross floor area
Single Family Detached Dwelling Two Family Dwelling Single-Family
Attached Dwelling;
Multiple-Family
Dwelling
One Number of Bedrooms Number of Bedrooms
Story
Between
1 & 2 Story
Dwelling
(split
levels)
Combined
Total:
Two
Story
Dwelling
Combined
Total:
1 2 3 1 2 3
RE-5 2,750
sf
2,750 sf 3,200 sf - - - - - -
RE-2 2,000
sf
2,000 sf 2,800 sf - - - - - -
RE-1 2,000
sf
2,000 sf 2,800 sf - - - - - -
R-1A 1,200
sf
1,200 sf 1,800 sf - - - - - -
R-1B 1,200
sf
1,200 sf 1,800 sf
- - - - - -
R-2 1,200
sf
1,200 sf 1,800 sf - - - - - -
R-3 1,200
sf
1,200 sf 1,800 sf 850
sf
per
unit
1000
sf
per
unit
1300
sf
per
unit
- - -
R-4 N/A N/A N/A 850
sf
per
unit
1000
sf
per
unit
1300
sf
per
unit
850
sf
per
unit
1000
sf
per
unit
1300
sf
per
unit
Section 8, Page 1
SECTION 8
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8.1 PURPOSE:
The Business Districts set forth herein are established to protect
public health; to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and
the general welfare; and to protect the economic base of the
Village and the value of property. These general purposes include
the following objectives:
A. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance
with a well-considered plan so as to ensure that adequate
space is provided in appropriate locations for the
various types of business uses, thereby protecting and
strengthening the economic base of the Village.
B. To place in separate zoning districts those businesses
which may create noise, odors, hazards or unsightliness,
or those which may generate excessive traffic.
C. To establish compatible neighborhood convenience centers
in or adjacent to residential areas in order to provide
efficient and convenient services for daily or frequent
needs of the people of the Village.
D. To encourage the grouping of compatible businesses in
appropriate locations which will draw mutually interchangeable
modes of trade, thus promoting public convenience
and business prosperity.
E. To arrange commercial centers in order that traffic and
pedestrian congestion will be minimized.
F. To provide for the establishment of off-street parking
facilities, permitted and required, so as to alleviate
traffic congestion and promote shopping convenience and
business prosperity.
8.2 ZONING DISTRICTS:
8.2-1 Districts Established: The following Business
Zoning Districts are hereby established:
B-1 Transitional Business District
B-2 Neighborhood Convenience Business
District
B-3 General Business District
B-4 Commercial Business District
Section 8, Page 2
B-5 Office Business District
8.2-2 Transitional Business District: The B-1 District
is established for uses which may be reasonably
established in a building originally designed and
constructed for residential use. The Transitional
Business District is intended to provide land and
structures to be used primarily as space for
professional office and service uses. Residences,
built and designed as a home, are allowed as a
permitted use, and a single dwelling unit is
allowed in a building containing a business use.
The uses permitted are characterized by a low
volume of traffic and limited outdoor signing.
This zoning classification is further intended for
houses along heavily traveled main thoroughfares
so long as the initiation of a business use does
not tend to interfere with or impede the traffic
flow on the thoroughfare. In this manner, the
residential appearance of the roadway corridor may
be maintained and the development of "strip"
commercial zones may be prevented.
8.2-3 Neighborhood Convenience Business District: The B-2
District is established to meet the needs of the
immediate neighborhood. It is intended to provide
convenience shopping for persons living in adjacent
residential areas. Permitted uses shall be those
that are appropriate to satisfy basic shopping
needs which occur on a frequent or daily basis.
8.2-4 General Business District: The B-3 District is
established to provide for a more intense amount of
business than found in the B-2 District. This
district will provide a large variety of
facilities, stores and services.
8.2-5 Commercial Business District: The B-4 District is
established to provide locations for major
commercial centers that would facilitate large
volumes of traffic. This District is intended to
provide for a broad base of commercial users and
services.
8.2-6 Office Business District: The B-5 District is
established to allow the development of areas
attractive to executive headquarters or offices on
open sites.
8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Section 8, Page 3
8.3-1 Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and
conditional uses are listed in Section 11 of this
Zoning Code.
8.3-2 Bulk, Lot, Area, Yard Requirements: Bulk lot area
and yard requirements are listed in the Business
Districts Bulk Chart found at the end of Section 8
of this Zoning Code.
8.3-3 Temporary Uses, Accessory Structures and Uses:
Accessory structures and uses and temporary uses
are permitted subject to the provisions of Sections
12, 13 and 14 of this Zoning Code.
8.3-4 Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and loading
requirements are established in Section 18 of this
Zoning Code.
8.3-5 Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
8.3-6 Processing and Assembly: Any establishment in a
business district may devote up to 30 percent of
its floor space to processing or assembly.
8.3-7 Vehicular Access: Vehicular access to the rear yard
must be provided along one side of a building unless
the rear yard abuts a public street or alley.
Section 8, Page 4
8.4
B U S I N E SS D I S T R I C T S B U L K C H A R T
LOT AREA,
PARCEL AREA
& FRONTAGE
YARD REQUIREMENTS1,5 BULK LIMITS6
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard2
Minimum
Rear
Yard3
Minimum
Side
Yard2,3
Height Limit
For Principal
Use
Height Limit
For Accessory
Use
District Square
Feet
Feet Feet Feet Feet Feet Stories Feet Stories
B-1 10,000 50 30 25 15 25 2 20 1
B-2 10,000 50 30 25 15 25 2 20 1
B-3, B-4 10,000 50 304 25 15 35 2 20 1
B-3, B-4
Shopping
Business
Center
1 acre 150 304 25 15 35 3 20 1
B-5 2 acres 150 30 25 15 35 3 20 1
1 No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the yards established in this chart
are provided and maintained in connection with such building.
2 See definition of Yard, Front.
3 Where a lot line abuts upon a residential zoning district, there shall be a yard of not
less than 30 feet.
4 The minimum setback along Rt. 47 for structures, paving and parking shall be 100 feet.
Sidewalks, bike paths and driveways perpendicular to the roadway are allowed.
5 The storage of materials, equipment or vehicles shall not take place within 10 feet of
any rear or side yard or within any front yard.
6 The maximum height for the storage of any materials shall be 20 feet.
Section 9, Page 1
SECTION 9
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
9.1 PURPOSES:
The manufacturing districts set forth herein are established to protect the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and to
protect the economic base of the Village, as well as the value of real
estate by regulating manufacturing developments in appropriate locations.
These general objectives include, among others, the following specific
objectives:
A. To protect established residential and business areas, and the
health of families living or working therein, by restricting
those nearby manufacturing activities which may create offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards
and other objectionable influences to those areas which are
appropriate therefor.
B. To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for most types
of manufacturing and related activities so that the economic
structure of the community may be strengthened, and that
employment opportunities may be found to be in the interest of
public prosperity and welfare.
C. To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations
accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw
materials, finished products and employees can be carried on
efficiently and with a minimum impact on public life and
property.
D. To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict
obnoxious manufacturing activities, while at the same time
encourage and permit the manufacturing activities which have
adopted facilities for the processing of finished products
without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in
nearby areas.
E. To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land
by prohibiting the use of such space for new residential
development, thereby preserving the land for a more appropriate
use in accordance with the plans for Village improvement and
development, including the Village's Official Comprehensive Plan.
F. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well considered plan of land use for all of the Village; to
conserve the use of property; to promote stability of
manufacturing activities and related development; to protect the
character and established development in each area of the
Section 9, Page 2
community; to enhance and stabilize the value of land; and to
protect the tax base of the Village.
9.2 ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS:
The following Manufacturing Zoning Districts are hereby established in
order to provide for a wide range of light and heavy manufacturing uses.
9.2-1 M-1 Limited Manufacturing District: The M-1 District
allows adequate space for high quality, nuisance free,
light manufacturing, wholesale, research, administrative
and related uses of such nature that they do not create
significant problems of compatibility with other types of
land uses.
9.2-2 M-2 General Manufacturing District: The M-2 District
allows adequate space for more intensive operations than
can be found in the M-1 Zoning District. The uses must be
so regulated and located as to avoid adverse impacts on
residential and other less intensive districts.
9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9.3-1 Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional
uses are listed in Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
9.3-2 Bulk, Lot, Area, Yard Requirements: Bulk, lot, area, and
yard requirements are listed in the Manufacturing Districts
Bulk Chart at the end of this Section 9.
9.3-3 Temporary Uses, Accessory Structures and Uses: Accessory
structures and uses and temporary uses are
permitted in the manufacturing districts subject to the
provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 14 of this Zoning Code.
9.3-4 Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and loading
requirements are established in Section 18 of this
Zoning Code.
9.3-5 Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in the
manufacturing districts subject to the provisions of
Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
9.4
M A N U F A C T U R I N G D I S T R I C T S B U L K C H A R T
LOT AREA,
PARCEL AREA
& FRONTAGE
YARD REQUIREMENTS 1,5 BULK LIMITS 6
Section 9, Page 3
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard 2,3
Minimum
Rear
Yard 4
Minimum
Side
Yard 4
Maximum
Coverage
of Buildings
and
Structures
Height
Limit
for
Principal
Use
Height
Limit
for
Accessory
Use
District Square
Feet
Feet Feet Feet Feet Feet Feet Stories Feet Stories
M-1,
Limited
10,000 80 30 30 20; 30 on
a corner
lot
50% 35 3 20 1
M-2,
General
15,000 100 30 30 20; 30 on
a corner
lot
60% 45 3 20 1
1. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the yards established in this chart are provided and maintained in
connection with such building.
2. See definition of Yard, Front.
3. There shall be no structure of any kind including open materials, equipment or the parking of vehicles within said set back.
4. Where a lot line abuts upon a residential zoning district, there shall be a yard of not less than 30 feet.
5. The storage of materials, equipment or vehicles shall not take place within 10 feet of any rear or side yard or within any
front yard.
6. The maximum height for the storage of any materials shall be 20 feet.
Section 10, Page 1
SECTION 10
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
10.1 OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
10.1-1 Purpose: The Open Space District is created to
recognize and protect all open space and
recreational areas which enhance and preserve the
beauty of the Village. It applies to all public
space of notable quality and to major private open
spaces. The use of buildings or structures are
secondary to the use of the land.
10.1-2 General Provisions:
A. Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and
conditional uses for the Open Space District are
listed in Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
B. Bulk Limits: Bulk, lot, area and yard requirements
are listed in the Special Districts Bulk Chart
found at the end of Section 10.
C. Temporary Uses, Accessory Structures and Uses:
Temporary uses, accessory structures and uses are
permitted in the Open Space District subject to the
provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 14 of this Zoning
Code.
D. Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and loading
requirements for the Open Space District are set
forth in Section 18 of this Zoning Code.
E. Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in the Open
Space District subject to the provisions of
Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
10.2 INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS DISTRICT
10.2-1 Purpose: The Institutional Buildings District is
created to accommodate government-owned or
government-operated buildings, as well as buildings
which house government-related activities. It is
created with the intent to avoid complications that
arise from treating such buildings as permitted or
conditional uses in zoning districts characterized
by uses and structures bearing no similarity to
governmental or institutional uses and buildings.
10.2-2 General Provisions:
Section 10, Page 2
A. Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional
uses for the Institutional Buildings District
are listed in Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
B. Bulk Limits: Bulk, lot, area and yard requirements
are listed in the Special Districts Bulk Chart
found at the end of Section 10.
C. Temporary Uses, Accessory Structures and Uses:
Temporary uses and accessory structures and uses
are permitted in the Institutional Buildings District
subject to the provisions of Sections 12, 13
and 14 of this Zoning Code.
D. Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and loading
requirements for the Institutional Buildings District
are set forth in Section 18 of this Zoning
Code.
E. Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in the
Institutional Buildings District subject to the
provisions of Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
10.3 AIRPORT DISTRICT 1
10.3-1 PURPOSE: The AD-1 District is established for
areas under public control, which are used or
intended for the landings and taking-off of
aircraft, and associated areas which are used or
intended for use as airport buildings or other
airport facilities or right-of-way, including
without limitation runways, taxiways, hangars and
aircraft storage and tie-down areas. The district
is further intended to allow for efficient airport
operations and utilization of certain amenity
uses. These general purposes include the following
specific objectives:
(1) Promotion of the most desirable use of land
in conformance with an FAA approved airport
site plan;
(2) Promotion of the economic viability and
operational value of the airport located
within the district; and,
(3) To encourage the development of the airport
within the district as an entity which will
benefit transportation and economic
development on a local and regional basis
Section 10, Page 3
10.3-2 General Provisions:
A. Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional
uses for the Airport District 1 are listed
in Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
B. Bulk Limits: Bulk, lot, area, and yard
requirements are listed in the Special Districts
Bulk Chart found at the end of Section 10.
C. Accessory Structures and Uses, Temporary Uses:
Accessory structures and uses and temporary uses
are permitted in the Airport District 1 subject
to the provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 14 of
this Zoning Code.
D. Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and
loading requirements for the Airport District 1
are set forth in Section 18 of this Zoning Code.
E. Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in the
Airport District 1 subject to the provisions of
Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
10.4 AIRPORT DISTRICT 2
10.4-1 Purpose: The AD-2 District is intended as a
designation assigned to areas adjacent and related
to land zoned AD-1, which include a reliever
category airport, by allowing mixed land uses,
flexible, yet orderly development, to protect and
promote public safety, comfort, convenience and
the general public welfare, and to protect and
enhance the economic value of parcels the district
includes.
10.4-2 General Provisions:
A. Permitted, Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional
uses for the Airport District 2 are
listed in Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
Section 10, Page 4
B. Bulk Limits: Bulk, lot, area, and yard
requirements are listed in the Special Districts
Bulk Chart found at the end of Section 10.
C. Temporary Uses, Accessory Structures and Uses:
Temporary uses and accessory structures and uses
are permitted in the Airport District 2 subject
to the provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 14 of
this Zoning Code.
D. Parking, Loading Requirements: Parking and
loading requirements for the Airport District 2
are set forth in Section 18 of this Zoning Code.
E. Sign Regulations: Signs are permitted in the
Airport District 2 subject to the provisions of
Section 16 of this Zoning Code.
Section 10, Page 5
10.5
SPECIAL D I S T R I C T S B U L K C H A R T
LOT AREA,
PARCEL AREA
& FRONTAGE
YARD REQUIREMENTS BULK LIMITS
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard 2
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Minimum
Side
Yard
Height Limit
for Principal
Use 3
Height Limit
for
Accessory
Use 3
District Square
Feet
Feet Feet Feet Feet Feet Stories Feet Stories
OS None None 25 25 10 25 2 20 1
IB None None 25 25 10 25 2 20 1
AD1 None None 30 4
1, 4
1, 4
3, 5
3, 5
3, 5
3, 5
AD2 10,000 80 30 4 30 4 20 4 35 5 3 5 20 5 1 5
1. No specific yard requirements shall apply to structures on
lots that are not adjacent to a public street. The distance
between all structures on lots within the district shall be
in accordance with applicable building and fire codes.
2. See definition of Yard, Front.
3. As regulated by the Lake in the Hills Airport Hazard Zoning
Provisions (Chapter 26) and the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
4. The storage of materials, equipment or vehicles shall not
take place within 10 feet of any rear or side yard or within
any front yard.
5. The maximum height for the storage of any materials shall be
20 feet.
Section 11, Page 1
SECTION 11
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USE CHART
P – Permitted Use
C – Conditional Use
A1
RE5
RE2
RE1
R1
A&B
R2
R3
R4
USE B1
B
2
B3
B4
B5
M1
M2
OS
I
B
AD1
AD2
Adult Entertainment Establishments
(Additional regulation – see Chapter 11 of the
Municipal Code and Section 24 of the Zoning
Ordinance)
C
P
Agriculture/Apiary(bee
keeping)Farm/Farming/Horticulture
Airport P P
Ambulance Service and Garage P P
Amphitheater C P
Amusement park C C
C Animal Shelter C C
Armed Forces Training Center C C C P C
Armory C P
Assembly – Civic/Social Organizations P P P P
Automatic teller machines (ATMs) &
commercial overnight delivery boxes P P P P P P P P P
Automotive Service C C P P C C
C C C C Bed and Breakfast Establishment C
Campground C
Cannabis Cultivation Center C C
Cannabis Dispensing Organization C C C
Child Care Institution C C
Cigar, cigarette, tobacco store P P P
Collection Bin (Additional Regulations - see
Section 28)
P P P P P P P P P
Day Care Center C C C C
C C Dog Day Care Facility / Obedience School C C C
Drive-Through C C
P P P P Dwelling – Group Home 1
C C C C Dwelling – Group Home 2
P Dwelling – Multi-Family
C Dwelling – Senior Housing C C
P Dwelling – Single Family Attached
P P P P P P P Dwelling – Single Family Detached P
P P Dwelling – Two-Family
Dwelling - Above Business P C C
Dwelling - with Business P
Entertainment P P P P P C P
Gas Station C C C C C
C C C Golf Course C C
P P P P P P P P Home Occupation
Hotel/Motel C C C
C C Kennel C C
Liquor Store C P
C Long Term Care Facility C C
Manufacturing P P P P
Section 11, Page 2
A1
RE5
RE2
RE1
R1
A&B
R2
R3
R4
USE B1
B
2
B3
B4
B5
M1
M2
OS
I
B
AD1
AD2
Mobile Home Sales C C
Nightclub C C C
Office/Service – Business/Professional C P P P P P P P P
Outdoor Sales/Open Sales Lot accessory to
principle use
C C C C C C
Flea Market C
Outdoor Storage of
Materials/Vehicles/Equipment accessory to
principle use
C C C C C C C
Outdoor Storage of Vehicles as principle use C C C C C
Outdoor Use accessory to principle use C C C C C C C C C
Park, government owned and operated P P P P
Parking Area, Public C P P C P P P
Parking Garage, Public P P P
Pawn Shop C C
Personal Wireless Service Facilities, Towers
(Additional Regulations – see Section 14.4)
C C C C C C
C C C C C C C Planned Development C C C C C C C C C C C
Public Uses (local, regional, state, federal
agencies/offices/facilities)
P P P P P P P
Recreation / Open Space / Park P P
Recreation Center, indoor P P C C C P
C C C C C C C C Religious Use C C C C C C
Restaurant, Classes I-V P P P P P P
Retail Sales C P P P P P P
C Rooming House
Sanitary Landfill C C
C C C C C C C Schools – Mentally and Physically Challenged C C
Schools – Nursery P P
C C C C C C C Schools – Public Pre-K to High School P C
C C C C C C C Schools – Private Pre-K to High School P P C
Schools – University, College P C C
Self-Storage Facility P P P P
Shooting Range – Indoor C C C P
Shooting Range – Outdoor C C C
Shopping/Business center (all
shopping/business centers shall be Planned
Developments) C C C C C C C C
C Social Service Agency C C C C
P P P P P P P P Solar Energy Systems 1 P P P P P P P P P P P
P Solar Energy Systems 2 P P P P P
C C C C C C C C Solar Energy Systems 3 C C C C C C C C C C C
Tavern P P
Transportation Service (taxi, limousine etc.) P P P P P P P
Utilities – government owned and operated P P P P
C
Utilities - Wind energy system, small, on-site,
ground-mounted C C C C C C C C C C
P P P P P P P P
Utilities - Wind energy system, small, on-site,
roof-mounted P P P P P P P P P C C
Veterinary clinic, small animals C P P C C
P P P P P P P P Village Owned & Operated Uses P P P P P P P P P P P
Warehouse/Distribution/Trucking P P P P
Wholesale P P P P P
Definitions for each use can be found in Section 3 of the Zoning Ordinance
Section 11, Page 3
New Compatible Uses: The Planning and Zoning Commission may allow a land use to be
considered as a permitted or conditional use which, though not identified by name in a
zoning district list of permitted or conditional uses, is deemed to be similar in nature,
and clearly compatible with the listed uses. The Commission shall consult the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) to determine similarity or compatibility.
However, such non-listed uses shall not be approved until the application for such use has
been reviewed by the village attorney.
Addition of Non-listed Uses to Zoning Ordinance: All non-listed uses that may be approved
may be added to the appropriate use list at the time of periodic updating and revision.
Section 12, Page 1
SECTION 12
TEMPORARY USES
12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
12.1-1 Authorized Temporary Uses: Authorized temporary
uses are listed in the Temporary Use Chart at the
end of this Section 12.
12.1-2 Construction: A temporary use shall not involve
the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.
12.1-3 Prohibitions: No temporary use shall infringe on
public safety, cause traffic interference or
congestion, block pedestrian access, block access
to a fire department connection or fire lane, or
create undue adverse effects on neighboring properties.
12.1-4 Access requirements: No temporary use shall reduce
a drive aisle or access aisle below the minimum
distance as required in Section 18, Off-Street
Parking and Loading.
12.1-5 Parking Requirements: No temporary use shall be
authorized that would reduce the amount of offstreet
parking spaces more than 10% below the
required number of spaces in relation to the
permanent uses located on the zoning lot.
12.1-6 Restoration and Clean Up: Upon termination of a
temporary use, the applicant shall clean up the
area where the use was located and restore it to at
least, if not better than, the condition that it
was in prior to the establishment of the temporary
use. The applicant shall make any repairs to the
property from damage inflicted by the temporary
use.
12.2 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL:
An application for a temporary use permit must be filed with the
Community Development Department in advance of the beginning of the
Section 12, Page 2
proposed use. To determine whether the applicant will meet the
standards set forth in this Section, the applicant shall submit the
following information:
1. A survey or site plan of the property to be used, rented or
leased for the temporary use, including all information
necessary to accurately locate and portray the location of the
proposed temporary use.
2. A written description of the proposed temporary use and period
of time requested for the use.
3. Sufficient information to determine that yard requirements,
sanitary facilities, vehicle and pedestrian access, signage
and parking spaces are adequately provided for.
4. Such other information and certification as may reasonably be
required by the Community Development Department to reach a
determination that the proposed temporary use will comply with
this Section.
If the applicant's plans do not comply with the provisions outlined
in this Section 12, then the application shall be denied. If the
applicant's plans comply with the provisions of this section, then
the Community Development Department may grant approval of the
application. If at any time during operation of the temporary use
the use fails to comply with this Section 12, then approval shall
be deemed immediately revoked and the temporary use shall be
terminated immediately.
No temporary use shall be approved if such use would conflict with
a previously approved temporary use.
12.3 SPECIAL TEMPORARY USES:
Tent meetings, carnivals, circuses and civic use of public property
are considered special temporary uses and shall require approval by
the Village Board.
Section 12, Page 3
12.4 Temporary Use Chart
Permitted
Temporary
Use
Zoning
District
Time Limited
Number Limited
Parking
Additional
Limitations
Indoor/Outdoor
Craft,
Art,
Rummage,
Plant Show,
Exhibits,
Sales and
Carnivals
B-2, B-3,
B-4, M-1
Maximum of 4
consecutive
days
No more than 2
times in a 12
month period.
As required
by the type
of
business;
see Section
18
Regular
business
hours
Farm Product
Sales
A-1, B2,
B-3, B-4,
M-1
Maximum of 8
consecutive
hours
No more than 5
sales per 7-
day period. No
more than 16
7-day periods
per year.
Minimum 5
spaces
Seller produced
goods
only
Christmas
tree sales
All B
districts,
M-1
Maximum of 45
consecutive
days
1 per year
Minimum 8
spaces
8 a.m. to 9
p.m.
Contractors'
offices &
equipment
sheds
Any use
district;
must be
accessory
to
construction
project
Not to exceed
duration of
the active
construction
phase of such
project or 1
year, whichever
is less.
Minimum 5
spaces
Limited to
construction
hours
Employment/
recruiting
offices
Any use
district;
must be
accessory
to a
building
or tenant
space
under
construction
Until
Certificate
of Occupancy
for building/
tenant space
is issued or
for 60
consecutive
days,
whichever
comes first
Minimum 1
space for
every
employee on
premises,
plus 1
space per
300 square
feet
8 a.m. to 9
p.m.
Membership
sales
offices
Any use
district;
must be
accessory
to a
building
or tenant
space
under
construction
Until
Certificate
of Occupancy
for building/
tenant space
is issued or
for 60
consecutive
days,
whichever
comes first
1 space per
300 square
feet
8 a.m. to 9
p.m.
Section 12, Page 4
Permitted
Temporary
Use
Zoning
District
Time Limited
Number Limited
Parking
Additional
Limitations
(On site)
real estate
offices, including
model units
Any use
district;
must be
accessory
to a new
development.
Not to exceed
period of
active selling/
leasing
of units or
space or to
activities
related to
the development
in which
such office
is located.
Minimum 5
spaces
No such
office shall
serve as a
general
office or
headquarters
of any firm.
9 a.m. to 8
p.m.
Outdoor
display of
seasonal
goods for
retail sale
B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-4
Maximum of 90
consecutive
days
No more than 2
times in a 12
month period.
1
2
3
4
Outdoor
service
areas
B-3, B-4,
B-5
Maximum of
120 consecutive
days.
2
4
Portable
storage/movi
ng
containers
Any use
district;
must be
accessory
to a
principal
structure
Maximum of 15
consecutive
days
No more than 1
unit at a
time, 2 times
in a 12 month
period
Access to
on-site
parking
must be
maintained;
no unit may
be located
within
required
parking
spaces
Maximum size
of 8’X 8’ X
16’; must be
setback 5
feet from
side and
rear lot
lines and
half the
distance of
the required
front yard
(see def.)
setback from
relevant lot
lines; must
be placed on
asphalt or
concrete
surface
1. The height of any display shall not exceed 5 feet and the
overall display area shall not exceed 5% of the parking
lot/access drive area, where the outdoor display is located.
The outside storage of materials cannot be located where there
is a designated area for turning radii for vehicles, trucks
and fire equipment.
Section 12, Page 5
2. Adequate sidewalk width shall be maintained for pedestrian
access per Fire District guidelines and shall not be reduced
under 3 feet.
3. If the outdoor display is limited to the sidewalk/walkways
associated with a business, there shall be no time limits on
the display.
4. No outdoor display area or outdoor dining area shall be
situated on any landscaped area.
Section 13, Page 1
SECTION 13
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
13.1 AUTHORIZATION
Subject to the limitations and provisions of this Section,
accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in any zoning
district in connection with a principal structure or use lawfully
existing within such district.
13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.2-1 Placement:
A. An accessory structure may not be located nearer to
any interior lot line than permitted for the main
building when located in a side yard as defined in
Sections 6,7,8,9, and 10 of this Zoning Code. When
an accessory structure is located in the rear yard,
it may then be located within four feet of the
interior lot line, or within five feet of the rear
lot line, however, no accessory building may
encroach onto any easement.
B. No accessory structure shall be located on a reversed
corner lot beyond the front yard required on
the adjacent lot to the rear, nor located nearer
than six feet to the side lot line of an adjacent
lot to the rear where there is a building on such a
lot to the rear.
C. Accessory structures may not be erected in front of
the main building on a zoning lot, unless otherwise
permitted in this Section.
D. An accessory structure shall not be erected prior
to the establishment or construction of the
principal structure to which it is accessory.
E. Swimming pools in all R Districts shall be located
not less than twenty (20) feet from any principal
building on an adjacent lot.
Section 13, Page 2
13.3 SIZE, FLOOR AREA
13.3-1 Height Limitations: For Residential zoned
properties, the maximum height for detached garages
shall be 16 feet and all other accessory structures
shall have a maximum height of 12 feet.
13.3-2 Size: No accessory building shall exceed 150 square
feet in size, except that sheds may not exceed 120
square feet and garages may not exceed 624 square
feet, and that enclosures for outside storage in
business and manufacturing districts may not exceed
300 square feet.
13.3-3 Anchoring: Detached garages, gazebos and sheds
shall be permanently anchored on all corners.
13.3-4 Concrete Floor: Garages and enclosures for outside
storage in business and manufacturing districts
shall have a concrete floor with the thickness and
aggregate as provided in the appropriate provisions
of the building codes adopted by the Village.
13.3-5 Exclusions:
A. Antennas and amateur radio facilities shall
comply with Section 14 of this Zoning Code.
B. Small Wind Energy Systems shall comply with
Section 27 of this Zoning Code.
C. Where a substantial part of the wall of an
accessory structure is a part of the wall of
the main building, or where an accessory
building is attached to the main building in a
substantial manner as by a roof, such
accessory structure shall be considered to be
part of the main building.
D. Sheds 40 square feet and smaller made of any
synthetic plastic material.
13.4 EXEMPTION FOR VILLAGE-OWNED OR OPERATED BUILDINGS
Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prohibit the erection of any
accessory structure of any size in any yard to a Village-owned
or operated building.
Section 13, Page 3
13.5 PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Permitted Accessory Structure Permitted
District
Yard(s)
Allowed*
Amateur radio facilities,
antennas1 All districts,
except R-4
R
Child's play equipment All R districts,
OS, IB
R
Decks, terraces3
All R SR
B, M, OS, IB,
AD1, AD2
FSR
Dog runs All R districts,
B-3, B-4
R
Fences, walls1 All districts SR
Flagpoles All districts FSR
Garages, Attached All districts FSR
Garages, Detached (limit-1) All districts SR
Gazebos All districts SR
Kennels, Stables A-1, RE-5, M-1,
B-4, OS
R
Laundry drying equipment R districts R
Lawn furniture All districts FSR
Off-street motor vehicle parking
areas, unloading/loading1 All districts FSR
Public utilities, telephone,
electric, gas, water lines, sewer
lines and cable lines, their
supports and incidental equipment
All districts FSR
Recreational equipment All districts R
Satellite dishes All districts R
Sheds (limit-1) All districts SR
Section 13, Page 4
Permitted Accessory Structure Permitted
District
Yard(s)
Allowed*
Tennis courts All R districts R
Trash Enclosure All Districts SR
Swimming pool, public2 B-4, OS, IB R
Swimming pool, private2 All R districts R
Solar Energy Systems 1, 2, & 3 All Districts SR
BSuyisltdeimng Integrated Solar Energy All Districts FSR
Storage building for goods used in
or produced by manufacturing
activities on the same lot or parcel
of ground with such activities
M-1, M-2, AD1,
AD2
SR
Storage building for storage of
merchandise normally in stock on
the same lot of any retail service
or business use, unless such storage
is excluded by district
regulations
B-2, B-3,
B-4, M-1,
M-2, AD1, AD2
SR
Storage building for recreational
paraphernalia, i.e., baseballs,
etc.
OS,IB FSR
Wmionudn teednergy systems, small, roof-
All districts N/A
* F = front yard; S = side yard; R = rear yard
1. See also other applicable requirements and limitations
included in this Zoning Code.
2. Allowed in accordance with 2012 IRC, Appendix G.
3. Additional restrictions for residential zoned properties per
Section 7.3.8 of this Zoning Code.
Section 14, Page 1
SECTION 14
ANTENNAS, AMATEUR RADIO FACILITIES, SATELLITE DISHES,
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
14.1 CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No antenna shall be erected, constructed, maintained or operated in
a zoning district except in conformance with the following
regulations:
14.2 ANTENNAS
14.2-1 Antennas with surface areas of 10 square feet or
less: antennas and antenna support structures having
a combined surface area not greater than 10
square feet and no single dimension exceeding 12
feet shall be permitted as an accessory use.
14.2-2 Antennas with surface areas exceeding 10 square
feet: antennas and antenna support structures
having a combined surface area greater than 10
square feet or having any single dimension
exceeding 12 feet shall be permitted as an
accessory use if and only if they comply with the
following regulations:
A. Height Limit for Detached Antennas: No
combination of such antenna and antenna
support structure shall, if ground mounted,
exceed 65 feet in height.
B. Attachment to Structure: No combination of
such antenna and antenna support structure
shall be attached to a principal or accessory
structure unless all of the conditions herein
are satisfied.
C. Height Limitation on Attached Antennas: No
antenna and its support structure shall extend
more than 20 feet above the highest point of
the building on which it is mounted.
D. Mounting: The antenna and its support structure
shall not be attached to or mounted upon
any building appurtenance, such as a chimney.
The antenna and its support structure shall
not be mounted or attached to the front of any
principal building or to the side of any building
facing a street, including any portion of
Section 14, Page 2
the building roof facing any street. The
antenna and its support structure shall be
designed to withstand a wind force of 90 miles
per hour without the use of supporting guy
wires.
E. Advertising, Illumination Prohibited; Color:
No signs, advertising, logos or other mark of
any kind shall be permitted on, and no
illumination shall be allowed of, any antenna.
All antennas must be neutral in color.
F. Grounding: The antenna and its support structure
shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
G. Additional Standards: The antenna support
structure shall satisfy such other design and
construction standards as the Director of
Community Development or designee reasonably
determines are necessary to ensure safe construction
and maintenance of the antenna and
its support structure.
14.2-3 Setback from Street: No antenna or its support
structure shall be erected or maintained closer to
any street than the wall of the principal building
to which it is accessory that is nearest to such
street.
14.2-4 Setback from Adjacent Buildings: No antenna or its
support structure shall be located in any required
side yard or nearer than one-half of the height of
the antenna and support structure to any habitable
building on any adjacent property.
14.2-5 Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations: All antennas
shall comply with all applicable provisions of
Chapter 26, Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations, of
the Lake in the Hills Municipal Code.
14.3 PARABOLIC/SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNAS:
A parabolic or dish type television antenna as used herein shall
refer to any circular or similarly dish-shaped transmitting or
receiving antenna for communications or transmitting or receiving
television signals from a satellite. Such antennas greater than 36
inches in diameter shall be permitted as an accessory use if and
only if they comply with the following regulations:
Section 14, Page 3
14.3-1 Number Limitation: No more than one such antenna
shall be located on any zoning lot.
14.3-2 Size Limitation: The diameter of the parabolic
antenna shall not exceed 10 feet.
14.3-3 Height Limitation: The maximum height of the
installation from ground level at the site shall
not exceed 15 feet.
14.3-4 Mounting: Parabolic antennas shall be ground
mounted only. No antenna shall be located in any
front or side yard. Each antenna shall be
supported by a concrete pier extending below the
frost line subject to the approval of the Director
of Community Development or designee and all
electric or transmission cable shall be underground
if the antenna is five feet or greater from the
principal structure. Each antenna must be able to
withstand up to 60 mph winds.
14.3-5 Advertising, Illumination Prohibited; Neutral
Color: No sign, advertising, or other mark shall be
permitted on, and no illumination shall be allowed
of, any antenna. All antennas must be neutral in
color.
14.3-6 Setback: Parabolic antennas are only permitted in
rear yards. All parabolic antennas shall be
freestanding and located no closer than 10 feet
from any property line measured from the closest
point of the antenna to the lot line.
14.3-7 Permit Requirements: No such antenna shall be
installed until or unless a building permit
therefor has been issued by the Community
Development Department. No building permit application
shall be approved unless the construction
plans and specifications accompanying said
application comply with the requirements established
in this Section. The manufacturer's installation
and operational manual or a copy thereof
shall be filed with the application. The antenna
shall be installed and operational in accordance
with the specifications contained in the manufacturer's
manual provided, however, that any
installation and operation shall otherwise comply
with the terms and provisions contained in this
Zoning Code. Each application must comply with all
Section 14, Page 4
terms and provisions of the Building Code of the
Village.
14.4 RADIO, TELEVISION TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS, PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITIES ANTENNAS:
14.4-1 Municipal Code Compliance Required: Personal
wireless service facilities antennas shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 47, Personal
Wireless Service Facilities, of the Lake in the
Hills Municipal Code.
14.4-2 Compliance with Airport Regulations Required:
Every antenna shall be in compliance with Chapter
26, Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations of the Lake in
the Hills Municipal Code.
Section 15, Page 1
SECTION 15
FENCES
15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
15.1-1 Permit Required: No fence shall be constructed
without a permit first having been properly issued therefor
by the Village; provided, however, that no permit shall be
required for the installation of sections of decorative
fencing in a front yard. The fee for a fence permit shall
be determined by the Board of Trustees.
15.1-2 Plans Required: The Community Development
Division shall require such plans and drawings as deemed
reasonably necessary prior to issuance of a permit to
assure compliance with this Zoning Code.
15.1-3 Code Compliance Required: All fences shall be
constructed in conformance with the ordinances of the
Village. The Community Development Division shall inspect
same for compliance.
15.1-4 Barbed Wire, Dangerous Fences Prohibited: With
the exception of Section 15.14-2 no fence shall contain any
barbed wire or be constructed in any way so as to
potentially cause injury to any person.
15.1-5 Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained and
kept in good condition.
15.1-6 Airport District 1 Restrictions: Fences in the
AD-1 District shall be allowed only per the airport
regulations described in Chapter 26 of the Municipal Code.
Section 15, Page 2
15.2 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. All fences shall be constructed of one or more of the
following materials: suitable plastic material, wood that
is treated or a species that is naturally resistant to
withstand decay and rot, chain link, decorative aluminum,
wrought iron, or other suitable material.
B. All rails and supports shall be on the inside of the
fence, such that the decorative side of the fence shall
face outward from the property enclosed.
C. All fence post holes shall be a minimum of 42 inches
deep for five foot and taller fences. All fences less than
five feet in height, may have post holes that are only 36
inches deep. Posts shall be securely anchored in the ground
with concrete.
D. Chain link used in fences that are erected in areas
zoned residential and agricultural shall not be less than
11 gauge. Chain link used in fences that are erected in
areas zoned for business and manufacturing shall not be
less than 9 gauge.
E. A gate shall be provided along at least one fence line
adjacent to the public street to allow access for emergency
response personnel. The gate shall be a minimum of 36
inches in width. The gate shall be mounted in such a manner
that the gate swings over private property of the lot where
it is located and not over the public right-of-way.
Section 15, Page 3
15.3 PERMITTED FENCING
15.3-1 Front yards:
A. Decorative corner fencing sections, not to
exceed 10 feet in length each, 3 feet in height
and at least 70 percent open. Two sections must
join together at a 120 degree angle or less to
form a corner (corner section), but no corner
section may be closer than 10 feet to another
corner section.
B. Fence, other than decorative corner fence,
within the front yard (side) which abuts another
front yard (side) shall be at least 30 percent
open, not exceeding five feet in height exclusive
of posts or ornamental objects on posts, provided
the fence is not closer than ten feet to the
property line plus starts and ends at a rear
yard.
C. Fence, other than decorative corner fence,
within the front yard (side) on a reversed corner
lot shall be at least 30 percent open, not
exceeding five feet in height exclusive of posts
or ornamental objects on posts, provided the
fence is not closer than ten feet to the property
line along the street and starts and end at a
rear yard. The fence shall not extend closer to
the front lot line than the width of the front
yard (front) of the adjacent lot.
D. Fence, other than decorative corner fence,
within the front yard (side) on a through
(corner) lot shall be at least 30 percent open,
not exceeding five feet in height exclusive of
posts or ornamental objects on posts, provided
the fence is not closer than ten feet to the
property line and starts and ends at a rear yard.
The fence shall not extend beyond the rear most
line of the rear yard.
Section 15, Page 4
E. Where the interior fence is taller and
adjoining fence shorter, the change in grade
shall taper in height to match the adjoining
section. (See Illustration I)
F. No chain link shall be used in any
residential front yard.
G. When existing neighborhood conditions for
fences in front yards differ from current
requirements, the Community Services Director or
designee shall have authority, but not the
obligation, to grant a variation to these
standards to allow construction similar to the
nearby properties. The variation shall be
documented and presented to the Planning and
Zoning Commission at their next regular meeting
for their information. Differing from existing
neighborhood conditions shall be defined as a
majority of the similar situations within 1000
feet of the property in question.
15.3-2 Side and rear yards: Fences, at least 30 percent
open, not exceeding six feet in height exclusive of posts
or ornamental objects on posts provided, however that
perimeter fencing shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of Section 15.12 of this Zoning Code. Fences in
the rear yards of lots fronting the following four lakes
shall be regulated per Section 15.15: Woods Creek Lake –
Lake #1, Goose Lake – Lake #2, Willow Lake – Lake #3, and
Lake Scott – Lake #4.
15.3-3 Temporary Fencing: Temporary fencing for special
events or constructions sites is allowed, without permit,
as authorized by the Community Services Director or
designee.
15.4 VISION OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
No fence, screening, or other structure shall be constructed on
any corner lot taller than 24 inches in height from curb level
or street crown if located within the area of a triangle, two
legs of which are a distance of 23 feet each when measured along
Section 15, Page 5
each of the intersecting front lot lines and from the point
where such lines intersect. (See Illustration A.)
15.5 EXEMPTIONS:
15.5-1 Certain Institutional Fences: Nothing in this
Zoning Code shall prohibit the erection of an open meshtype
or chain-link fence for public parks, recreational
areas, ballfields, public or private school sites, or
property owned by any public utility or agency.
15.5-2 Soil and Erosion Control: Nothing in this Zoning
Code shall prohibit the erection of soil and erosion
control fencing around any disturbed area.
15.5-3 Snow Fencing: Nothing in this Zoning Code shall
prohibit the erection of snow fencing to control blowing
snow between November 1 and April 1.
15.5-4 Certain Terraces and Patios: Open terraces and
patios located in a rear yard may be enclosed by a solid
fence not to exceed 72 inches in height and not extending
more than 12 feet from the principal building.
15.6 FENCES, INTERIOR LOT:
15.6-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A.Interior lot is any lot having a lot line fronting
or facing only one street.
B.The front yard of an interior lot is the area
extending across the front of a lot and being
contained within the front lot line, the front of
the main building and the side lot lines.
(SeeIllustration B.)
C.The rear yard of an interior lot is the area
extending across the rear of a lot and being contained
within the rear lot line, the rear of the
main building, the side lot lines and at the
opposite end of the lot from the front lot line.
(See Illustration B)
Section 15, Page 6
D. The side yard of an interior lot is the area
extending along a side lot line and contained between
the front and rear yards, the side lot line
and the main building. (See Illustration B.)
15.6-2 Prohibitions: No fence shall be permitted in or
on property between the front lot line and the street or
roadway.
15.7 FENCES, CORNER LOT:
15.7-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A. A corner lot is a lot situated at the junction
of, abutting on or facing two intersecting
streets or roadways; or a lot at the point of deflection
in alignment of a single street, the
interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
Lot lines fronting, abutting or facing the
streets shall be considered to be the front lot
lines.
B. Corner lots have two front yards, as follows:
(i) The front yard (front) is the area
extending within and along the front
lot lines to the side lot lines and
then inward alongside lot lines to a
point equal to that part of the main
building (exclusive of projections)
closest to the front lot lines and then
continuing parallel to the front lot
line and extending to the property line
along the adjacent street. (See
Illustration C)
(ii) The front yard (side) is that area
contained between the front yard
(front), the rear lot line, the main
building and the front lot line
abutting the adjacent street. (See
Illustration C)
C. The rear yard is the area extending across
Section 15, Page 7
the rear of the lot and parallel to the street
upon which the lot has its shortest dimension.
Such area shall be within and extending along the
rear lot line to a point equal to that part of
the main building (exclusive of projections)
closest to the front lot line and then inward
from the rear lot line to that part of the main
building and from the rear lot line along the
side lot line to a point equal to that part of
the main building (exclusive of projections)
closest to the rear lot line and then inward from
the side lot line to that point of the building.
(See Illustration C)
D. The side yard is that area remaining after
establishing the front and rear yards or the area
extending along the side lot line and contained
between the front and rear yards, the main
building and the side lot line. (See
Illustration C)
15.8 FENCES, THROUGH (INTERIOR) LOT:
15.8-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A. Through (interior) lot is defined as a lot
that has a pair of opposite lot lines along
two more or less parallel streets or roadways
and that is not a corner lot. On an interior
through lot, both lot lines parallel to,
fronting or facing a street or roadway shall be
considered to be front lot lines.
Section 15, Page 8
B. Through (interior) lots have two front
yards, as follows:
(i) Front yard (front) is the area
extending across the front of the lot and
being contained within the front lot line,
the side lot lines and the front of the main
building. (See Illustration D)
(ii) Front yard (rear) is the area extending
across the rear of the lot, opposite from
the front yard (front) and being contained
within its front lot line, the side lot
lines and for the minimum depth of front
yard as required for the applicable zoning
district. (See Illustration D)
C. Rear yard is the area remaining after
determining the front yard (rear) and being
contained within the side lot lines, the rear of
the main building and front yard (rear). (See
Illustration D)
D. Side yard is the area extending along a side
lot and contained between the side lot line and
the main building and the front yard (front) and
the rear yard. (See Illustration D)
15.8-2 Prohibition: No fence shall be permitted in or
on the property between the front lot line and the street
or roadway.
15.9 FENCES, THROUGH (CORNER) LOT:
15.9-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A. Through (corner) lot is defined as a lot
which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
more or less parallel streets or roadways and has
another lot line fronting or facing another
street or roadway and has its side lot line
Section 15, Page 9
adjoining or contiguous to another lot or lots.
On the corner through lot, all lot lines parallel
to, fronting or facing any street or roadway
shall be considered as front lot lines.
B. Front yards in through (corner) lots shall
have three front yards as follows:
(i) Front yard (front) is the area
extending across the front of the lot with
the least dimension and being contained
within that front lot line, the front of the
main building, the side lot line and its
opposite front lot line. (See Illustration
E)
(ii) Front yard (rear) is the area extending
across the rear of the lot, opposite from
the front yard (front) and being contained
within its front lot line, the side lot line
and its opposite front lot line and for
minimum depth of a front yard as required
for the applicable zoning district. (See
Illustration E)
(iii)Front yard (side) is the area extending
along the front of the lot with the greatest
dimension and contained within the
front yard (rear), the front yard (front),
the front lot line and the main building.
(See Illustration E)
C. The rear yard is the area contained between
the front yard (rear) and the main building and
the side lot line and the front yard (side).
(See Illustration E)
D. The side yard is the area extending along a
side lot line and contained between the side lot
line and the main building and the front yard
(front) and the rear yard (See Illustration E.)
15.9-2 Prohibition: No fence shall be permitted in or
on the property between the front lot line and the street
Section 15, Page 10
or roadway.
15.10 FENCES, THROUGH (ENTIRE BLOCK) LOT:
15.10-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A. Through (entire block) lot is a lot which
has all of its lot lines abutting, fronting on,
or facing streets or roadways and which does not
have any side lot lines. On a through lot
(entire block), all lot lines abutting, fronting
on or facing any street or roadway shall be
considered to be front lot lines.
B. A through lot (entire block) shall have four
front yards as follows:
(i) One, front yard (front), is the area
extending across the front of the lot with
the greatest dimension and being contained
within the front lot line and the front of
the building or buildings and the two front
lines opposite from each other with the
least dimension. (See Illustration F)
(ii) One, front yard (rear), is the area
extending across the rear of the lot, opposite
from the front yard (front) and being
contained within its front lot line, the
two front lot lines opposite from each
other with the least dimension and for the
minimum depth of a front yard as required
for applicable zoning district. (See
Illustration F)
(iii)Two, front yards (side), each shall be
the area extending along the front of the
lot with the least dimension and contained
within the front yard (rear) and the front
lot line and the main building. (See
Illustration F)
C. Rear yard is the area contained between the
Section 15, Page 11
front yard (rear) and the main building and the
two front yards (side). (See Illustration F)
15.10-2 Prohibition: No fence shall be permitted in or
on the property between the front lot line and the street
or roadway.
15.11 FENCES, REVERSED CORNER LOT
15.11-1 Terms used in this subsection shall mean as
follows:
A. A reversed corner lot is the same as a
corner lot except that its front lot line with
the greatest dimension is substantially a
continuation of the front lot lines of the
interior lots to its rear, and its rear lot line
adjoins or abuts the side lot line of the lot to
its rear. Lot lines abutting, fronting or facing
a street or roadway shall be considered to be
front lot lines.
B. Front yard, side yard and rear yard of a
reversed corner lot is the same as the front
yard, side yard and rear yard of a corner lot.
(See Illustration G)
15.11-2 Prohibition: No fence shall be permitted in or
on the property between the front lot line and the street
or roadway.
15.12 PERIMETER FENCING:
15.12-1 Defined: Perimeter fencing is defined as fencing
along thoroughfares having a speed limit of 30 miles per
hour or higher abutting property which does not allow
vehicular access to those thoroughfares from abutting lots
or tracts.
15.12-2 Clear Areas: When a thoroughfare intersects with
any other roadway, the perimeter fencing must terminate 23
feet from the corner lot stake. In the case of radius lot
stakes, the fence must terminate 23 feet from the
intersecting point that a line extended from each lot line
Section 15, Page 12
would create, or at the radius lot stake, whichever is
greater. (See Illustration H-1.)
When two thoroughfares intersect, a clear area must be
maintained by measuring 23 feet from the intersecting stake
or stakes, down each lot line and creating a diagonal line
across the two points. In the case of radius lot stakes,
the fence must terminate 23 feet from the intersecting
point that a line extended from each lot line would create,
or at the radius lot stake, whichever is greater. (See
Illustration H-2.)
15.12-3 One Foot Distance Standards: Perimeter fencing
shall be located not less than one foot inside all lot
lines, or not less than one foot from any existing County
or State roadway maintenance easement, or not less than one
foot in from any existing landscaping easement. (See
Illustration H-1 and H-2.)
15.12-4 Posts: Fence posts shall be located on the side
yard lot lines so adjacent property owners may tie into
existing fencing on adjacent property in order to maintain
uniformity. The post location requirement shall not apply
to developers developing two or more consecutive lots
subject to this Zoning Code.
15.12-5 Changes in Elevation: Changes in elevation shall
be rolling with the contour of the property, subject to the
Director of Community Services or designee’s approval,
keeping the top of the fencing even.
15.12-6 Material: Perimeter fencing shall be constructed
entirely of western red cedar, which shall remain in
its natural condition except for clear wood or cedar
wood preservatives used to prevent decay and rot.
15.12-7 Height; Style: Perimeter fencing shall be five
feet in height and 30 percent open, flat topped, board on
board.
15.12-8 Gates: Gates are permitted but shall be of the
same construction as the fence.
Section 15, Page 13
15.12-9 Connection of Interior Fencing: Where perimeter
fencing is installed, interior fencing is permitted to be
extended and connected to the perimeter fencing. Where the
interior fencing is six feet high, the change in grade
shall be made evenly, with the eight foot section
connecting. (See Illustration I.)
15.13 DOG POUNDS, RUNS & ENCLOSURES:
15.13-1 Rear Yard Only; Lot Line Limitation: Dog pounds,
runs and enclosures shall be permitted only in rear yards
and shall be located not closer than 10 feet to any lot
line.
15.13-2 Construction Standards: Such enclosures shall be
constructed of fencing that is at least 30 percent open,
shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall not exceed
a total of 50 lineal feet.
15.13-3 Number Limited: Only one such pound, run or
enclosure shall be permitted per zoning lot.
15.14 SEPARATION WALLS/FENCING (MULTIPLE FAMILY, BUSINESS,
MANUFACTURING PROPERTY):
15.14-1 Separation Fence Required if Abutting
Residential: Whenever a business abuts a residential area,
there shall be erected a wall or solid fence at least six
feet in height and maintained in good condition.
15.14-2 Standard in not Abutting Residential: Whenever a
business does not abut a residential area a fence of at
least six feet in height, but no more than eight feet in
height, may be erected. A three-strand barbed wire
extension, not exceeding eighteen inches is permissible,
unless it does not meet the applicable setback standard.
15.14-3 Whenever a duplex, townhouse, condominium or any
other multiple family zoned property abuts single family
zoned property, a six foot high board on board cedar fence
shall be erected between the two areas. The later of the
two builders shall be responsible for the fence.
Section 15, Page 14
15.15 LAKEFRONT FENCING:
15.15-1 Defined: Lakefront fencing is defined as fencing
that is located in the rear yards of lots that abut one of
the following four lakes: Woods Creek Lake – Lake #1,
Goose Lake – Lake #2, Willow Lake – Lake #3, and Lake Scott
– Lake #4.
15.15-2 Height: The maximum height for any lakefront
fencing shall be 4 feet exclusive of posts or ornamental
objects.
15.15-3 Setback: The minimum setback for lakefront
fencing is 15 feet from the shoreline or property line,
whichever is closest to the principal structure on the lot
at the time of permit.
15.15-4 Percent Open: Lakefront fencing shall be at
least 50% open as viewed at 90 degrees.
15.15-5 Type of Fences: Lakefront fencing shall be
restricted to picket or split rail.
Section 15, Page 15
15.16 Illustrations
Section 15, Page 16
Section 15, Page 17
Section 15, Page 18
Section 15, Page 19
Section 15, Page 20
Section 15, Page 21
Section 15, Page 22
Section 15, Page 23
Section 16, Page 1
SECTION 16
SIGNS
16.1 PURPOSE:
All signs located within the Village limits shall be located,
erected, altered and maintained in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this Section 16. These sign regulations
are made in accordance with, and in furtherance of, the
Comprehensive Plan and program for public safety, area
development, preservation of property values and the general
welfare in the Village. The intent of the regulations in this
Section 16 is to safeguard the general welfare of the property
owner and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the Village while
balancing these goals with the reasonable controlled growth and
development of the area. Accordingly, it is the intention of
this Section to establish regulations governing the display of
signs that will:
A. Control the number of signs in the Village so as to not
distract motorists or create a hazard to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
B. Prevent the proliferation of off-premises commercial
signs which obscure the legitimate effort of local
business establishments to reasonably identify the
location and nature of their business.
C. Preserve the beauty of the landscape and residential and
commercial architecture of the Village that are among the
prime assets of the Village.
D. Be compatible with their surroundings.
E. Comply with the type of activity to which they pertain.
F. Be legible in the circumstance in which they are seen.
G. Encourage quality sign design to promote a better visual
environment.
H. Enhance the physical appearance of the Village through a
program that ensures the removal of inadequately
Section 16, Page 2
maintained, illegal, and nonconforming signs within the
shortest reasonable time period.
16.2 ZONING DISTRICT SIGNS:
Zoning district sign regulations are established in the Sign
Chart found at the end of this Section.
16.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
16.3-1 Signs Prohibited Unless Specifically Listed: The
sign standards by zoning classifications, which
are established in the Sign Chart, are intended
to include every district in the Village as defined
in this Zoning Code. Only signs described
and regulated in this Section 16 shall be
permitted in any particular zoning district, and
no sign shall be permitted in the Village except
as authorized in this Section.
16.3-2 Variations from this Zoning Code shall be
permitted only by the approval of the Board of
Trustees, according to standards of procedure
established in Section 23 of this Zoning Code.
16.3-3 Sign Area: The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits
of all lettering, wording, designs, symbols
together with the background on which they are
displayed and in no case passing through or
between any adjacent elements of the same. Such
perimeter shall not include any structural
elements lying outside the limits of such sign
and not forming an integral part of the display.
16.4 PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited everywhere
within the Village, except as otherwise hereinafter specifically
provided:
A. "A" frame signs, sandwich signs, curb signs.
Section 16, Page 3
B. Commercial signs not advertising a business conducted, a
product sold, or service provided on the same premises
where the sign is located.
C. Flashing signs.
D. All miscellaneous advertising devices not specifically
authorized by this Section.
E. Pennants.
F. Portable signs.
G. Projecting signs.
H. Roof signs.
I. Signs on fences, landscaping, utility poles, retaining
walls, refuse enclosures and storage sheds with the
exception of public signs.
J. Signs on or within parked motor vehicles and designed to
be conspicuously visible for advertising or
informational purposes from outside the vehicle.
K. Signs that move or have moving parts however powered.
L. Signs that use reflective paints or tape.
M. Signs with lights between opaque letters and an opaque
background.
N. Signs hung across any street, alley or public right-ofway,
except as authorized by this Zoning Code.
O. Signs located on otherwise vacant land other than real
estate signs, construction signs, or outdoor advertising
signs except as authorized by this Section 16.
P. Signs in conflict with traffic signals, vehicular or
pedestrian travel, traffic sight lines or that impede
access to fire hydrants and fire lanes and exits.
Section 16, Page 4
Q. Signs that impede or impair the public health, safety or
welfare.
R. Signs painted on the walls or windows of any building,
except as authorized by this Zoning Code.
S. Signs on microwave, radio, transmission or receiving
towers or on satellite dishes.
T. Temporary signs, except as authorized by this Section
16.
U. Inflatable signs larger than three cubic feet.
V. Signs in the public right-of-way not approved else
wherein this Zoning Code.
W. Banners and Feather Banners.
X. Any sign which uses exposed exterior neon tubing and/or
exposed light bulbs.
Y. All other signs not expressly authorized by this Zoning
Code.
16.5 EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following types of signs are exempt from the provisions of
this Section except for construction, maintenance and safety
regulations, and except as provided for herein. Such signs are
exempted from all permit requirements herein, except that
illuminated signs shall be subject to application for and
receipt of an electrical permit. Exempted signs and devices may
be used to display non-commercial messages under the same
standards as the display of a commercial message unless
otherwise allowed or restricted by State laws including, but not
limited to the Illinois Election Code and/or 10ILCS 5/1-1 et
seq. as enforced by the State Board of Elections or other
appropriate officials.
A. Yard Signs
B. Public Signs: Signs required by governmental bodies or
public utility specifically authorized for a public
Section 16, Page 5
purpose by any law, statute or ordinance; such public
signs may be of any type, number, area, height, location
or illumination as required by law, statute or
ordinance.
C. Secluded Signs: Signs located on private property that
cannot be deciphered from a public right-of-way or
public property.
D. Symbols or Insignia: Any sign of any official court or
public office, notices thereof, or any flag, emblem or
insignia of a government entity.
E. Window Signs:
1. Window Signs – Residential Zoning Districts:
Window signs in residential zoning districts
shall not exceed 30 percent of the window surface
area of the first floor windows.
2. Window Signs – Non-Residential Zoning Districts:
Window signs in non-residential zoning districts
shall be exempt, provided that:
Location: Window signs maybe permanently affixed
or applied to the window glass of buildings where
such windows or glass doors face the principal
street frontage(s). Such signs may be affixed on
the interior or the exterior surface of the
glass.
Surface Area: The surface area of the window
signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the total
window surface area, of any building elevation
exclusive of borders and trim.
Displays: The display of merchandise shall not
be construed as a window sign, nor any signs
identifying or promoting merchandise or services,
so long as the signs are located more than 12
inches back from the interior surface of the
glass.
Section 16, Page 6
Illumination: The use of neon tubing, LED, or
any other type of light source that is capable of
producing an effect similar to that of neon
tubing is permitted only as an inside window or
door signage treatment. The outlining of windows
or doors with any type of neon tubing, LED tubing
or other type of light source that is capable of
producing an effect similar to neon tubing is not
permitted.
F. A single unlit sign advertising or marketing the sale
of vacant, unimproved residentially-zoned real estate
greater than one acre in size, as well as all nonresidentially-
zoned real estate, situated on the
relevant real estate, and which satisfies the following
requirements:
1. Such sign does not interfere with any sight lines
of an intersection;
2. Such sign does not exceed a height of 10 feet from
ground level;
3. Such sign does not exceed 10 feet in width; and
4. Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
16.7 ILLUMINATION AND MAINTENANCE:
16.7-1 Illumination Generally: Illumination, if
authorized by this Zoning Code, shall be white
(non-colored) light and shall not blink,
fluctuate or move.
16.7-2 Internal Illumination: The type and manner of
illumination shall be specifically restricted by
the following:
A. No part of the sign panel other than the
lettering shall be transparent or translucent.
B. In no case shall the lighting intensity
exceed the limit of 70 foot candles measured
with a standard light meter perpendicular to
the face of the sign at a distance equal to
Section 16, Page 7
the narrowest dimension of the sign, whether
it be the height or the width.
C. No sign in any Residential or B-1 District
maybe internally illuminated, except for
non-residential uses in a Residential
District.
16.7-3 External Illumination: Externally illuminated
signs shall be permitted subject to the standards
set forth in Section 16.7-2 of this Zoning Code.
The type and manner of illumination shall be
specifically restricted by the following:
A. The lighting shall be uniformly
distributed over the area of the sign or
portion thereof and not extend beyond the
edges of the sign.
B. The lighting shall not shine into dwellings
or create a traffic hazard.
C. The light reflectance, when measured
perpendicular one foot from the surface of
the sign shall not exceed 50 foot candles
at its brightest area when measured with a
standard light meter.
D. Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other
external sources of illumination shall be
contained within a protective casing.
16.8 PERMITS:
16.8-1 Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any
person to erect, construct, alter, change any
lettering or graphics on or relocate any sign,
except as otherwise expressly authorized, within
the Village without first obtaining a permit from
the Community Development Department and paying
the fee required. Those signs listed under
Section 16.5, Exempt Signs, of this Zoning Code
are exempted from the permit requirement.
Section 16, Page 8
16.8-2 Permit Application: Application for a sign
permit shall be made upon a form provided by the
Community Development Department and shall
include the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
2. Location of the building, structure or
parcel of property to which or upon which
the sign is to be attached or erected.
3. Position of the sign in relation to nearby
buildings or structures.
4. Three copies of plans and specifications
showing the method of construction,
location, support, illumination and the
lighting intensity measured in terms of
foot candles.
5. Sketch showing sign faces, exposed
surfaces and layout of the proposed
message thereof, accurately represented in
scale as to size, proportion, font and
color.
6. Name of the person, firm, corporation or
association erecting the sign.
7. Written consent of the owners of the
building, structure or land on or to which
the sign is to be erected.
8. Such other information as the Community
Development Department shall require to
show full compliance with this Section and
all other applicable ordinances of the
Village.
16.8-3 Permit Fees: Before a sign permit is issued the
applicant shall pay a permit and inspection fee
as required by Chapter 24 of the Lake in the
Hills Municipal Code.
Section 16, Page 9
16.8-4 Issuance of Permit: It shall be the duty of the
Community Development Department, upon the filing
of an application for a sign permit, to examine
such plans, specifications and other data and the
premises where the sign will be erected,
constructed or altered, and issue a sign permit
if all requirements of this Section and all other
applicable ordinances of the Village are
satisfied.
16.8-5 Revocation of Permit: The Director of Community
Development or designee is hereby authorized and
empowered to revoke any sign permit for any
violation of this Section or any ordinances of
the Village.
16.8-6 Sign Erected Without Permit: Any sign existing
at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Code
for which no sign permit was issued, shall be
removed within 30 days of enactment of this
Zoning Code unless such sign fully complies with
the provisions of this Section and all applicable
ordinances of the Village or is altered to fully
comply with the provisions of this Section and
all applicable ordinances of the Village within
30 days, and a sign permit is applied for and
issued. See also Section 16.9 of this Zoning
Code.
16.9 REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
16.9-1 Prohibited Signs: Any sign existing in violation
of Section 16.4, Prohibited Signs, shall be
removed, altered or repaired in such a manner to
bring such sign into conformance with the
provisions of this Section 16 within 60 days
after the date of the adoption of this Section
16.
16.9-2 Unsafe or Unlawful Signs: Every unlawful sign
shall be removed as provided by this Zoning Code.
Every unsafe, insecure, or menacing sign shall be
removed immediately. If the Director of Community
Section 16, Page 10
Development or designee shall find that any sign
is unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or
has been constructed, erected or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this Section, then
they shall give written notice of the violation
to the owner or lessee thereof stating that the
Village shall initiate such legal proceedings as
may be required to compel the removal of said
sign and the recovery of any costs incurred,
including any legal costs, in connection
therewith if the owner or lessee fails to remove
or alter the sign so as to comply with the
standards set forth herein within 10 days after
receipt of such notice. If the owners or lessee's
address cannot be located, then the notice may be
sent to the person last paying the real estate
taxes on the premises. Receipt of such notice
shall be conclusively presumed from proof of
mailing such notice as provided above. Service
in any other manner where there is actual receipt
of notice shall also be satisfactory service for
the purposes of this Section 16. Such owner or
lessee shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Village Administrator upon filing a written
request with the Village Clerk for such a hearing
within 72 hours after receipt of such notice.
Such request shall state the reasons why such
sign should not be removed. Such hearing will be
held 72 hours after receipt of such request, if
possible, but in any event shall be held prior to
the initiation of any proceedings as provided
above.
16.9-3 Immediate Removal, Removal Without Notice: The
Director of Community Development or designee may
cause any sign or other advertising structure
which is an immediate peril to persons or
property to be immediately removed or repaired
if, after notice, either oral or written, the
owner or lessee fails to take corrective action
or if the owner or lessee cannot be located in
sufficient time to remedy the immediate peril.
In addition to the penalty provisions in this
Section, the Director of Community Development or
Section 16, Page 11
designee or the Village may also file a complaint
for injunction or any other appropriate remedy,
including the recovery of any costs incurred
therewith, including legal fees.
16.10 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
16.10-1 Building Code: All signs shall be constructed of
materials approved by the Village and shall
comply with the requirements of the Lake in the
Hills Building Code and any amendments thereto as
adopted by the Village.
16.10-2 Electrical Code: All signs in which any
electrical wiring and/or connections are to be
used shall comply with the Electrical Code and
any amendments thereto as adopted by the Village.
16.10-3 Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements: All
permanent signs shall be designed and constructed
to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30
pounds per square foot and shall be constructed
to receive dead loads as required in the Building
Code and any amendments thereto or other
applicable ordinances of the Village. Any
existing sign not so constructed shall be
considered as an immediate peril to persons and
property, and be removed per Section 16.9 of this
Zoning Code.
16.10-4 Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act: No
sign permitted under this section shall be
allowed or maintained if the sign shall in any
way violate the Illinois Highway Advertising
Control Act 225 ILCS 440 as amended. No sign
permitted under said Act shall exceed the
standards as set forth in this Zoning Code.
16.10-5 Awnings, Canopies, Marquees: Construction of
awnings, canopies and marquees shall be in
accordance with Chapter 24 of the Lake in the
Hills Municipal Code.
Section 16, Page 12
16.11 SIGN CHART
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
R-1, R-2, R-3,
RE-1, RE-2
Permanent
Wall or
ground
Four square
feet per
sign
6 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line,
wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
street
frontage
None
Permanent
Subdivision
Entryway
100 square
feet per
sign
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
Two at
each
entrance
None
Temporary
Wall or
ground
Six square
feet per
sign
5 feet maximum
from grade; not
above the first
floor
One per
zoning lot
30 days
R-1, R-2, R-3,
RE-1, RE-2
(Nonresidential)
Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 100
square feet
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
elevation
None
Temporary
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
30 days
Section 16, Page 13
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
frontage
Maximum
total, 32
square feet
R-1, R-2, R-3,
RE-1, RE-2
(Nonresidential)
Permanent
Ground
50 square
feet
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
8 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
30 days
RE-5
Permanent
Wall,
ground, or
entryway
32 square
feet per
sign
6 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line, wall signs
are not to
exceed the
height of the
main wall of the
building.
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Wall,
ground, or
entryway
6 square
feet per
sign area
5 feet maximum
from grade; not
above the first
floor
One per
zoning lot
30 days
R-4 Multifamily
Permanent
Wall,
ground or
entryway
Gross aggregate
total of
all signs:
100 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line, wall signs
are not to
exceed the
height of the
main wall of the
building
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Wall,
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum,
not to exceed
One per
zoning lot
30 days
Section 16, Page 14
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
ground or
entryway
the height of
the main wall
Permanent
Subdivision
Entryway
100 square
feet per
sign
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
Two at
each
entrance
None
R-4 Multifamily
(Nonresidential)
Permanent
Wall
2 sq ft for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total 100
sq ft
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
building
One per
building
None
Permanent
Ground
50 sq ft
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
One per
building
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
height
One per
building
30 days
B-1
Permanent
Wall
1 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 50
square feet
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
elevation1
None
Temporary
Wall
1 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
60 days
Section 16, Page 15
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
frontage
Maximum
total, 32
square feet
B-1
Permanent
Ground
50 square
feet per
sign
6 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
height
One per
zoning lot
60 days
B-2, B-3, B-4
and B-5
Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 100
square feet
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Temporary
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 32
square feet
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
60 days
B-2, B-3, B-4
and B-5
Permanent
Ground,
entryway
100 square
feet per
sign
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line.
A ground sign
may be located
off-premise
within a planned
One per
principal
street
None
Section 16, Page 16
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
development
(with permission
of the property
owner) instead
of on premise
Temporary
Ground,
entryway
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
height
One per
zoning lot
60 days
B-2, B-3, B-4
and B-5
(Shopping
Center or
Multi-tenant
building)
Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet of
signage for
each lineal
foot of
tenant/
business
frontage
Maximum
total, 250
square feet
per sign
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Temporary
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage,
maximum
total 32
square feet
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
60 days
B-2, B-3, B-4
and B-5
(Shopping
center or
business
center)
Permanent
Ground,
entryway
200 square
feet
16 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Ground,
entryway
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
Section 16, Page 17
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
A-1, IB and OS Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet of
signage for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 100
square feet
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building.
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Temporary
Wall
2 square
feet of
signage for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 32
square feet
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building.
One per
building
60 days
IB and OS
Permanent
Ground
100 square
feet
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from lot line
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
Manufacturing
Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet of
signage for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 100
square feet
Wall sign not to
exceed the
height of the
main wall of the
building
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Temporary
2 square
Not to exceed
One per
60 days
Section 16, Page 18
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
Wall feet of
signage for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage
Maximum
total, 32
square feet
the height of
the main wall of
the building
zoning lot
Manufacturing
Permanent
Ground
100 square
feet
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line.
A ground sign
may be located
off-premise
within a planned
development
(with permission
of the property
owner) instead
of on premise.
One per
street
frontage
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
Manufacturing
(Business
center)
Permanent
Ground,
entryway
180 square
feet gross
aggregate
total of
all
signs
10 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line (at main
entry to the
park/center)
One on
each
principal
street
None
Temporary
Ground,
entryway
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
AD1
Permanent
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Section 16, Page 19
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
foot of
building
frontage,
maximum
total 100
square feet
the main wall of
the building
Temporary
Wall
32 square
feet
Not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
60 days
AD1
Ground
2
2
2
None
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
AD2
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage,
maximum
total 100
square feet
Wall signs are
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
elevation 1
None
Temporary
Wall
2 square
feet for
each lineal
foot of
building
frontage,
maximum
total 32
square feet
not to exceed
the height of
the main wall of
the building
One per
building
60 days
AD2
Permanent
Ground
100 square
feet
8 feet maximum
from grade, 10
feet minimum
from any lot
line
One on
each
principal
street
None
Section 16, Page 20
ZONING
DISTRICT
ALLOWABLE
SIGN TYPES
MAXIMUM
SIZE LIMIT
HEIGHT
RESTRICTION,
LOCATION
NUMBER
Maximum
time
period for
Display
(Per
calendar
year)
Temporary
Ground
32 square
feet
6 feet maximum
from grade
One per
zoning lot
60 days
1 Individual letters of the alphabet or two distinct elements, separated by
open space, but organized to form a single sign may be allowed.
2 Ground Signs shall be allowed only per the airport regulations described in
Chapter 26 of the Municipal Code.
Section 17, Page 1
SECTION 17
HOME OCCUPATIONS
17.1 PURPOSES:
The purpose of the home occupation standards and requirements is
to allow occupations to be conducted in a dwelling unit which
are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located
and which do not interfere with the rights of the surrounding
property owners to enjoy the residential character of the
neighborhood.
17.2 CERTAIN HOME OCCUPATIONS AUTHORIZED:
Subject to the limitations of this Section 17, a home occupation
shall be permitted in a dwelling unit.
17.3 USE LIMITATIONS:
17.3-1 Structural Limitations:
A. No alteration of any kind shall be made to the
dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted
that would change its residential character as a
dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public
utility services beyond that customarily required
for residential use. A home occupation shall not
have lighting, advertising or other facilities
which would indicate its use for purposes other
than that of private dwelling.
B. No separate entrance shall be provided in
connection with the conduct of any home
occupation.
C. All activity associated with a home occupation
must be conducted within a closed structure.
Section 17, Page 2
17.3-2 Operational Limitations:
A. A home occupation shall be conducted only by
members of the family residing in the dwelling
unit, and not more than one additional nonresident
assistant or employee on the premises.
An off-street parking space shall be provided
while the employee is on the premises.
B. Goods that are subject of the home occupation may
be fabricated or produced on the premises, as
well as manufactured else where, subject,
however, to further regulations herein. No
article or stock-in-trade shall be displayed such
that it is visible from the exterior of the
dwelling unit. Direct sales of products from the
dwelling unit are prohibited unless public access
to the home occupation has been by invitation
only, but a person may pick up an order placed
earlier.
C. The attendance of up to four persons at any one
time, and no more than eight persons per day, may
be allowed for the purpose of receiving private
instruction or training in any subject or skill
except singing, dance or musical instrument.
Individual instruction in singing, dance or
musical instrument shall be limited to no more
than two pupils at any one time, and no more than
four pupils per day, and shall only be permitted
in the single family detached or attached
dwelling.
D. No outdoor storage or display shall be allowed in
connection with any home occupation.
E. No refuse in excess of the amount customary for
regular residential pick-up shall be generated by
any home occupation.
F. Motor vehicle traffic generated by the home
occupation shall be prohibited from visiting the
premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
Section 17, Page 3
a.m. except for child care operations. Vehicles
used in connection with any home occupation shall
be subject to the requirements of Section 18,
Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Zoning
Code.
G. There shall be no signs on the premises for home
occupations other than those permitted for
Residence Districts under this Zoning Code.
H. The receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, or
supplies for use in a home occupation shall be
limited to the United States Postal Service, UPS,
or any other licensed parcel delivery service
that would normally be expected in a residential
area.
I. Home occupations shall not involve the use of any
accessory building.
J. Any activity resulting in noise, fumes, traffic,
light or odor, to such extent that it is
noticeable that the property is being used for
non-residential purposes, shall not constitute a
home occupation.
K. A home occupation shall be confined to the
principal structure and not exceed 25% of the
gross floor area of the building or 600 square
feet, whichever is less.
L. Occasional gatherings, meetings or classes
associated with home occupations are permissible.
The gatherings, meetings or classes shall in no
case be held more than four times per month and
vehicles shall in no way impede the safety and
flow of traffic within the neighborhood.
M. Every home-based business shall be subject to
applicable business licensing and inspection
requirements, and shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
Section 17, Page 4
17.3-3 Home Kitchen Operations:
The use of a home occupation as a home kitchen
operation is specifically permitted, as defined in 410
ILCS 625/3.6, as may be amended, and subject to the
regulations prescribed by all applicable state,
federal, and local law, including without limitation
the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS
625/0.01 et seq., as may be amended, and all
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including this
Section 17.
Section 18, Page 1
SECTION 18
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
18.1 PURPOSES:
The purposes of this Section 18 are to alleviate and prevent
congestion of the public streets, and so to promote the safety and
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the
off-street parking, loading and unloading, and storage of motor
vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers in accordance with
the use to which property is zoned.
18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
18.2-1 Procedure: An application for a building permit
for a new or enlarged building, structure or use
shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale, and
fully dimensional showing all parking and loading
facilities to be provided in compliance with the
requirements of this Zoning Code.
18.2-2 Extent of Control: The off-street parking and
loading requirements of this Zoning Code shall
apply as follows:
A. All buildings and structures shall provide
accessory off-street parking, loading, and
vehicle storage facilities as required by this
Section 18.
B. When a building or structure undergoes any
decrease in the number of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity, number of
employees or other unit of measurement
specified in this Section 18 for the required
parking or loading facilities, and further,
when said decrease would result in a
requirement for fewer total parking or loading
spaces through application of the provisions
of this Section 18, then the parking and
loading facilities may be reduced accordingly,
provided that existing parking or loading
facilities remaining will at least equal the
minimum parking or loading required by this
Section 18, Page 2
Section 18 for the building or structure as
modified.
C. When a building or structure undergoes any
increase in the number of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity or other
unit of measurement specified in this Section
18 for the required parking or loading
facilities, and further, when said increase
would result in a requirement for additional
total parking or loading spaces under this
Section 18, then the parking and loading
facilities shall be increased accordingly, to
at least equal the parking or loading required
by this Section 18 for the building or
structure as modified.
18.2-3 Existing Parking and Loading Spaces: Accessory
off-street parking and loading spaces in existence
as of the effective date of this Zoning Code shall
not be reduced to a number less than required by
this Section 18 for equivalent new construction.
18.2-4 Permissive Parking and Loading Spaces: Nothing in
this Section 18 shall prevent establishing offstreet
automobile parking or loading spaces to
serve any existing use of land or buildings,
subject to full compliance with the provisions of
this Zoning Code.
18.2-5 Damage or Destruction: Any building, structure or
use that has fewer parking or loading spaces than
are required by this Zoning Code and that is
damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion
or other cause may be reconstructed, re-established
or repaired without the addition of off-street
parking or loading facilities, provided, however,
that the same number of parking and loading spaces
that existed prior to such damage or destruction
shall be provided. No building, structure, or use
that meets or exceeds the parking or loading space
requirements of this Section and that is damaged or
destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other
cause, shall be reconstructed, re-established, or
repaired except only if all parking and loading
spaces required by this Section are provided.
Section 18, Page 3
18.2-6 Schedule of Required Number of Parking Spaces
A. Required Parking and Loading: Requirements
governing the number of off-street parking
spaces and off-street loading spaces are
established in Sections 18.3 and 18.8 of this
Section. The parking and loading requirements
for any use not specified herein shall be the
same as for a similar specified use, as
determined pursuant to Sections 18.3 and 18.8.
B. Floor Area: For office, retail, merchandising
or service types of use, the term "floor area"
as used in this Section 18 shall mean the
gross floor area of a building or structure
used or intended to be used for service to the
public as customers, patrons, clients,
patients or tenants, including areas occupied
by fixtures and equipment used for display or
sale of merchandise, and areas used for food
preparation in restaurants. For purposes of
this Section 18, "floor area" shall not
include any area used for:
1. Floor area primarily devoted for storage
purposes.
2. Processing or packaging of merchandise.
3. Show windows or offices incidental to the
management or maintenance of a store or
building.
4. Restrooms
5. Utilities
6. Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms
7. Stairwells
8. Elevator Shafts
18.2-7 Surfacing Requirements for Outdoor Parking and
Storage Areas in Commercial Districts:
Section 18, Page 4
Areas in the M-1 or M-2 Manufacturing Districts
used strictly for the outdoor storage of equipment
or vehicles may be treated with gravel, ground
asphalt, crushed limestone or other material as
approved by the Community Development Department.
Such areas shall not exceed 10% of the total site
area and shall not be located in a front yard. A
50 foot long asphalt or concrete driveway shall be
provided from the paved street onto the property to
prevent gravel or dirt from being carried onto the
public street. Areas for the outdoor storage of
equipment or vehicles shall be clearly shown and
labeled on the plans required for permitting.
18.3 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum parking requirements are listed in the chart at the end
of this Section.
18.4 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS
18.4-1 Use of Approved Parking Areas Facilities:
Off-street parking spaces accessory to residential
use and developed in any residential district in
accordance with the requirements of this Section 18
shall be used solely for the parking of vehicles
owned or operated by the occupants of the dwelling
structures to which such facilities are accessory
or by guests of said occupants. The storage of
commercial vehicles must be within a fully enclosed
structure, except as allowed as follows. The
outside storage of commercial vehicles having a
class “D” plate (as defined by the Illinois Vehicle
Code) or lower is permitted, however any vehicle
with a class “B” or “D” plate must be no higher
than 9 feet in height as measured from the ground
to the vehicle’s highest point including a cargo
box, other permanently mounted equipment or cargo.
Trailers with a classification of “TA” (as defined
by the Illinois Vehicle Code) are permitted in
residential districts, however the cargo box height
shall be no higher than 6 feet or have a length of
over 11 feet, excluding the trailer tongue.
Trailers with a classification of “TB” and “TC” are
Section 18, Page 5
allowed on a temporary basis not to exceed 7 days
and must be approved by the Chief of Police or
designee. No more than two temporary trailer
authorizations shall be issued to the same property
in any calendar year. All vehicles must be located
on an approved hard surface as defined in this
Zoning Code. All boats, trailers, and recreational
vehicles in all residential districts shall meet
the requirements of this section and Section 18.4-
No equipment or machinery designed for the movement
of earth, roadwork, or for use on a farm,
(including but not limited to bulldozers, road
graders, tractors, cranes, forklifts or rollers),
shall be stored in a residential area, except as
permitted in relation to work approved by the
Village.
The parking of trucks, trailers and other vehicles
prohibited under this section shall be permitted,
if they are temporarily being used in conjunction
with a service, delivery or pick up actually being
conducted for the benefit of the property where the
vehicle is being parked for a period not to exceed
the time period of permitted construction hours for
one 24 hour period.
18.4-1.1 Boats, Trailers, and Recreational Vehicles in
Residential Districts
A. Flammable Liquids: With the exception of fuels
used in the operation of the boat, trailer or
recreational vehicle in the primary fuel tanks, the
owner of such a vehicle shall not park, or store
such vehicle leaving flammable liquids on board.
B. Dangerous or Unsafe Storage: The owner of a boat,
trailer, or recreation vehicle shall not park, or
store such vehicle in a manner as to create a
dangerous or unsafe condition on the property where
parked, or stored. Parking or storing the boat,
trailer or recreation vehicle in a manner that a
vehicle may tip, roll, or create a hazard shall be
considered a prohibited dangerous and unsafe
condition.
Section 18, Page 6
C. Street Parking: At no time shall any boat,
trailer, recreational vehicle, or recreational
vehicle trailer be permitted to park on any Village
street for more than 24 hours.
D. Proof of Ownership: A legal or beneficial owner
of, or lessee of the property shall have, and
display upon request to authorized Village
officials, proof of ownership of a parked, or
stored boat, trailer or recreation vehicle.
E. Sewage Disposal: Sewage shall be disposed only into
approved sanitary facilities.
F. Maintenance: A boat, trailer or recreation vehicle
which may be temporarily parked or stored outdoors,
shall be maintained in operable condition, and
shall not be stored off the ground except when
properly loaded on a trailer. Service utilities,
such as electrical power, may not be attached to
the vehicle except when the vehicle is temporarily
parked.
G. Temporary Parking and Storage: No more than a
combination of two of the following may be parked
or stored on any one residential zoning lot: one
boat/trailer combination, recreational vehicle/
trailer combination, recreational trailer, or
freestanding recreational vehicle.
H. Ownership Control: No person shall store on any
property any boat, trailer, or recreation vehicle
which is not owned by an occupant of the residence
for more than 14 days.
I. Overnight Use: No boat or recreation vehicle shall
be used as primary living or sleeping quarters
while temporarily parked or stored in the Village.
Occasional overnight use may be allowed but only
if permission is granted in advance by the Chief of
Police or designee.
J. “In season”: During the "in season" a boat, trailer
or recreational vehicle shall be stored on an
approved surface and not encroach on a Village
Section 18, Page 7
Street or public sidewalk. The boat, trailer, or
recreational vehicle must be parked or stored a
minimum of 2 feet back from the edge of any street
in areas where there are no public sidewalks.
K. “Off season”: During the "off season" a boat,
trailer or recreational vehicle shall be stored
either indoors; or outdoors in the rear yard on an
approved surface. The dimensions of the approved
surface shall not be less than the overall width
and length dimensions of the stored trailer or
vehicle. As an exception, trailers and vehicles may
be stored in the side yard on an approved surface
so long as the side yard and portion of the side
yard facing a street is screened with a board on
board 6 foot high fence that is a maximum of 30%
open. Any boat, trailer or recreational vehicle
stored in the side yard behind the screening fence,
shall not be over 6 feet in height at any point, or
contain cargo visible above the height of the
screening fence.
Up to a maximum of (2) canoes, kayaks, or row boats
none to exceed 18 feet in length, shall be
permitted to be stored in rear yards on the ground.
L. Winter use vehicles: Snowmobiles, or trailers for
the specific purposes of hauling a snowmobile or
winter recreational vehicle shall be considered "in
season" from November 1st through April 30th of the
subsequent year.
All motor vehicles parked in a residential district
must not be in violation with Chapter 12.02 -D,
“Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety” of
the Municipal Code related to unlicensed motor
vehicles or inoperable motor vehicles. The covering
of an unlicensed motor vehicle or an inoperable
motor vehicle or trailer by a cover or tarp is
prohibited, except when placed within a fully
enclosed structure. The covering of licensed and
operable motor vehicles or trailer must be done
with a commercially made motor vehicle cover,
securely fastened at all times.
Section 18, Page 8
18.4-2 Control of Off-Site Facilities: When required
accessory off-site parking spaces are provided
elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal
use served is located, they shall be in the same
possession, either by deed or long term lease, as
the property occupied by such principal use. The
owner shall be bound by covenants filed of record
in the office of the McHenry County Recorder of
Deeds requiring the owner and his or her heirs and
assigns to maintain the required number of parking
spaces during the existence of said principal use.
Section 18, Page 9
18.4-3 Design and Maintenance:
A. Parking Space and Aisle Size: A required offstreet
parking space shall be in accordance with
the requirements specified herein (also see
Section 18.4-6). These specifications are
exclusive of access drives and aisles, ramps,
columns and office and work areas accessible from
streets or alleys or from private driveways or
aisles leading to streets or alleys and to be
used for the storage or parking of passenger
vehicles or commercial vehicles under 12 ton.
Angle Stall
Width
Stall
Length
Aisle
Width
(1 way)
Aisle
Width
(2 way)
0 8 22
45 9 18 13 25
60 9 18 18 25
75 9 18 18 25
90 9 18 25 25
B. Calculation of Required Spaces: When the
calculation of the required number of offstreet
parking spaces results in a requirement
for a fractional space, any fraction up to and
including one-half shall be disregarded and
fractions over one-half shall be interpreted
as one parking space.
C. Open and Enclosed Spaces: Except as provided
herein, parking areas may be open or enclosed.
D. Access: Parking facilities shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to
a street or alley in such a manner providing
least interference with the movement of
traffic. A driveway access in any residential
zoning district shall be at least 12 feet in
width and not exceed 30 feet in width from the
lot line to the edge of the roadway pavement,
and shall not exceed a 20 percent grade in any
direction (that is, a 20 foot vertical rise in
Section 18, Page 10
100 feet of horizontal distance). The
Community Services Director shall have
authority to allow grades in excess of 20
percent on lots where the driveway services an
existing building and site conditions prevent
meeting the 20 percent standard. The driveway
in any residential zoning district shall be at
least 12 feet wide throughout its length. The
Community Services Director shall have
authority to reduce driveway to a width not
less than 10 feet in cases where site
conditions prohibit construction to a width of
12 feet.
E. Signs: No signs shall be displayed in any
parking area within any residential zoning
district except as may be reasonably necessary
for the orderly use of the parking facilities.
All signs must conform with Section 16 of this
Zoning Code.
F. Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas
and driveways shall be constructed as an
approved hard surface.
G. Lighting: Lighting shall be required for new
business, manufacturing and residential offstreet
parking areas with 20 or more spaces.
1. General Requirements: Any lighting shall be
directed away from adjoining and adjacent
properties. The height and shielding of
lighting fixtures shall provide proper
lighting without hazard to motorists on
adjacent roadways or nuisance to adjacent
residents by extending on to adjacent
property. Shielding means that a) the
bulb/light source and cover portion of a
fixture that transmits the light shall not
extend beyond or below the opaque portion
of such fixture so the bulb/light source is
not visible from general side view and b)
the fixture itself is angled properly so
the bulb/light source is not visible from
general side view.
Section 18, Page 11
2. Pole Height
a. In Business, Manufacturing, Airport
District 2 and Institutional Buildings
Zoning Districts:
i. for developments up to 2 acres
the maximum height of light
fixtures including the pole,
pole support, fixture and
related equipment shall be 25
feet;
ii. for developments over 2 acres
the maximum height of light
fixtures including the pole,
pole support, fixture and
related equipment shall be 35
feet;
b. In Residential Zoning Districts the
maximum height of light fixtures
including the pole, pole support,
fixture and related equipment shall be
25 feet.
c. In the Airport District 1 Zoning
District, lighting shall be allowed
only per the regulations described in
Chapter 26 of the Municipal Code.
3. Light intensity
a. Light intensity at a property line
abutting a residential property shall
not exceed 0.1 foot candle.
b. Light intensity at a property line
abutting a non-residential property
right-of-way shall not exceed 0.5
foot candle.
4. Lighting Plans: A lighting plan shall be
submitted in conjunction with applications
for subdivision, planned unit development
and development within any environmentally
sensitive area. Such lighting plans shall
Section 18, Page 12
be subject to establishment and approval
through the applicable review processes.
Said lighting plan shall show the
following:
a. The location and height of external
light fixtures;
b. The type (such as incandescent,
halogen, high pressure sodium) and
luminous intensity of such light
source;
c. The type of fixture (such as
floodlight, full-cutoff, lantern,
coach light);
d. Estimates for site illumination
resulting from the lighting, as
measured in foot-candles, should
include minimum, maximum and average
illumination. Comparable examples
already in the community that
demonstrate technique, specification
and/or light level should be provided
if available to expedite the review
process; and;
e. Other information deemed necessary by
the Director of Community
Development.
5. The provisions for lighting are applicable
to the use and development of all private
and public lands, exclusive of the
following :
a.Public street lighting;
b.Temporary seasonal decorative
lighting;
c. Specialized lighting necessary for
safety, such as navigational or
runway lighting at the Lake in the
Hills Airport, temporary lighting
associated with emergency operations,
road hazard warnings and other
similar operations;
d. Outdoor recreational uses, such as
ball diamonds, playing fields and
tennis courts, which have unique
Section 18, Page 13
requirements for nighttime visibility
and generally have limited hours.
These uses may exceed the lighting
standards provided. To the maximum
extent possible, lighting is to be
located and directed to minimize
spillover onto residential
properties.
H. Miscellaneous: Any wall or fence developed
around any parking area shall be subject to
the front yard setback requirements of this
Zoning Code in the same manner as a building
or structure. No parking spaces shall be
permitted beyond the boundaries of a zoned
lot.
18.4-4 Overnight Parking: In all Business, Manufacturing
and Airport zoning districts overnight parking
shall not be permitted except for vehicles
accessory to the principal use of the lot and in
the case of a vehicle owned by an employee at a
business that operates 24 hours a day.
18.4-5 Stacking Design: Stacking spaces provided for
drive-thru uses shall 1) be a minimum of 9 feet
wide and 20 feet in length; 2) be placed in a
single line; 3) be located so that when in use they
do not obstruct ingress/egress to the site and do
not obstruct access to required parking or loading
spaces; 4) begin behind the last vehicle being
washed in an automobile laundry and from the last
point of service, such as a window, for all other
drive-thru uses.
18.4-6 Non-Parking Aisle Design: Aisles provided to allow
traffic circulation that do not have adjacent
parking stalls shall be a minimum of 11 feet wide
for one-way and a minimum of 22 feet wide for two
way traffic.
18.4-7 Storage for Automotive Repair Operations: Any
inoperable vehicle or trailer temporarily parked or
stored in relation to a vehicle repair facility,
shall be placed in the rear yard or screened from
view from the public road with fencing in
Section 18, Page 14
compliance with the fencing regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance, or as approved by ordinance
specific to the location. No vehicles stored in
relation to a repair facility shall be stored on
the lot for a period of more than 60 days.
18.5 LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS:
18.5-1 Extent of Control: Off-street vehicle parking
facilities shall be located as hereinafter
specified. Where a distance is specified, such
distance shall be measured from the nearest point
of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the
building that the parking area is required to
serve.
A. One and two family dwellings: off-street
parking facilities shall be provided on the
same lot with the buildings the parking area
is required to serve.
B. Single-family attached dwellings not exceeding
two stories in height: off-street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot
or parcel of land as the building the parking
area is required to serve. For the purpose of
this requirement, a group of such uses
constructed and maintained under single
ownership or management shall be considered as
a single lot or parcel of land.
C. Multiple family dwellings containing four or
more dwelling units and three and four family
dwellings exceeding two stories in height:
off-street parking facilities shall be
provided on the same lot or parcel of land as
the building the parking area is required to
serve, or on a separate lot or parcel of land
not more than 300 feet from the nearest
entrance to the main building being served,
provided the lot or parcel of land selected
for the parking facilities is located in an R-
4 or less restricted zoning district.
D. Hotels, motels, clubs, hospitals, sanitariums,
orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent
Section 18, Page 15
homes and for other similar uses: off-street
parking facilities shall be provided on the
same lot or parcel of land as the main
building or buildings being served, or upon
properties contiguous to the zoning lot upon
which is located the building or buildings the
parking area is intended to serve.
E. For uses other than those specified above:
off-street parking facilities shall be
provided on the same lot or parcel of land as
the main building served, or on a separate lot
or parcel of land not exceeding 1,000 feet
from the entrance of the main building,
measured from the nearest point of the parking
area, provided the separate lot or parcel of
land intended for the off-street parking
facilities is located in the same zoning
district as the principal permitted use or in
a less restricted zoning district.
18.6 PARKING SETBACKS:
18.6-1 Parking within buildings and structures: Enclosed
buildings, carports, or other structures containing
off-street parking shall comply with the front,
rear and side yard setback requirements for such
structures as contained in this Section or as
otherwise applicable to the property in question.
18.6-2 Yards adjoining streets: With the exception of
single family and two family dwellings, off-street
parking spaces and access drives shall not be
located within a required front yard, except that
an access drive generally perpendicular to such
right of way may traverse such yard.
18.6-3 One and two family front yards: Off-street parking
spaces and access drives may be located in any yard
of single family and two family dwellings, provided
that such parking spaces and access drives shall
not cover more than fifty (50%) percent of a front
yard, nor more than fifty (50%) percent of a side
yard abutting a street. For a single family
detached unit with a front yard of 1,000 square
feet or less (or a lot width of 50 feet or less),
Section 18, Page 16
the maximum width for an off-street parking space
or access drive shall be 12 feet for a one-car
garage and 20 feet for a two-car garage.
18.6-4 Parking adjacent to residential districts: Open
off-street parking spaces for five or more vehicles
and access drives adjoining a lot zoned for a
residential use shall be separated from such lot by
a yard not less than ten (10) feet in depth.
Screening consisting of earth berms, landscaping,
and/or fencing shall be provided and maintained so
as to protect the privacy of adjoining residential
uses. Such screening shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet in height above the adjacent parking lot
pavement grade, except that screening located
within twenty (20) feet of a street right-of-way
line shall not exceed thirty inches in height above
the parking lot pavement adjoining such yard.
18.7 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES:
18.7-1 Design:
A. Construction, Size: An off-street loading
space shall be a hard-surfaced area of land,
open or enclosed, other than a street or a
public way, used principally for the standing,
loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors
and trailers so as to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets and alleys. The
loading space shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width and 45 feet in length exclusive of
access aisles and maneuvering space, except as
otherwise specifically dimensioned hereafter.
B. Location: No loading space, whether required
in addition to any requirement, shall be
closer than 50 feet to any property in any
Residential zoning district unless completely
enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly
painted solid fence or wall, or any
combination thereof not less than six feet in
height. No such loading space shall be
located within 25 feet of the nearest point of
an intersection of any two streets. Loading
Section 18, Page 17
spaces open to the sky may be located in any
required yard.
C. Calculation of Required Spaces: When the
calculation of the required number of offstreet
loading spaces results in a requirement
for a fractional space, any fraction up to and
including one-half shall be disregarded and
fractions over one-half shall be interpreted
as one loading space.
D. Surfacing: All open loading spaces shall be
improved with a compacted macadam base not
less than seven inches thick, surfaced with a
minimum of two inches compacted asphaltic
concrete or some comparable all-weather
dustless material.
18.8 MINIMUM LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
In all zoning districts where property uses include the loading and
unloading of materials or merchandise from vehicles, off-street
loading spaces shall be provided as required herein. For buildings
under the square footage thresholds listed herein, the Director of
Community Development may determine the number, if any, of offstreet
loading spaces required.
18.8-1 Hotels containing exhibition halls, convention
halls, auditoriums, office facilities or retail
shops: one off-street loading space for the first
40,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one
additional off-street loading space for each
150,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof of gross floor area in excess of 40,000
square feet.
18.8-2 Hospitals or sanitariums containing 40,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor area: one offstreet
loading space, plus one additional such
space for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of
100,000 square feet.
Section 18, Page 18
18.8-3 Buildings containing bowling alleys, taverns,
restaurants or any retail shop containing 40,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor area: one offstreet
loading space, plus one additional such
space for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of
100,000 square feet.
18.8-4 Banks, business or professional offices or public
administration buildings containing 40,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor area: one offstreet
loading space, plus one additional such
space for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of
100,000 square feet.
18.8-5 Buildings containing furniture and appliance
stores, motor vehicles sales, wholesale stores,
household equipment or machinery sales and having
8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area:
one off-street loading space, plus one additional
space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof in excess of 25,000 square
feet.
18.8-6 Buildings containing manufacturing uses; research
and testing laboratories; laundry and dry-cleaning
establishments; printing, binding and publishing of
newspapers, periodicals, books and other reading
matter; warehouses and storage facilities;
engraving shops; assembly of materials and
products; processing and distribution of materials
and products; and other similar uses having more
than 10,000 square feet of gross area, exclusive of
basement area, and less than 40,000 square feet of
gross floor area: one off-street loading space,
plus one additional such space for each additional
60,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of
40,000 square feet.
Section 18, Page 19
18.9 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Use of Property Required Parking Spaces
Airport and associated uses Per the Director of Community
Development
Airport Hangar (For private land and
hangars)
.5 per aircraft space
Assembly hall / Convention hall 1 space per 100 square feet
Automobile Sales 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor
area
Automobile Repair, Major and Minor 3 parking spaces per service bay
Automotive Service Facility 3 spaces per service bay
Bank 1 parking space for each space 250
square feet of floor area, 5
stacking spaces for each drive-thru
service lane
Bar / Lounge 1 space per 70 square feet
Bowling alley 3 parking spaces for each alley, 1
parking space for each 300 feet of
floor area devoted to affiliated
uses such as restaurant, bar, etc.
Car Wash (full service automatic) 5 stacking spaces for each wash bay
plus 1 drying space per bay
Car Wash (full service by hand) 3 stacking spaces for each wash
bay, plus 1 drying space per bay
Car Wash (self-serve) 1 parking space for every 2 wash
bays, 2 stacking spaces per wash
bay plus 1 drying space per bay
Club, lodge (private) 1 space per 250 square feet
Contractors Office/Shop 1 parking space per 300 sq. ft.
Day care center 1 space per 400 square feet
Dspreicveif-itcharlul ye sltiasbtleids hemlesnetwsh,e reex cienp tt haiss Section
5t hrstu acsekirnvgi ces palacenes for each drive-
Dwelling unit, single family, two
family
2 parking spaces per unit
Section 18, Page 20
Use of Property Required Parking Spaces
Dwelling unit, multiple family 2 parking spaces for each unit plus
2 additional spaces for each four
units
Emdiducdalet ioscnahlo ofl,a ciplubiltiy:c Eolr emperintvaartey and 1 space for each classroom plus 1
space for each 4 seats or 72” of
seating spaces in the main place of
assembly
Educational facility: High school,
public or private
1 space per teacher and staff
member plus 1 space per 5 students
plus 1 space for each 4 seats or
72” of seating spaces in the main
place of assembly
Educational Facilities: Pre-schools 1 parking space for each
employee/teacher, plus 1 space for
each 10 students for guest parking
Equestrian sports facility Per the Director of Community
Development
Funeral home 1 space per 100 square feet of
chapel area, 1 space for each
funeral vehicle maintained on
premises, 2 spaces for each family
residing on premises
Gas Station 1s pascpae cep epr e3r504 sgqa.s fptu.m posf pflluoso r1 area twahekeres pthlae ceretail sale of goods
Group Home 2 spaces for every 3 bedrooms
Horse Stable 1 space for each 2 stalls
Hospital 1 parking space for each 2 hospital
beds plus 1 parking space for each
1,500 square feet gross floor area
in residents' quarters, plus 1
space for each staff or visiting
doctor
Hotel / Motel 1 space per lodging room plus 1
space per 300 square feet of
meeting and restaurant space.
Industrial use 1 space per 1,000 square feet.
Kennel 1 space per 500 square feet.
Library 1 space per 800 square feet.
Long Term Care Facility 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Section 18, Page 21
Use of Property Required Parking Spaces
Mining operation 2 spaces for every 3 employees on
the maximum shift, plus 1 space for
every vehicle used in the operation
of the use or stored on the
premises.
Motor vehicle sales 1 space per 400 square feet.
Museum 1 space per 800 square feet.
Nursery, including retail sales 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.
Nursing Homes / Sanitariums 1 space for each 4 beds.
Office: Business 1 space per 300 square feet.
Office: Medical or Dental 1 space per 200 square feet.
Office: Public Administration 1 space per 300 square feet.
Places of Worship 1 space for each 4 seats.
Post Office 1 space per 200 square feet plus 1
space per government-owned vehicle
stored on the premises.
Restaurant 1 space per 70 square feet plus 10
stacking spaces for drive-thru
Retail / Service Establishment
Single-tenant buildings under 30,000
sq. ft.
(Multi-tenant buildings 30,000 sq.
ft. or less, provided that no more
than 50% of the building is occupied
by restaurant uses1)
1 space per 200 square feet.
Retail / Service Establishment
(Single-tenant buildings over 30,000
sq. ft.; Multi-tenant buildings over
30,000 sq. ft., provided that no more
than 50% of the building is occupied
by restaurant uses1)
1 space per 300 square feet.
Senior Housing 1 parking space per dwelling unit
Skating rink 1 parking space for each 100 square
feet of floor area used for
assembly
Section 18, Page 22
Use of Property Required Parking Spaces
Shepaolrtths /c lrubecreational facility / 1 space per 300 square feet.
Stadium, sports arena, auditorium,
gymnasium (other than incidental to a
school or place of worship)
1 parking space for each 4 seats
Storage facility 11 psepar c4e 00p ers q2u0a res tfoeraegt e ofs taulsalbs lep lus area
Theater, indoor 1 parking space for each 4 seats up
to 500 plus 1 parking space for
each 2 seats over 500
Vehicle rental facility 1 space per 300 square feet of
indoor office area plus 1 space per
rental vehicle.
Warehouse 1 space per 1,000 square feet
Wholesale store 1 space per 600 square feet.
1 To the extent that restaurant uses exceed 50% of a
Retail/Service Establishment multi-tenant building, additional
parking requirements based on calculations for Restaurant use
must be met.
If a use is not specifically mentioned, the Director of Community
Development shall make a determination on the number of required
parking spaces based upon standards of the closest comparable use
or data provided from the American Planning Association or
Institute of Traffic Engineers to determine the particular
parking demand.
Section 19, Page 1
SECTION 19
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
19.1 PURPOSE:
The performance standards set forth herein are established to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare of the Village and to promote a more desirable
environment in which to live and work within the Village.
19.2 NOISE:
19.2-1 General Prohibition: No person shall emit beyond
the boundary of his property any sound that
unreasonably interferes with another's enjoyment of
property or life or with any lawful business or
activity so as to violate any regulation set forth
herein.
19.2-2 Land Classes: For the purposes of this Section 19,
land shall be classified into three classes:
A. Class A: Areas especially noise sensitive in
that they incorporate sleeping quarters such
as residential and institutional areas.
B. Class B: Retail commercial and office commercial
land uses, and recreational and open
space uses.
C. Class C: Manufacturing uses. The applicable
land use classification for undeveloped land
shall be determined by the predominant land
use of the surrounding property or, if no use
is predominant, by the most restrictive
designation applicable to any of the
surrounding property.
19.2-3 Standards
A. Except for emergency services, the use of
emergency equipment and vehicles to provide for
the public safety, the testing and maintenance of
emergency equipment, and the normal operation of
vehicles accessory to a permitted use, no Property
Owner or Occupant shall cause or allow the
emission of any noise to abutting property to
exceed the exterior levels specified in the table
below.
Section 19, Page 2
Maximum Noise Level (dB A-level)
at Emitter's Lot Line
Class of
Property
Emitting
Noise
Between the
Hours of:
Adjacent to
Class A
Property
Adjacent to
Class B
Property
Adjacent to
Class C
Property
7:01 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. 55 55 61
Class A
10:01 p.m and
7:00 a.m. 45 45 51
7:01 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. 62 66 66
Class B
10:01 p.m and
7:00 a.m. 55 62 66
7:01 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. 66 66 70
Class C
10:01 p.m and
7:00 a.m. 62 66 70
B. Impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 88
decibels at any time. Impulsive sound that
repeats two or more times in any hour shall meet
the requirements in the table above.
C. Noise shall be measured at any point on or beyond
the lot line of the land on which the noise
originates.
19.3 AIR POLLUTION
The IEPA air pollution regulations as adopted by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board of April 14, 1972 and published by the
IEPA and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference
and made part of this Section 19.
Copies of said air pollution regulations shall be kept on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk for public inspection in
accordance with the requirements of 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.
Any person who violates any provision of said air pollution
regulations shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Section 30
of this Zoning Code.
Section 19, Page 3
19.4 WATER POLLUTION
The IEPA Water Pollution Regulations, as adopted by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board on March 7, 1972 and published by the IEPA
and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
made part of this Section 19.
Copies of said water pollution regulations shall be kept on file
in the Office of the Village Clerk for public inspection in
accordance with the requirements of 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.
Any person who violates any provision of said water pollution
regulations shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Section 30
of this Zoning Code.
19.5 OPEN BURNING
The IEPA open burning pollution regulations as adopted by the
Illinois Pollution Control Board on September 2, 1971 and
published by the IEPA, and all amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and made part of this Section 19.
Copies of said open burning pollution regulations are on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk for public inspection in
accordance with the requirements of 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1, et seq.
Any person who violates any provision of said open burning
pollution regulations shall be subject to penalties pursuant to
Section 30 of this Zoning Code.
19.6 ODORS
No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in a zoning district
in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an individual at
any point on the lot line of the premises.
19.7 NOXIOUS GASES
Processes and operations of permitted uses capable of dispersing
gases or toxic particulate into the atmosphere shall be hooded or
otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such toxic gases or
particulate matter shall be from a stack.
19.8 GLARE AND HEAT
Operations producing intense light or heat shall be performed
within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond any lot line
bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
Section 19, Page 4
19.9 VIBRATIONS
There shall be no uses that create heavy, earth-shaking vibrations
that are noticeable at or beyond the lot line of the subject
premises.
Section 20, Page 1
SECTION 20
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This Section 20 regulates and limits the continued existence of
uses, structures and lots established prior to the effective date
of this Zoning Code that do not conform to the applicable regulations
of this Zoning Code.
The continued existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent
with the purposes for which the zoning districts of this
Zoning Code are established and thus, the gradual elimination of
such nonconformities is generally desirable.
20.2 CONTINUANCE OF USE:
20.2-1 Non-Conforming Use: A nonconforming use may be
continued only in strict compliance with all
provisions of this Section 20.
20.2-2 No Physical Change: No non-conforming structure
may be physically changed other than necessary
maintenance and repair, except as otherwise
permitted herein.
20.2-3 Completion of Permitted Building: Any building for
which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to
the effective date of this Zoning Code or of
amendments hereto, may be completed in accordance
with the approved plans; provided that construction
is commenced within six months after issuance of
the permit therefor and diligently prosecuted to
completion. Such building shall thereafter be a
lawfully established non-conforming building.
20.3 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
20.3-1 Changing, Replacing Non-Conforming Use: Whenever
any part of a building, structure or land
considered a non-conforming use is changed or
replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this Zoning Code, such premises shall thereafter be
used only in conformance with this Zoning Code, and
no such building shall thereafter be used or
Section 20, Page 2
occupied in a manner not conforming to this Zoning
Code, notwithstanding a circumstance where such
building may have been originally designed and
constructed for the prior non-conforming use.
20.3-2 Discontinuing Non-Conforming Use: Whenever a nonconforming
use of a building or structure, or part
thereof, has been discontinued for a period of six
consecutive months, or for a consecutive period of
12 months if the building was originally designed
and constructed for a non-residential use, or
whenever there is evidence of an intent by the
owner to abandon a non-conforming use, such use
shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned,
be re-established; the use of the premises
thereafter shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
20.3-3 Abandoning Non-Conforming Use: Where no enclosed
structure is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming
use for a period of six months shall
constitute abandonment.
20.3-4 Discontinuing Non-Conforming Use: Any nonconforming
use that was not authorized by Village
codes and regulations in effect at the time the use
was established shall be discontinued and shall not
be re-established, except only if such use complies
with all provisions of this Zoning Code.
20.4 CHANGE OF USE:
20.4-1 More Restricted Use Permitted: A non-conforming
use of a building or structure, or part thereof,
may be changed to a use of the same or of a more
restricted character, but may not thereafter be
changed to any less restrictive use.
20.4-2 Changing, Replacing to Conforming Use: Any part of
a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming
use that is changed or replaced by a use
conforming to the provisions of this Zoning Code
shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming
use.
Section 20, Page 3
20.5 TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES OR USES:
The period of time during which the non-conforming buildings,
structures or uses of land listed below in items A. and B. may
continue or remain shall be limited to two years after the
effective date of this Zoning Code, or of any amendments
hereto, which cause the use to be non-conforming. Every such
non-conforming building, structure or use shall be brought
into compliance with this Zoning Code or completely removed
from the premises on or before the expiration of the two-year
period.
A. Assessed Valuation: Any non-conforming building or
structure having an assessed valuation not in excess of
1,000.00 on the effective date of this Zoning Code.
B. Accessory, Incidental Building or Use of Land: Any nonconforming
use of land when no enclosed building is
involved, excluding gravel driveways, or when the only
buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such
use, or when such use is maintained in connection with a
conforming building.
20.6 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
20.6-1 Normal Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a
building or other structure constituting a nonconforming
use is permitted, including necessary
non- structural repairs and incidental alterations
that do not extend or intensify the non-conforming
use.
20.6-2 Structural Alterations: No structural alterations
shall be made in a building or other structure
constituting a non-conforming use, except in the
following situations:
A. When the alteration is required by law; or
B. When the alteration will result in eliminating
the non-conforming use.
20.7 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
If a non-conforming building or structure or a building or other
structure containing a non-conforming use is damaged or destroyed
Section 20, Page 4
by any means to the extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement
value at the time, the building or other structure shall be rebuilt
or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with
the regulations of this Zoning Code.
In the event the damage or destruction is less than 50 percent of
its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs which existed at
the time of such partial destruction, the occupancy or use of such
building may be continued.
Restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be
started within a period of one year after the date of damage and
construction completed before the building permit expires.
20.8 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
20.8-1 No Addition Unless Conformance: A non-conforming
building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a
conforming use and is made to conform to all the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
20.8-2 No Enlargement or Expansion of Non-Conformity: No
building partially occupied by a non-conforming use
shall be altered in such a way as to permit the
enlargement or expansion of the space occupied by
such non-conforming use.
20.8-3 No Increase in Dwelling Units: No non-conforming
building in any residential district shall be so
altered as to increase the number of dwelling units
therein.
20.8-4 No General Expansion of Non-Conforming Use: No
non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in
such a way as to occupy any required usable open
space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of
this Zoning Code, or to displace any conforming use
in the same building or on the same parcel.
20.9 EXCEPTIONS:
Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise
conforms to the use regulations of this Zoning Code, but is nonconforming
only in the particular manner hereinafter specified, the
Section 20, Page 5
building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of
Sections 20.5 and 20.6 of this Zoning Code.
A. Residential Districts: In any Residential District where
a dwelling is non-conforming only as to the number of
dwelling units it contains, provided no such building
shall be altered in any way so as to increase the number
of dwelling units therein.
B. Business, Manufacturing and Special Districts: In any
Business or Manufacturing or Special District where the
use is located at a point less distant from an
Residential District than that specified in the
regulations for the district in which it is located.
20.10 Non-Conforming Signs:
Any sign to be constructed on any building or parcel of land, the
use of which does not conform to this Zoning Code for the zoning
district in which such building or land is located, shall,
nevertheless, comply with all the provisions of Section 16 – Signs.
Permanent signs existing at the time of the enactment of this
Section 20, or any amendments, and not conforming to its
provisions, but which were constructed in compliance with the
previous regulations, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs.
Such signs must be properly repaired and maintained as provided
herein and must continue to be in conformance with other ordinances
of the Village. Normal maintenance of legal non-conforming
permanent signs, necessary structured repairs, and incidental
alterations that do not extend or intensify the non-conforming
features of the sign, shall be permitted.
Non-conforming permanent signs which are structurally altered,
relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions
of this Section 20.
If any legal non-conforming permanent sign is damage or destroyed,
by means whatsoever, to the extent that its repair or replacement
cost exceeds 50 percent of its replacement cost as of the date it
became non-conforming, the right to maintain the existence of a
legal non-conforming sign shall be immediately terminated, and the
sign may not be rebuilt or used thereafter. In the event the
damage or deconstruction of the of the legal non-conforming sign is
less than 50 percent of its replacement cost, the sign may be
rebuilt to its original. The funds and effort expended on such
Section 20, Page 6
rebuilding, however, shall not be grounds to justify a waiver of
the requirement for the sign to conform, or to extend the time that
the sign may remain non-conforming.
Non-conforming temporary signs existing at the time of the
enactment of this Section, or any amendments, shall be removed or
brought into compliance within 30 days. Window signs shall be
considered a temporary sign.
Section 21, Page 1
SECTION 21
ADMINISTRATION
21.1 ENFORCING OFFICER:
The Director of Community Development or designee shall be
responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Zoning Code.
21.2 BUILDING PERMITS:
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered until a building permit is issued by the
Director of Community Development or designee stating the
building or structure, and proposed use of it and the zoning lot
on which it is located, comply with the regulations of this
Zoning Code and all ordinances of the Village. The Director of
Community Development or designee shall not issue a building
permit if they determine that a building or structure does not
comply with all the regulations contained in the ordinances of
the Village or that the zoning lot does not afford proper
drainage according to reasonable engineering standards.
21.3 CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of use
and occupancy has been issued by the Director of Community
Development or designee. The certificate of use and occupancy
shall be issued only after the Director of Community Development
or designee makes a finding that the building or structure has
been erected or structurally altered in conformance with the
provisions of this Zoning Code and other health and building
laws and in accordance with a building permit.
Certificates of use and occupancy shall be applied for coincident
with the application for the building permit and shall be
issued within 10 days after the erection and alterations of such
building shall have been fully and properly completed and
approved. A record of all certificates of use and occupancy
shall be kept on file in the office of the Community Development
Department and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any
Section 21, Page 2
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected.
No change shall be made in the use of a building or part thereof
now or hereafter erected or structurally altered, or in the use
of land now or hereafter occupied, without an occupancy permit
having first been issued by the Director of Community
Development or designee. No such permit shall be issued
authorizing such change unless it is in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
21.4 CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING USES:
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the continuance of the
present occupancy of lawful use of any existing building or
zoning lot, except as may be necessary for the safety of life
and property, and except as provided in Sections 4 and 20 of
this Zoning Code.
21.5 APPEALS:
21.5-1 Filing of appeal: An appeal may be taken from
any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Director of Community
Development or designee relating to zoning
matters set forth in this Zoning Code by any
person, firm, or corporation aggrieved thereby,
or by any officer, department, board, or
commission of the Village. The appeal shall be
taken within 45 days after the action complained
of by filing a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof to the Community Development
Department. The Director of Community
Development or designee shall transmit to the
Planning and Zoning Commission all papers
constituting the record upon which the action
appealed was taken.
21.5-2 Stay: An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
Director of Community Development or designee
certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission
that, by reason of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to
Section 21, Page 3
life or property. In such case the proceedings
shall not be stayed except by a restraining order
issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission or a
court of record after notice to the Director of
Community Development or designee and on due cause
shown.
21.5-3 Hearing of Appeal: The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall select a reasonable time and
place for the hearing of the appeal, shall give
due notice to all interested parties, and shall
render a written decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. Any person may appear at the
hearing and present testimony in person or by a
duly authorized agent or attorney. The
concurring vote of at least four members shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the Director of
Community Development or designee or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter upon which the
Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to
act.
21.6 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICES:
Within a reasonable time after receipt of all papers and
documents relating to a variation, application for conditional
use, application for a planned development or application for
amendment of the regulations or zoning district boundaries
established by this Zoning Code, public notice shall be given as
provided herein.
21.6-1 Published Notice: There shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village a
notice of the time and place of the public
hearing. This notice shall be published not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days before the
hearing and shall contain the common street
address or addresses and the property index
number (“PIN”) or numbers of all the parcels of
the real property contained in the affected area
for which the variation, conditional use,
amendment, ruling or recommendation is being
Section 21, Page 4
sought, and a brief description of the nature of
the matter being heard.
21.6-2 Sign: The applicant shall post a sign or signs
upon the property involved in the application,
with letters of sufficient size to be clearly
legible to the public view on each adjacent
public way, for at least 15 consecutive days
prior to the hearing. Such sign or signs shall
contain a brief description of the nature of the
public hearing as deemed necessary by the
Community Development Department. Such posting
requirements do not apply to a Village-initiated
zoning map amendment.
It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to
remove such sign or signs after the hearing is
adjourned. The applicant shall be responsible
for maintaining the visibility of such sign or
signs from said public way. The Community
Development Department shall require a deposit of
$75.00 to be refunded upon verification of the
removal of such sign or signs. The Director of
Community Development or designee shall have the
authority to determine the number, location and
placement of such signs.
21.6-3 Notice to Property Owners: In addition to every
other type of notice, notice by First Class Mail,
shall be sent by the applicant to the owners of
all property adjoining, and within 250 feet
adjacent to the property in question, including
the property directly opposite and across a
public street or alley. This notice shall be
given within 15 days but not more than 30 days
before the hearing.
The Village reserves the right to direct the
applicant to notify additional interested party
owners, groups or organizations.
For the purpose of notice, “owner” shall mean the
person to whom the most recent statement of real
property taxes on the property in question was
Section 21, Page 5
sent. An affidavit shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission to the attention
of the Director of Community Development that
contains a list of the property owners who
received the notice that includes their names,
addresses and Parcel Identification Number.
21.6-4 Notice by Applicant Owning Single Family
Dwelling Unit: In cases where the only
relief requested is a single family residential
variation, the applicant may, at the applicants
option:
A. Send notice by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, as outlined in
Section 21.6-3 of this Zoning Code.
B. Satisfy the personal notice
requirements of Section 21.6-3 of this
Zoning Code by presenting to the Planning
and Zoning Commission, at its hearing, a
certificate of notice. The certificate of
notice shall consist of 8 1/2" x 11" sheets
of paper bearing the names of the person
specified in Section 21.6-3. There shall be
a separate sheet for each person to be
notified and each sheet shall state:
"The undersigned acknowledges receipt
of a Application for Residential
Variation filed by
, (Applicant). I understand a hearing
will be held on the day
of , , at
p. m." at the Lake in the Hills Village
Hall, 600 Harvest Gate, Lake in the
Hills, IL 60156.
Section 22, Page 1
SECTION 22
AMENDMENTS
22.1 AUTHORITY:
The Board of Trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, may amend the
text of this Zoning Code or the Zoning Map after application
therefor and a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
22.2 APPLICATION:
Text amendments may be applied for by the Village Board,
Planning and Zoning Commission, Village Staff or by any resident
or owner of property within the Village. Zoning Map amendments
may be applied for by the Village Board, Planning and Zoning
Commission, or by the owner of the property being requested for
amendment.
22.3 FEE:
Every application for an amendment shall be accompanied by a
filing fee as established by the Board of Trustees.
22.4 PUBLIC HEARING:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
pursuant to notice therefor as provided by the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-13-1, et seq.) and Section 21.6 of
this Zoning Code. Within 45 days after the conclusion of the
public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward
its recommendation to the Board of Trustees, unless the
application is withdrawn by the applicant.
22.5 FINDINGS OF FACT:
Before recommending any Zoning Map Amendment, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall first determine and record its findings
based upon the following criteria:
1. Existing uses of property within the general area of
property in question.
Section 22, Page 2
2. The zoning classification of property within the general
area of the property in question.
3. The suitability of the property in question of the uses
permitted under the existing zoning classification(s).
4. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question.
5. The length of time, if any, that the subject property has
been vacant, considered in the context of the pace of
development in the vicinity of the subject property.
6. Projected use of the property, as indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan.
22.6 WRITTEN PROTEST:
In case of written protest against any proposed amendment of the
regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners
of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the
owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across any alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of
the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be
altered, is filed with the Community Development Department, the
amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of twothirds
of the trustees then holding office. In such cases, a
copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendments and a
copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at
the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the
application for the proposed amendment.
22.7 BOARD OF TRUSTEES ACTION:
The Board of Trustees, without further public hearing, may
approve the requested amendment, may deny the requested
amendment, or may refer the application back to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for further consideration.
Section 23, Page 1
SECTION 23
VARIATIONS & SPECIAL EXPECTIONS
23.1 AUTHORITY:
The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to approve
variations after application therefore and a public hearing before
the Planning and Zoning Commission. In cases where a variation is
created by a de minimis dimensional change, the Board of Trustees
grants the Village Administrator authority to approve the
application as set forth in 23.11 of this Section.
23.2 APPLICATION:
Any person, firm or corporation having an interest in a parcel of
property may apply for a variation from the literal enforcement of
a provision this Zoning Code. Unless otherwise states herein, a
hearing on every such application for a variation, pursuant to
notice in the manner provided by this Zoning Code, shall be held by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. No variation shall be granted
except in accordance with the standards for such a grant set forth
in this Zoning Code.
23.3 AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
Variations from the dimensional and/or quantitative requirements of
this code may only be considered.
23.4 FEE:
Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the required
fee as determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
23.5 PUBLIC HEARING:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
pursuant to notice therefor as provided by the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/11-13-1, et seq.) and Section 21.6 of this Zoning
Code.
23.6 STANDARDS:
When evidence in a specified case shows conclusively that literal
enforcement of any provision of this Zoning Code would result in a
practical difficulty or particular hardship because of unusual surroundings
or condition of the property involved, or by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the zoning lot, or
because of unique topography, underground conditions or other
unusual circumstances, then the Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend and the Board of Trustees may grant, by ordinance duly
adopted, a variation to permit relief from any provision of this
Section 23, Page 2
Zoning Code relating to the use, construction or alteration of
buildings or structures or the use of land.
23.7 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Board of
Trustees shall permit a variation of the provisions of this Zoning
Code, as authorized in this Section, only if the evidence, in the
judgement of the Village sustains each of the following three
conditions:
A. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return
if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed
by the regulations governing the district in which it is
located;
B. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
C. The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Village,
in making this determination whenever there are practical
difficulties or particular hardship, also shall take into
consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to
the applicant, have been established by the evidence:
D. That the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved
would bring a particular hardship upon the owner as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict
letter of the regulation were to be carried out;
E. That the conditions upon which the petition for variation
is based would not be applicable generally to other
property within the same zoning classification;
F. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively
upon a desire to make more money out of the property;
G. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been
created by any person presently having interest in the
property;
Section 23, Page 3
H. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is
located; or
I. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property, or
substantially increase the danger of fire, or otherwise
endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
23.8 CONDITIONS:
When granting a variation, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend, and the Board of Trustees may impose every condition or
restriction as appears necessary to minimize possible detrimental
effects of such variation on other properties in the neighborhood.
23.9 BOARD OF TRUSTEES ACTION:
No variation shall be granted by the Board of Trustees without a
hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission as required herein or
without a report having been made by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to the Board of Trustees, and every such report shall be
accompanied by a findings of fact specifying the reasons for the
report.
After receipt of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the Board of Trustees, without further public hearing, may grant,
by ordinance duly adopted, or may deny any proposed variation or
may refer the application back to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for further consideration. Any proposed variation that
fails to receive the approval of at least four members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be approved by the Board
of Trustees except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of the
members of the Board of Trustees.
23.10 EXPIRATION:
An ordinance approving a variance shall be valid for no longer than
one year from the date of adoption unless a building permit has
been issued for said variance.
Section 23, Page 4
23.11 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS FOR DE MINIMIS CHANGES:
Dimensional changes of less than one foot may be considered de
minimis and, so, the requirements for a public hearing and Planning
and Zoning Commission review would be onerous. The Board of
Trustees grants authority to the Village Administrator to consider
any applications where the only deviation(s) from dimension
standards are less than one foot, and approve any such applications
as de minimis special exceptions should no significant risk to
public health, safety, or welfare, or diminishment to nearly
property values or use be found to exist. Sections 23.2, 23.4,
23.8, and 23.10 of this Section shall apply to a de minimis special
exception, as it would to a variance, substituting the Village
Administrator for the Planning & Zoning Commission where
applicable. The application and determination shall be in writing
shall include the Village Administrator’s signature and approval or
disapproval. Disapproved applications may proceed through the
regular process for seeking a variance.
Amended Feburary 22, 2018
Section 24, Page 1
SECTION 24
CONDITIONAL USES
24.1 PURPOSE:
The principal objective of this Zoning Code is to provide for an
orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for
the proper location of all types of uses required for the social
and economic welfare of the Village. To accomplish these
objectives, certain types and kinds of uses are classified as
permitted in one or more of the various districts established by
this Zoning Code. However, in addition to those uses specifically
classified and permitted in each district, there are certain
additional uses that may be desirable to allow because of their
unusual characteristics or the service they provide the public.
These additional uses require particular consideration as to their
proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended
uses, or to the planned development of the community, and are
permitted, if at all, only as conditional uses. The conditions
controlling the location and operation of such conditional uses are
established by the following provisions of this Section 24. A list
of uses that are allowed only as conditional uses is found in
Section 11 of this Zoning Code.
24.2 AUTHORITY:
The Board of Trustees shall have authority to permit conditional
uses of land or structures, or both, after receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to
conditions contained herein, if the Board of Trustees finds that
the proposed location and establishment of any such use will be
desirable or necessary to the public convenience or welfare and
will be harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and
in the vicinity of the selected site or sites.
24.3 APPLICATION:
A verified application, signed by the owner or authorized agent of
the owner of the property involved, shall be filed with the
Community Development Department, upon a form prescribed therefore,
which shall contain or be accompanied by all required information.
Section 24, Page 2
24.4 FEE:
Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the required
fee as determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
24.5 PUBLIC HEARING:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
pursuant to notice therefor as provided by the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/11-13-1, et seq.) and Section 21.6 of this Zoning
Code. A record of pertinent information presented at the public
hearing shall be made and maintained by the Community Development
Department as a part of the permanent record relative to the
application.
24.6 FINDINGS OF FACT:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its findings and
recommendations to the Board of Trustees within 45 days after the
conclusion of the public hearing on the subject application. Before
recommending any Conditional Use, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Board of Trustees shall consider the following
factors and how they are relevant to the specific conditional use
being requested.
1. That the proposed use at the particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility
which is in the interest of public convenience and will
contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or
community; and
2. That the proposed use will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals
or general welfare of persons residing or working in the
vicinity, or injurious to property values or improvements in
the vicinity; and
3. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; and
4. The extent to which the conditional use is harmonious and
compatible with the goals and objectives of the Village’s
comprehensive planning documents; and
Section 24, Page 3
5. The amount of traffic congestion or hazards, if any, that may
occur as a result of the conditional use, as well as the extent
and adequacy of pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation;
and
6. The extent that the conditional use can be adequately served by
essential public facilities and services, and by private
utilities; and
7. That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in this Zoning Code for such use, and
with the stipulations and conditions made a part of the
authorization granted by the Board of Trustees; and
8. Any other criteria as identified in this Zoning Code.
Conditional use requests by and for religious use property do not
have to affirmatively prove the public convenience requirement
listed above. Religious property is property that is currently
used or proposed to be used as a church, synagogue, or other place
of worship by a religious organization.
24.7 CONDITIONS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village
Board may impose such conditions or restrictions as appear
necessary to minimize the possible detrimental effects of such
conditional use upon other properties in the neighborhood or
community.
24.8 BOARD OF TRUSTEES ACTION:
No conditional use shall be granted by the Board of Trustees
without a hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission as required
herein or without a report having been made by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to the Board of Trustees, and every such report
shall be accompanied by a findings of fact specifying the reasons
for the report.
24.9 TERMINATION OF CONDITIONAL USES:
Whenever any conditional use granted under the terms of this Zoning
Code fails to be established within one year of approval of the use
or has been discontinued for a period of one year, such use shall
not be reestablished without notice and public hearing as provided
for the establishment of conditional uses. Establishment shall
Section 24, Page 4
mean the issuance of a building or construction permit or
certificate of occupancy for the conditional use.
24.10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
A conditional use for an Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be
subject to all of the following standards:
1. No Direct Interference With Surrounding Development.
The proposed Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be
constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to directly
interfere with the use and development of neighboring
property in accordance with the applicable district
regulations.
2. Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed Adult
Entertainment Establishment will be served adequately
by essential public facilities and services such as
streets, public utilities, drainage structures, and
police and fire protection services, or the applicant
will provide adequately for such services.
3. No Traffic Congestion. The proposed use and
development will not cause demonstrably undue traffic
congestion nor draw demonstrably significant amounts of
traffic through residential districts.
4. No Destruction of Significant Features. The proposed
use and development will not directly result in the
destruction, loss, or actual damage of any natural,
scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.
5. Location Standards.
a. Minimum Distance From Other Adult Entertainment
Establishments. No Adult Entertainment
Establishment shall be established, maintained, or
operated on any lot that has a property line
within 1,000 feet of the property line of any
other lot on which any other Adult Entertainment
Establishment is located, established, maintained,
or operated.
b. Minimum Distance From Protected Uses. No Adult
Entertainment Establishment shall be established,
Section 24, Page 5
maintained, or operated on any lot that has a
property line within 1,000 feet of the property
line of any other lot on which a Protected Use is
located, established, maintained, or operated.
c. Minimum Distance From Residential Property. No
Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be
located, established, maintained, or operated on
any lot that has a property line within 1,000 feet
of the property line of any Residential Property.
d. Measurement. For the purposes of this Section,
distances shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property
line of the lot on which the Adult Entertainment
Establishment is located to the nearest point on a
property line of (i) any Residential Property or
(ii) any lot on which a Protected Use or other
Adult Entertainment Establishment, as the case may
be, is located, established, maintained, or
operated.
e. Limited Exception For Subsequent Protected Uses
and Residential Property. An Adult Entertainment
Establishment lawfully operating under this Zoning
Code and under the Lake in the Hills Adult Use
Licensing Ordinance shall not be deemed to be in
violation of the location restrictions set forth
herein solely because (i) a Protected Use
subsequently locates within the minimum required
distance of the Adult Entertainment Establishment,
or (ii) property within the minimum required
distance subsequently becomes Residential
Property. This Section shall not apply to an
Adult Entertainment Establishment at a time when
an application for an “Adult Entertainment
License” under the Adult Use Licensing Ordinance
for that Establishment is submitted after the
License has previously expired, has been revoked,
or is at that time under suspension.
Section 25, Page 1
SECTION 25
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
25.1 PURPOSE:
The regulations contained in this Section 25 are established to
encourage imaginative design of coordinated land uses and to
provide relief from the subdivision and zoning requirements that
are designed for conventional developments, but that may inhibit
innovation and cause undue hardship with regard to the use of
parcels which present technical development problems.
These regulations also are established to provide safe and
desirable areas characterized by unified building and site
development programs, to preserve natural features of sites, and to
provide adequate open space for recreation and other community
purposes.
25.2 WHERE PERMITTED:
A planned development may be located in the zoning districts as
outlined in Section 11 and subject to the procedures and standards
established by this Section and the conditions, if any, of the
conditional use permit approving the planned development.
25.3 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A Planned Development shall conform to the following standards:
A. Any use maybe permitted in a planned development provided
it complies with the provisions of Section 25.4.
B. The number of dwelling units proposed shall not exceed
the number permitted by the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
C. The yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the
project shall not be less than the yard requirements of
the district in which it is located.
D. If a building is permitted to exceed the height limit of
the district in which it is located, the yards and open
spaces around such building shall be increased by an
amount equal to the height that the building exceeds the
height limit of the district measured in feet.
Section 25, Page 2
25.4 EXCEPTIONS:
In the case of any Planned Development, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may authorize,
exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this Zoning Code
within the boundaries of such development, provided that the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall find:
A. That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of
encouraging a desirable living environment no less
beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development, as well as of neighboring properties, than
would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this
Ordinance for buildings developed on separate zoning
lots.
B. That along the periphery of planned developments, yards
shall be provided as required by the regulations of the
district in which said development is located.
C. Other standards for height, density, yard regulations,
signage, parking, loading and screening for a planned
development shall be governed by the standards of the
zoning district in which it is located or which is most
similar in nature and function to the proposed planned
development as determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Standards for public improvements shall be
governed by the applicable Ordinances and laws of the
Village’s Subdivision Control Ordinance. Exceptions to
these standards by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Village Board are possible when these bodies find
that such exceptions are warranted in terms of the total
proposed development.
25.5 APPLICATION PROCESS:
Before submitting a development plan for a planned development, the
applicant is encouraged to present a Sketch Plan to the Village
pursuant to the Lake in the Hills Subdivision Control Ordinance.
A Development Plan must be prepared and submitted for any Planned
Development and should contain the following:
A. A reproducible survey of the property showing existing
features of the property, including specimen trees,
structures, streets, easements, utility lines and
existing land use.
B. A reproducible development plan showing:
Section 25, Page 3
1. Proposed land uses, population densities and
building intensities.
2. Proposed circulation pattern, indicating both
public and private streets and off-street parking
spaces.
3. Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites and other
open spaces.
4. A market analysis and fiscal impact analysis of any
proposed commercial use, if the property is not
zoned for commercial purposes at the time of
submittal of the preliminary development plan.
5. Delineation of the units to be constructed in
progression, if any.
6. Traffic impact analysis of the immediate and
surrounding property.
C. A schedule for the development of units to be constructed
in progression and a description of the design principles
for buildings and streetscapes; tabulation of total
number of acres in the project and the percent thereof
designated for various uses; the number of dwelling units
proposed by type of dwelling for each unit of the
development; estimated residential population by type of
dwelling for each unit of the development; proposed
retail sales by unit and economic justification;
anticipated timing for each unit and standards for
height; open space, parking area and parking spaces, lot
coverage, land in streets, gross floor area, population
density and public improvements proposed for each unit of
the development whenever the applicant proposes an
exception from the standard zoning district or other
ordinance regulations governing development. The
applicant shall provide an itemized list of exceptions by
unit and by zoning district, when exceptions are
requested by the applicant from the standard zoning
district.
D. Signage details including design, location, height and
size.
E. A schedule for development concerning the proposed parks,
playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces; and the
party or parties responsible for developing the proposed
parks, playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces.
Section 25, Page 4
F. Lighting details including a photometric plan.
G. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans,
exterior elevations and outline specifications of type of
building materials, type of wall and roof construction,
type of pavement and surfacing materials including
proposed colors.
H. Landscaping plans including type and size of plant
materials and their arrangement.
I. Engineering plans, including site grading, street
improvements, drainage and public water, sanitary sewer
and storm sewer extensions, as necessary.
J. A development schedule indicating:
1. The approximate date when construction of the
project is expected to begin;
2. The stages in which the project will be built and
the approximate date when construction of each
stage is expected to begin;
3. The anticipated rate of development;
4. The approximate date when the development of each
stage will be completed; and
5. The area and location of common open space that
will be provided at each stage of development.
K. An inventory and evaluation of all significant
environmental features of the site including, but not
limited to, lakes, streams, ponds, marshes, soil
conditions, mineral deposits, including sand and gravel,
floodplains and wooded areas. The evaluation shall
include any limitation resulting from natural conditions
on the site that would restrict the development of the
site permitted generally under this Zoning Code.
L. A written statement containing a detailed explanation of
the size and character of the planned development and the
manner in which it has been planned to:
1. Take advantage of the provisions of this Section
25;
2. Conserve the significant natural features of the
site; and
Section 25, Page 5
3. Avoid, or otherwise overcome, any natural
limitations of the site.
M. Agreements, bylaws, provisions and/or covenants that will
govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of
the planned development and any of its common open areas,
streets, parking facilities or other facilities and
improvements.
25.6 DEVELOPMENT PLAN STANDARDS:
In preparing the development plan, particular consideration
shall be given to the following:
A. The provision of open space for recreational and other
outdoor benefits and activities.
B. The conservation of significant natural features of the
site, such as floodplains, wetlands, forests, scenic
areas and vistas. All such areas shall be considered
recreational open space whether or not they are developed
for recreational use or left in a natural state.
C. A unified design based upon significant architectural
features, compatible building materials and a distinctive
arrangement of structures and open space.
D. The provision of adequate sites for retail shopping and
service areas, schools, places of worship and other
community services where the development is large enough
to support these services.
E. The relationship of the development to surrounding uses
and property.
F. Surface drainage and stormwater detention shall be
designed pursuant to the Lake in the Hills Municipal
Code.
25.7 APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
25.8-1 Planning and Zoning Commission Review: The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a
public hearing on the proposed planned development
as provided in this Zoning Code and after the
required fees have been paid. A copy of the
development and required supporting information
shall be available at the Village Hall at the time
the public hearing notice is published and be
available at the public hearing.
Section 25, Page 6
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend
to the President and Board of Trustees approval or
disapproval of the development plan or, in response
to testimony and/or objections voiced at the public
hearing, approval of the development plan with
modifications or conditions.
25.8-2 Board of Trustees: The Board of Trustees shall, by
ordinance, approve or disapprove the development
plan, with or without modifications and/or
conditions, or additional specific standards. Upon
approval of the development plan, the Board of
Trustees shall order the issuance of a conditional
use permit, by ordinance, authorizing the planned
development in conformance to the approved
development plan.
25.8-3 Final Plats, Plans: It shall be the duty of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to review all final
plans and plats for general conformity with the
approved development plan and the Lake in the Hills
Subdivision Control Ordinance. No plat shall be
recorded and no building permit shall be issued
except in accordance with final plats and plans
approved and signed in accordance with the Lake in
the Hills Subdivision Control Ordinance.
25.8 MINOR MODIFICATION OF DEVEOPLMENT PLANS:
The Director of Community Development may, from time to time,
approve minor changes within a planned development, but any changes
shall not be of such a nature that would affect the character and
standards of the planned development.
25.9 FAILURE TO BEGIN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
If no substantial construction has begun or no use established
within two years after approval of the development plan by the
Village Board, the conditional use permit for the planned
development shall be declared null and void and the project shall
not be initiated unless it is resubmitted and re-approved in the
same manner that it was approved in the first instance.
The Board of Trustees may, however, extend the period for
initiating construction after conducting a public hearing. Notice
of such hearing shall be published as provided in Section 21.6 of
this Zoning Code. Notice shall also be sent by regular mail to
property owners contiguous to the subject property. It shall be
Section 25, Page 7
the responsibility of the owner/developer to comply with the notice
provisions.
Section 26, Page 1
SECTION 26
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
26.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Section 26 is established to create uniform landscape,
screening and tree preservation standards for development
of property in the Village of Lake in the Hills and to
provide screening or transition buffer areas that will
promote compatibility among land uses, the planting of
street trees, and landscaping of residential and nonresidential
properties, in order to preserve and promote
the health, safety and general welfare of Lake in the
Hills.
B. These regulations are intended to minimize the harmful or
nuisance effects resulting from noise, heat, glare and
accumulation of dust, and to provide shade, air
purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff reduction, and privacy from noise and
visual intrusion of objectionable sights and activities
C. Village-owned park sites shall be exempt from the
regulations within this section.
26.2 EVENTS TRIGGERING LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
In addition to new construction, the following events will
trigger landscape requirements proportional to the work being
done:
A. Addition of 5 or more parking spaces or any parking access or
drive aisle
B. Any increase in the square footage of a building
26.3 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
ARTERIAL STREET  As defined in the Lake in the Hills Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
BERM  An earthen mound, designed to provide visual interest and
screen undesirable views.
CALIPER  A measurement of the tree 6 inches above the ground for
trees with caliper of four inches or less, and 12 inches above
Section 26, Page 2
ground for trees that are larger, as defined in the American
Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1.
COLLECTOR STREET  As defined in the Lake in the Hills
Subdivision Control Ordinance.
DECIDUOUS  A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
EVERGREEN  A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round.
ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFER  An area that is landscaped with native
plant material and designed to stabilize slopes (where
applicable), slow runoff, recharge aquifers and absorb nutrients
and pollutants before stormwater enters an environmental resource
such as wetland, fen, stream or creek.
MINOR STREET  As defined in the Lake in the Hills Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
PARKWAY  That portion of Village-owned property between the curb
line, shoulder line, traveled portion of the roadway or alley and
the private property line.
SCREEN  An area of planting that provides an effective visual
barrier that includes a combination of physical space and
vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the
purpose of which is to separate and screen incompatible land uses
from one another.
TRANSITION YARD  That portion of a yard that separates two
incompatible land uses
TREE, OVERSTORY  A self-supporting woody plant having one welldefined
stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and
spread of at least 30 feet, and having a trunk that may, at
maturity, be kept clear of leaves and branches at least 8 feet
above grade.
TREE, UNDERSTORY  A self-supporting woody plant having at least
one well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature
height and spread of less than 30 feet, with branching less than
8 feet above grade.
26.4 PERIMETER LANDSCAPING
26.4-1 Perimeter landscaping required: Landscaping shall be
installed along the perimeter of all non-residential and
multiple-family residential lots, consistent with standards for
yard width and type and intensity of planting identified in Table
26.5 to provide visual and physical separation between uses, and
Section 26, Page 3
to create an attractive development. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, perimeter yards shall be defined as that portion of a
lot that runs parallel to a front, corner, side or rear lot line,
and shall be measured in width.
26.4-2 Front, corner, side and rear yards abutting a street:
Table 26.5 identifies the type and intensity of plantings
required in perimeter yards that abut a street. Trees, shrubs
and groundcovers required for installation in theses yards shall
be selected from the plant lists found in Section 26.17.
26.4-3 Design of a landscape berm: Where a berm is required or
proposed as part of a perimeter yard, it shall be undulating in
form, and not exceed a slope of 3:1.
26.4-4 Required plant material: Minimum standards for
landscaping presented in Table 26.5 are based on 100 linear feet
of street frontage. The intensity of landscaping and width of
the perimeter yard varies, depending upon the classification and
function of the street. Where two streets intersect, the
requirements of the higher street classification take precedence
at property corners. The width of the yard shall then be
subtracted from subsequent frontage lengths in calculating the
quantity of plant materials required for other yards. The
pavement width of driveways shall also be subtracted from
frontage lengths in calculating the quantity of plant materials
required for yards.
26.4-5 Grasses and perennials recommended: The introduction of
native and ornamental grasses and perennials into the landscape
is encouraged. The proposed planting of such grasses and
perennials may result in a reduction from required shrubs,
depending on the type, location, and intensity of grasses and
perennials that are proposed.
26.4-6 Side and rear yards that do not abut a street: Table
26.6 identifies the type and intensity of plantings required in
perimeter yards that do not abut a street and that do not require
screening as defined in Section 26.7. Trees, shrubs and
groundcovers required for installation in theses yards shall be
selected from the plant lists found in Section 26.17.
26.4-7 Sight Lines maintained: Notwithstanding the above,
landscape screening that is within 20 feet of an intersection
shall be not more than 30 inches tall without approval by the
Community Development Director.
26.4-8 Shared Yards: Where two yards on adjacent properties
combine to provide a larger landscape yard, the plantings
required by each development shall, where possible, work together
to provide a common design and planting theme.
Section 26, Page 4
26.4-9 Shared Parking: For development sites under five acres,
two adjacent lots shall not be required to have a ten (10) foot
wide yard along the common lot line if the two lots: 1) have a
shared parking agreement and cross access agreement; or 2) share
a common site access and have a cross access agreement.
TABLE 26.5
Zoning
District
Minor/100 linear
feet
Collector/100
linear feet
Arterial/100
linear feet
Residential
(all
locations,
except the
front yard of a
single-family,
two-family or
town home)
 25 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 3 evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs, of
which 33% or more
must be evergreen
 25 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 2 overstory trees
 2 understory trees
 3 evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs, of
which 33% or more
must be evergreen
 25 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 3 understory trees
 3 evergreen trees
 12 large shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
Open Space and
Institutional
Buildings
(excluding
IL Route 47)
 25 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 1 evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and
3 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
 25 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 2 overstory trees
 2 understory trees
 1 evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and
3 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
 25 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 3 evergreen trees
 12 large shrubs
and 6 medium
shrubs, of which
33% or more must
be evergreen
Business
(excluding
IL Route 47)
 30 foot wide yard
 3 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 1 evergreen tree
 6 large shrubs and
3 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
 30 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 1 evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and
3 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
 30 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 2 evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs and
6 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
Manufacturing
and Airport
(excluding
IL Route 47)
 30 foot wide yard
 3 overstory trees
 2 understory trees
 1 evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and
3 medium shrubs,
of which 33% or
 30 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 2 understory trees
 3 evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs and
6 medium shrubs,
 30 foot wide yard
 3 to 5’ berm
 3 overstory trees
 2 understory trees
 3 evergreen trees
 12 large shrubs
and 6 medium
Section 26, Page 5
TABLE 26.5
Zoning
District
Minor/100 linear
feet
Collector/100
linear feet
Arterial/100
linear feet
more must be
evergreen
of which 33% or
more must be
evergreen
shrubs, of which
33% or more must
be evergreen
IL Route 47
(all uses,
except
residential)
Not applicable Not applicable  100 foot wide
yard
 All native plants
 3 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 15 large shrubs
in clusters
TABLE 26.6
Zoning
District
Side Yard/100 linear
feet
Rear Yard/100 linear
feet Residential
(all
locations
except the
front yard of
a singlefamily,
twofamily-
or
townhome)
 10 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory or 1
evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs, of
which 33% or more shall
be evergreen
 10 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory tree
 1 evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs and 3
medium shrubs, of which
33% or more shall be
evergreen
Open Space
and
Institutional
Buildings
Same as residential Same as residential
Business  10 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory or 1
evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and 3
medium shrubs, of which
33% or more shall be
evergreen
 10 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 1 understory or
evergreen tree
 9 large shrubs and 6
medium shrubs, of which
33% or more shall be
evergreen
Manufacturing
and Airport
 10 foot wide yard
 2 overstory trees
 2 understory or
evergreen trees
 9 large shrubs and 6
medium shrubs, of which
33% or more shall be
evergreen
 10 foot wide yard
 3 overstory trees
 2 understory or
evergreen trees
 12 large shrubs and 6
medium shrubs, of which
33% or more shall be
evergreen
Section 26, Page 6
26.7 SCREENING
26.7-1 Landscape screening required: Landscape screening shall
be required when:
A. A non-residential land use abuts, or will abut a
residential land use.
B. A residential land use (single- or multiple-family)
abuts, or will abut a non-residential land use.
C. Outdoor storage is, or will be, located on a nonresidential
lot.
D. Off-street loading is proposed or exists in a side or
rear yard that abuts a residential land use.
E. Off-street parking is proposed or exists in a side or
rear yard that abuts a residential land use.
F. Off-street parking is proposed or exists along a
public street (see Section 26.10).
26.7-2 Type of screening required: Such screening shall be
provided as follows:
A. By installing a 6 foot tall fence or wall, with at
least 1 overstory tree for each 30 linear feet planted
along the outside of the fence to provide for
screening above the top of the fence. Evergreen trees
may be substituted for shade trees, provided that at
least 50% of the required trees are deciduous
overstory trees; OR
B. By installing a landscaped berm, not less than three
feet tall, planted with a combination of evergreen
trees, overstory trees, understory trees and shrubs to
provide a dense planting that achieves a solid screen;
OR
C. A combination of a fence, wall or landscaped berm,
such that a solid screen is created.
26.7-3 Sight Lines maintained: Notwithstanding the above,
landscape screening that is within 20 feet of an intersection
shall be not more than 30 inches tall without approval by the
Community Development Director.
26.8 ENVIRONMENTAL BUFFERS
26.8-1 Buffers required: Environmental buffers shall be provided
around all regulatory resources including wetlands, fens, streams
Section 26, Page 7
or creeks according to standards below, unless other regulatory
agencies requires a more restrictive buffer, in which case that
agency’s requirements shall apply.
26.8-2 Native plants required: Buffers shall be planted with
plants native to McHenry County. Recommended plant mixes for
native prairie and recommended riparian zone plantings along a
stream or creek are included in Section 26.17.
26.8-3 Required maintenance and management plan:
A. Wetlands, fens, or the riparian zone along a stream or
creek that is located on private property shall be
managed to create a native plant community that slows
stormwater runoff, increases infiltration of water
into the ground, assimilates pollutants, and provides
wildlife habit.
B. Maintenance and management of buffers around wetlands,
fens, streams and creeks shall, at a minimum, include
the following:
(1) Initial removal of invasive shrubs and woody
plant material, as applicable, and enhancement of
buffer with native plantings, as described in
Section 26.8-2.
(2) Implementation of regular prescribed burn
management for native plant communities.
C. Buffers along streams or creeks shall be managed to
encourage growth of native shrubs and trees by
allowing seedlings and saplings to re-establish and
mature.
TABLE 26.9
Resource Buffer Width Planting Requirement
Wetland 0.10ac - 1ac 30-foot minimum
buffer
1ac - 2.5ac 40-foot minimum
buffer
2.5ac - larger 50-foot
minimum buffer
Native prairie, unless
buffer is wooded, in which
case no planting is
required
Fen
High Quality
Aquatic
Resources,
HFVW, HQAR, or
HQHS
100 feet minimum
Native prairie, unless
buffer is wooded, in which
case no planting is
required
Stream or Creek 75 feet minimum 1 tree/25 linear feet,
Section 26, Page 8
clustered and
riparian floodplain mix,
unless buffer is already
wooded, in which case no
planting is required
26.10 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
26.10-1 Pavement setbacks required: Parking and access drives
for multiple-family dwellings and all non-residential land uses
shall not be allowed within (running parallel with) a required
perimeter yard, as presented in Section 26.4.
26.10-2 Screening required: Where parking or an access drive is
located between a building and the street of a multiple-family or
non-residential property, screening shall be provided. With the
exception of properties along Illinois Route 47, such screening
shall include the following, in addition to landscaping
identified in Section 26.4.
A. An undulating berm, not less than 3 feet tall, with a
maximum 3:1 slope.
B. A combination of evergreen and deciduous shrubs that,
when combined with the berm, provide continuous
screening not less than 4 feet tall, except where
screening is located within 20 feet of an
intersection, in which case landscaping shall not
exceed 30 inches in height. Required plantings shall
be informally arranged, rather than in linear rows, to
create a natural appearance, unless a formal landscape
theme is proposed for the entire landscape.
C. Where parking lot screening is proposed to be located
within a required perimeter yard (see Section 26.4),
the intensity of perimeter yard landscaping around the
parking lot shall be increased to provide a full
screen.
26.10-3 Tree and shrub planting required:
A. Required tree plantings: A minimum of 1 tree shall be
planted or preserved for each 15 parking spaces in an
outdoor parking facility. Such trees shall be located
in landscaped islands or median strips that are not
less than 162 square feet in area (measured to back of
curb), and a minimum of 9 feet in any direction. They
shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot to
provide shade on the paved surface.
Section 26, Page 9
B. Required shrub/groundcover plantings: In addition to
required trees, all landscaped islands shall be
planted with shrubs, groundcovers (other than turf
grass), or native plants such that 50% or more of the
island includes live plant material. At the ends of
parking islands (minimum 9’ x 9’), such material shall
not exceed 30” in height at maturity to ensure that
motorist visibility is not compromised.
C. Motorist Visibility: Evergreen and ornamental trees
(other than Callery Pear cultivars) shall not be
allowed in parking lot islands (i.e., 9’ x 18’,
typical, installed parallel to a parking space) since
their growth characteristics can block the visibility
of motorists traveling through the parking lot,
potentially compromising safety for pedestrians and
motorists. Evergreen trees and ornamental trees may
be planted in median strips (typically 10’ or more in
width, constructed parallel to a row of parking
spaces) constructed in parking lots, provided such
trees are set back 10 feet from the ends of the median
to protect motorist line of sight.
26.10-4 Protecting landscapes:
A. All landscaped areas adjacent to parking lots and
within parking lot islands shall be protected from
parked vehicles by curbing.
B. Landscaping shall be set back at least 2 feet from
parking island curbs, medians, or the perimeter of a
parking lot to protect plantings from damage by car
overhang.
C. Adequate space shall be provided for snow storage and
shall be designated on the landscape plan.
26.10-5 Areas to be planted: All parkways and areas that are not
improved with buildings or pavement shall be provided with
landscaping that includes groundcover (seed, sod, or other
ornamental or native plantings) and trees and shrubs.
26.11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AREAS
26.11-1 Required landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided
around the perimeter of all retention or detention basins,
generally above the high water level:
A. Only those plants that are adapted to temporary
flooding may be planted below the high water level.
Section 26, Page 10
B. A hydroperiod analysis shall be submitted for the 5-,
10-, and 25-year storm events so that it can be
confirmed that groundcover and other landscaping will
be able to withstand the frequency and duration of
these storm events.
26.11-2 Type and intensity of planting required for stormwater
management areas:
A. Unless otherwise approved, only native trees, shrubs,
grasses and wildflowers shall be installed around the
perimeter of a stormwater management facility to slow
runoff, filter pollutants, recharge aquifers and
enhance water quality in Lake in the Hills.
B. Native overstory trees shall be planted at a ratio not
less than 1 tree for every 40 linear feet around the
perimeter of a retention or detention basin (as
measured at the high water mark). Required trees
shall be informally clustered, rather than evenly
spaced, to create a natural appearance. Native
plantings shall provide complete coverage of the
perimeter of the basins. Understory trees or shrubs
may also be included provided such materials can be
installed without compromising the viability and
required management of native plantings.
C. Where a stormwater basin is proposed to be located
within a required perimeter yard (see Section 26.4),
the intensity of landscaping around the basin shall be
increased to comply with the applicable standard for
the perimeter yard.
D. The selection of all plant material in these areas
shall be made from the approved plant lists in Section
26.17.
26.12 LANDSCAPING AROUND SIGNS
26.12-1 Where required: Landscaping shall be installed around
the base of all ground signs to visually anchor the sign and help
it blend into the landscape.
26.12-2 Type and intensity of planting required: Landscaping
shall include shrubs or other groundcovers (excluding turf grass)
that are large enough to cover or soften the base of the sign
without blocking the sign copy.
26.13 TREE PRESERVATION
26.13-1 Required survey:
Section 26, Page 11
A. Properties proposed for development that possess
existing trees shall be surveyed prior to the issuance
of a building permit. The survey shall identify all
deciduous trees that are greater than 4 inches in
diameter as measured at breast height, and all
evergreen trees that are 5 feet or greater in height.
B. The survey shall identify the location, size, species
and condition of those existing trees that qualify for
surveying as defined in Section 26.13-1A , above.
26.13-2 Tree preservation plan:
A. Decision to remove or replace trees: Identification
of which trees will be preserved, removed or replaced
shall be coordinated with the Director of Community
Development or designee, and based upon:
(1) The health of the tree or trees
(2) Need to provide for essential grade changes
(3) Need to provide for surface water drainage and
utility installations
(4) Ability to locate proposed development without
causing unreasonable economic hardship
(5) Good forestry practices, regarding the number,
species and location of healthy trees the parcel
will support
(6) The potential that a tree will pose a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or safety hazard
to buildings, both existing and proposed.
B. Preservation techniques:
(1) Protective fencing shall be installed at the
critical root zone of a tree or trees identified
for preservation, to protect such trees from
grading and root compaction by construction
equipment. Where construction is allowed to take
place within the critical root zone of one side
of a tree proposed for preservation, protective
fencing shall be extended beyond the critical
root zone of the other side of the tree, in order
to maximize protection of the root system. The
area of the root system protected by protective
fencing shall, in no case, be less than the area
of the critical root zone of the tree.
Section 26, Page 12
(2) The crowns and roots of all trees that could be
negatively affected by construction shall, unless
otherwise approved by the Director of Community
Development or designee, be pruned by a qualified
arborist according to tree standards set by ANSI
2100 to compensate for root loss due to
construction and to minimize damage to root
systems.
(3) Crushed limestone or other materials detrimental
to the health of a tree shall be placed outside
the drip line of a tree or group of trees planned
for preservation, and drainage routed away from
such trees.
26.13-3 Removal and replacement criteria  Trees that are removed
shall be replaced according to the following:
A. Deciduous trees:
(1) All deciduous trees that are proposed to be
removed with approval by Lake in the Hills shall
be replaced with new trees at a rate of 1”
caliper of replacement tree equal to 1” caliper
of tree removed, unless otherwise approved by the
Director of Community Development.
(2) In the event a deciduous tree or trees designated
for preservation is destroyed or removed without
Village approval, the tree or trees shall be
replaced with new trees at a rate of 1 ½” caliper
of replacement tree for each 1” caliper of tree
removed.
(3) When calculating required tree replacement,
fractions less than 1” may be disregarded. If
the fraction is ½ or greater, it shall be counted
as 1”.
(4) Replacement deciduous trees shall be 3” or more
in caliper, and selected from the approved plant
lists in Section 26.17.
B. Evergreen trees:
(1) All evergreen trees that are proposed to be
removed with approval by Lake in the Hills shall
be replaced with new trees at a rate of onevertical
foot for each one-vertical foot of tree
removed, unless otherwise approved by the
Director of Community Development.
Section 26, Page 13
(2) In the event an evergreen tree or trees
designated for preservation is destroyed or
removed without Village approval, the tree or
trees shall be replaced with new trees at a rate
of 1 ½ vertical feet for each one vertical foot
of tree removed.
(3) Replacement evergreen trees shall be 7’ or more
in height, and selected from the approved plant
lists in Section 26.17.
26.13-4 Enforcement: In the event that a tree designated for
preservation is destroyed or razed during the construction
process, or has been removed without prior approval by Village
staff, each tree shall be replaced according to replacement
criteria presented in 26.10-3, above. Also, a minimum penalty of
$500 per tree shall be assessed upon the Owner of the property
upon which trees were removed, and a temporary stop work order
shall be issued until such time as the Village has identified the
extent of tree removal and the number of replacement trees
required.
26.14 FEXIBILITY IN APPLYING STANDARDS
The Director of Community Development may administratively vary
any specific requirement of this Section 26, provided such
variation is less than 25% of the requirement. Any deviation of
25% or more from any specific requirement of this Section 26
shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Whenever the Village allows or requires a
deviation from the requirements set forth in this section, the
reasons for such deviation shall be affixed to the landscape plan
for future reference and use.
26.15 PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS
Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this
Section 26 shall conform to the latest edition of the American
Association of Nurserymen’s (now the American Nursery & Landscape
Association (ANLA)), Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
Planting stock shall be wellbranched and well-formed, sound,
vigorous, healthy and free from disease, sun-scald, windburn,
abrasion, harmful insects or insect eggs, and shall have healthy,
normal and unbroken root systems. Overstory trees shall have
straight single (or central) leaders with no disfiguring knots or
crotches.
26.16 GENERAL MAINTENANCE
The owner, tenant, or their agent, if any, shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all landscaping located on the site that
is required by this Section of the Zoning Ordinance. Landscaping
Section 26, Page 14
shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy,
neat and orderly appearance and kept free from refuse and debris.
Any dead or severely damaged or diseased plant material shall be
replaced by the owner, tenant or their agent during the next
planting season. If the cost of the new landscaping materials
indicated on an approved plan exceeds $1,000, the petitioner
shall furnish an itemized cost estimate of the landscaping
materials and a two (2) year landscape maintenance bond in an
amount equal to 10% of the total cost. In lieu of the landscape
maintenance bond, the petitioner may deposit a cash bond of the
same amount with the Village for a period of two years. After
the two-year period, if the Village does not need to use the cash
for landscape maintenance, the deposit will be returned without
interest.
26.17 PLANT LISTS
The following lists have been developed to assist the landscape
architect and architect in the selection of plant material.
Street trees shall be selected and installed according to Chapter
6 of the Lake in the Hills Municipal Code. Trees, shrubs, grasses
and groundcovers used for landscaping as required by this Section
26 shall be selected from lists provided in Sections 26.18 and
26.19 of this Zoning Ordinance and Chapter 6 of the Lake in the
Hills Municipal Code unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Community Development. Minimum sizes required for trees, shrubs
grasses and groundcovers at installation are identified within
each category.
General Plant List:
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
O verstory Trees (3” average , as measur ed 6” above grade)
Maple trees shall not exceed 10% of the overall plant schedule
in a development.
Acer x freemanii “Autumn Blaze” Autumn Blaze Freeman
Maple
Acer nigrum ** Black Maple
Acer rubrum “Morgani” Morgani Red Maple
Acer rubrum ** Red Maple
Acer saccharum ** Sugar Maple
Acer s. “Green Mountain” Green Mountain Sugar
Maple
Aesculus glabra ** Ohio Buckeye
Aesculus hippocastanum
“Baumanii”
Baumanaii Horsechestnut
Carya Sp Hickory
Section 26, Page 15
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa
Celtis occidentalis ** Common Hackberry
Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert
Fagus grandiflora ** American Beech
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo
Gleditsia triacanthos var.
inermis **
Thornless Honeylocust
Cultivars
Gymnocladus dioicus ** Kentucky Coffeetree
Juglans nigra ** Black Walnut
Ostrya virginiana ** American Hophornbeam
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear
Quercus alba** White Oak
Quercus bicolor ** Swamp White Oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa ** Bur Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinquapin Oak
Quercus palustris ** Pin Oak
Quercus rubra ** Northern Red Oak
Robinia pseudoacacia ‘Chicago
Blues’ (Benjamen)
Chicago Blues Black
Locust
Taxodium distichum Common Baldcypress
Tilia americana ** American Linden
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden
Tilia cordata “Greenspire” Greenspire Littleleaf
Linden
Ulmus genus Hybrid Elm
Ulmus japonica x wilsonia
“Accolade”
Accolade Elm
Zelkova serrate Japanese Zelkova
Evergreen Trees (7’ height, minimum)
Abies concolor White Fir
Section 26, Page 16
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
Picea abies Norway Spruce
Picea glauca var. densata Blackhills Spruce
Picea omorika Serbian Spruce
Picea pungens Colorado Spruce (Green)
Pinus flexilis Limber Pine
Pinus strobus ** Eastern White Pine
Pinus sylvestris Scotch Pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir
Tsuga canadensis Canadian Hemlock
Ornamental/UnderstoryTrees (1 ½” minimum, single-stem; 8’
height, multi-stem)
Acer campestre Hedge Maple
Acer ginnala Amur Maple (clump)
Alnus glutinosa European Alder
Amelanchier canadensis
(arborea) **
Shadblow Serviceberry
Amelanchier x grandiflora Apple Serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis** Allegheny Serviceberry
Betula nigra ** River Birch (clump)
Cercis canadensis ** Eastern Redbud
Cornus alternifolia ** Pagoda Dogwood
Cornus mas Cornelian Cherry
Dogwood
Crataegus crusgalli inermis** Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorn
Crataegus phaenophyrum Washington Hawthorn
Crataegus viridis “Winter King” Winter King Hawthorn
Magnolia liliiflora x stellata
“Susan”
“Susan” Little Girl
Magnolia
Magnolia stellata “Royal Star” Royal Star Magnolia
Malus floribunda Japanese Flowering
Crabapple
Malus “Jackmanii” Baccata Jackii
Crabapple
Section 26, Page 17
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
M alus “Sentinel” Sentinel Crabapple
Malus “Spring Snow” Spring Snow Crabapple
Malus zumi “Calocarpa” Zumi Crabapple
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac
Large Deciduous Shrubs (36” minimum)
Aronia arbutifolia
“Brilliantissima”
Red Chokeberry
Aronia melanocarpa ** Black Chokeberry
Cornus sericea Isanti Redtwig Dogwood
Euonymus alatus Burning Bush
Euonymus alatus “Compactus” Dwarf Burning Bush
Euonymus atropurpureus Eastern Wahoo
Hamamelis vernalis Vernal Witchhazel
Hamamelis virginiana ** Fall Blooming
Witchhazel
Hydrangea species Tardiva Hydrangea
PeeGee Hydrangea
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum
Viburnum x burkwoodii Burkwood Viburnum
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberrybush
Viburnum **
Viburnum trilobum Hahs Viburnum
Viburnum lantana Mohican Viburnum
Viburnum lentago ** Nannyberry Viburnum
Viburnum carlesii Koreanspice Viburnum
Medium Deciduous Shrubs (24” minimum)
Corylus americana** American Hazelnut
Cotoneaster acutifolius Peking Cotoneaster
Forsythia species Sunrise Forsythia
Early Forsythia
Hydrangea species Annabelle Smooth
Hydrangea **
Oak-leaf Hydrangea
Ilex verticillata ** Afterglow Winterberry
Section 26, Page 18
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
Holly (female)
Ilex verticillata ** Jim Dandy Winterberry
Holly (male)
Rosa species Rugosa Rose
Shrub Rose
Spiraea species Anthony Waterer
Frobelli
Grefsheim
Snowmound Spirea
Meadowsweet **
Medium Deciduous Shrubs (18” minimum)
Cotoneaster apiculatus Cranberry cotoneaster
Rhus aromatica Grow-Low Sumac **
Spiraea species Little Princess
Large Evergreen Shrubs (30” minimum)
Juniperus chinensis Pfitzer Juniper
Sea Green Juniper
Taxus x media Brown Yew
Hatfield Yew
Hicks Yew
Japanese Yew
Medium Evergreen Shrubs (18”minimum)
Juniperus horizontalis** Hughes Juniper
Sargent Juniper
Broadmoor Juniper
Blue Chip Juniper
Trailing Juniper
Taxus x media Taunton Yew
Dense Yew
Nana Yew
Perennials (1 gallon container, minimum)
Achillea species Moonshine Yarrow
Heidi Yarrow
Paprika Yarrow
Aster novae-angliae** New England Aster
Section 26, Page 19
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
Astilbe species Fanal Astilbe
Peach Blossom Astilbe
Pumila Astilbe
Boltonia latisquama** False Aster
Coreopsis species Coreopsis
Echinacea species** Purple Coneflower
White Coneflower
Hemerocallis species Daylily
Hosta species Hosta
Iris virginica var. shrevei ** Wild Blue Iris
Lavandula species Lavender
Leucanthemum species Shasta Daisy
Liatris aspera ** Rough Blazing Star
Liatris spicata** Gay Feather
Monarda species Bee Balm
Nepeta faassenii Catmint
Penstemon digitalis ** Foxglove Beard Tongue
Perovskia atriplicifolia Russian Sage
Phystostegia virginiana** False Dragonshead
Rudbeckia fulgida “Goldsturm” Black-eyed Susan
Rudbeckia hirta ** Black-eyed Susan
Salvia species Sage
Sedum species Stonecrop
Solidago nemoralis ** Gray Goldenrod
Solidago speciosa ** Showy Goldenrod
Veronica species Speedwell
Section 26, Page 20
TABLE 26.18
Scientific Name Common Name
O rnamental Grasses (1 gallon container, minimum)
Andropogon gerardii ** Big Bluestem
Andropogon scoparius ** Little Bluestem
Calamagrostis acutiflora Feather Reed Grass
Deschampsia caespitosa ** Tufted Hair Grass
Helictotrichon sempervirens Blue Oat Grass
Miscanthus species Silver Grass
Panicum virgatum ** Switch Grass
Pennisetum alopecuroides Fountain Grass
Sorghastrum nutans ** Indian Grass
Spodiopogon sibiricus Silver Spike Grass
Sporobolus heterolepis ** Prairie Dropseed
**Native Plants
Detention/Retention Seed Mixes (Substitutions may be made with
approval by the Director of Community Development):
TABLE 26.19
IDOT CLASS 4B SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
% By
Weight
Lbs.
per
Acre
Avena sativa Spring oats 25
Lolium multiflorum Annual Rye Grass 25
Wetland Grasses (Below)
Calamagrostis canadensis Blue Joint Grass 2 6
Carex lacustris Lake-Bank Sedge 6
Carex stipata Awl-Fruited Sedge 6
Carex stricta Tussock Sedge 6
Carex vulpinoidea Fox Sedge 6
Eleocharis acicularis Needle Spike Rush 2
Eleocharis obtusa Blunt Spike Rush 2
Glyceria striata Fowl Manna Grass 14
Section 26, Page 21
TABLE 26.19
IDOT CLASS 4B SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
% By
Weight
Lbs.
per
Juncus effusus Common Rush 6 Ac r e
Juncus tenuis Slender Rush 6
Juncus torreyi Torrey's Rush 6
Leersia oryzoides Rice Cut Grass 10
Scirpus acutus Hard-Stemmed Bulrush 2
Scirpus atrovirens Dark Green Rush 2
Scirpus fluviatilis River Bulrush 2
Scirpus validus Softstem Bulrush 2
Spartina pectinata Cord grass 4
Total Lbs. Per Acre 56
TABLE 26.20
CLESEN RETENTION MIX (D)
% Cover Cover
70% Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue
33% Perennial Ryegrass
TABLE 26.21
DETENTION BASIN COOL SEASON MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lbs. per
Acre
Agrostis alba Redtop 7.500
Agrostis alba palustris Creeping Bent 7.500
Eleocharis palustris Spike Rush 0.375
Festuca rubra "Dawson's" Dawson's Creeping Red Fescue 68.000
Lolium perenne Perennial Rye 15.000
Poa pratensis Kentucky Bluegrass 52.000
Total Lbs. Per Acre 150.375
TABLE 26.22
TOUGH WATER LINE NATIVE SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name Lbs. per Acre
Temporary Matrix
Section 26, Page 22
Agrostis alba Redtop 0.500
Agrostis alba palustris Creeping Bent 0.084
Avena sativa Seed Oats 32.000
Alopecurus arundinaceus Creeping Foxtail 0.250
Echinochloa crusgalli
frumentacea
Millet 0.500
Lolium multiflorum Annual Rye 5.000
Phleum pratense Timothy 0.500
Permanent Matrix
Grass and Grass-Like Plants
Alisma subcordatum Water Plantain 0.250
Carex hyalinolepis Hyaline Sedge 0.125
Carex vulpinoidea Brown Fox Sedge 0.250
Eleocharis palustris Spike Rush 0.250
Elymus triticoides Creeping Wild Rye 1.000
Puccinella distans
"Fults"
Fults Salt Grass 0.172
Scripus acutus Hard-Stem Bulrush 0.556
Scirpus atrovirens Dark Green Rush 0.038
Forbs
Sparganium eurycarpum Common Bur Reed 1.000
Total Lbs. Per Acre 42.475
TABLE 26.23
RIPARIAN FLOODPLAIN SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lbs. per
Acre
Temporary Matrix
Agrostis alba Redtop 1.000
Agrostis alba palustris Creeping Bent 0.031
Avena sativa Seed Oats 64.000
Echinochloa cryusgalli
frumentacea
Millet 1.000
Lolium multiflorum Annual Rye 5.000
Phleum pratense Timothy 0.125
Polygonum pennsylvanicum Pinkweek 1.000
Puccinella distans "Fults" Fults Salt grass 0.188
Permanent Matrix
Grass and Grass-Like Plants
Section 26, Page 23
TABLE 26.23
RIPARIAN FLOODPLAIN SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lbs. per
Acre
Carex buxbaumii Brown Sedge 0.047
Carex cornosa Dark-Scaled Sedge 0.125
Carex cristatella Crested Oval Sedge 0.016
Carex hyalinolepis Hyaline Sedge 0.016
Carex vulpinoidea Brown Fox Sedge 0.125
Elymus virginicus Virginia Wild Rye 0.063
Glyceria striata Fowl Manna Grass 0.046
Juncus torreyi Torrey's Rush 0.016
Leersia oryzoides Rice Cut Grass 0.016
Scirpus atrovirens Dark Green Rush 0.375
Scirpus cyperinus Wool Grass 0.031
Scirpus pendulus Red Bulrush 0.006
Scirpus pungens Chairmaker's Rush 0.009
Scirpus validus Soft-Stem Bulrush 0.188
Forbs
Acorus calamus Sweet Flag 0.031
Alisma subcordatum Water Plantain 0.313
Asclepias incarnata Swamp Milkweed 0.094
Bidens species
Various Species
Bidens
0.016
Boltonia latisquarma
recognita
False Aster 0.022
Cicuta maculata Water Hemlock 0.016
Eleocharis palustris Spike Rush 0.375
Eupatorium maculatum Spotted Joe Pye 0.063
Iris virginica shrevei Blue Flag 0.063
Napaea dioica Glade Mallow 0.031
Peltandra virginica Arrow Arum 0.500
Penthorum sedoides Ditch Stonecrop 0.009
Pontedaria cordata Pickerel Weed 0.313
Rudbeckia lacinata Wild Golden Glow 0.016
Sagittaria latifolia Common Arrowhead 0.188
Silphium perfoliatum Cup Plant 0.125
Sparganium eurycarpum Common Bur Reed 1.000
Total Lbs. Per Acre 76.594
Section 26, Page 24
TABLE 26.24
DETENTION BASIN WET PRAIRIE MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lb. Per
Acre
Temporary Matrix
Agrostis alba Redtop 1.000
Avena sativa Seed Oats 32.000
Lolium multiflorum Annual Ryegrass 5.000
Phleum pratense Timothy 0.500
Permanent Matrix
Andropogon gerardii Big Bluestem 0.187
Beckmannia syzigachne American Sloughgrass 0.735
Bromus ciliatus Fringed Brome 0.490
Calamagrostis canadensis Blue Joint Grass 0.032
Carex bebbii Bebb's Oval Sedge 0.136
Carex comosa Bristly Sedge 0.136
Carex hystericinia Porcupine Sedge 0.136
Carex lupulina Common Hop Sedge 0.136
Carex stipata Common Fox Sedge 0.136
Carex vulpinoidea Brown Fox Sedge 0.136
Elymus canadensis Canada Wild Rye 0.490
Elymus virginicus Virginia Wild Rye 0.490
Glyceria grandis Reed Manna Grass 0.136
Juncus effusus Common Rush 0.068
Juncus interior Inland Rush 0.028
Panicum virgatum Switch Grass 0.136
Scirpus atrovirens Dark-green Bulrush 0.677
Scirpus cyperinus Wool Grass 0.353
Scirpus validus Great Bulrush 0.068
Sorghastrum nutans Indian Grass 0.899
Spartina pectinata Cord Grass 0.136
Grasses
Andropogon gerardii Big Bluestem 0.187
Beckmannia syzigachne American Sloughgrass 0.735
Bromus ciliatus Fringed Brome 0.490
Calamagrostis canadensis Blue Joint Grass 0.032
Carex bebbii Bebb's Oval Sedge 0.136
Carex comosa Bristly Sedge 0.136
Carex hystericinia Porcupine Sedge 0.136
Carex lupulina Common Hop Sedge 0.136
Section 26, Page 25
TABLE 26.24
DETENTION BASIN WET PRAIRIE MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lb. Per
Acre
Carex stipata Common Fox Sedge 0.136
Carex vulpinoidea Brown Fox Sedge 0.136
Elymus canadensis Canada Wild Rye 0.490
Elymus virginicus Virginia Wild Rye 0.490
Glyceria grandis Reed Manna Grass 0.136
Juncus effusus Common Rush 0.068
Juncus interior Inland Rush 0.028
Panicum virgatum Switch Grass 0.136
Scirpus atrovirens Dark-green Bulrush 0.677
Scirpus cyperinus Wool Grass 0.353
Scirpus validus Great Bulrush 0.068
Sorghastrum nutans Indian Grass 0.899
Spartina pectinata Cord Grass 0.136
Forbs
Acorus calamus Sweet Flag 0.1363
Alisma subcordatum Mud Plantain 0.0677
Allium cernuum Nodding Onion 0.1363
Anemone canadensis Canada Anemone 0.034
Asclepias incarnata Swamp Milkweed 0.477
Aster novae-angliae New England Aster 0.068
Aster umbellatus Flat-topped Aster 0.032
Boltonia asteroides False Aster 0.032
Chelone glabra Turtlehead 0.054
Eupatorium maculatum Joe Pye Weed 0.054
Eupatorium perfoliatum Boneset 0.032
Gentiana flavida/andrewsii Cream/Bottle Gentian Mix 0.068
Helenium autumnale Sneezeweed 0.068
Heliposis helianthoides Early Sunflower 0.068
Hibiscus militaris Rose Mallow 0.273
Iris virginica shrevei Southern Blue Flag 0.273
Liatris pycnostachya Prairie Blazing Star 0.340
Lobelia siphilitica Great Blue Lobelia 0.068
Pedicularis lanceolata Marsh Betony 0.068
Physostegia virginiana Obdient Plant 0.068
Pycnanthemum virginianum Mountain Mint 0.068
Rudbeckia hirta Black-eyed Susan 0.136
Rudbeckia subtomentosa Sweet Black-eyed Susan 0.343
Section 26, Page 26
TABLE 26.24
DETENTION BASIN WET PRAIRIE MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lb. Per
Acre
Rudbeckia triloba Brown-eyed Susan 0.034
Silphium laciniatum Compass Plant 0.273
Silphium perfoliatum Cup Plant 0.136
Silphium terebinthinaceum Prairie Dock 0.204
Solidago riddellii Riddell's Goldenrod 0.068
Soldiago uliginosa Bog Goldenrod 0.032
Thalictrum dasycarpum Purple Meadow Rue 0.204
Verbena hastata Blue Vervain 0.068
Vernonia fasciculata Common Ironweed 0.136
Veronicastrum virginicum Culver's Root 0.032
Zizia aurea Golden Alexanders 0.136
Total Lbs. Per Acre 53.930
Wetland or Fen Buffer Seed Mix(Substitutions may be made with
approval by the Director of Community Development):
TABLE 26.25
LOW PROFILE BROAD SPECTRUM PRAIRIE WITH FLOWER SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lbs. per
Acre
Temporary Matrix
Avena sativa Seed Oats 32.000
Elymus canadensis Prairie Wild Rye 1.000
Hordeum jubatum Squirrel Tail Barley 0.006
Lolium multiflorum Annual Rye 5.000
Phleum pratense Timothy 2.000
Permanent Matrix
Andropogon gerardii Big Blue Stem 0.250
Andropogon scorparius Little Blue Stem 4.000
Bouteloua curtipendula Side Oats Grama 1.750
Panicum virgatum Prairie Switch Grass 0.500
Sorghastrum nutans Indian Grass 0.094
Forbs
Amorpha canescens Lead Plant 0.125
Aster laevis Smooth Blue Aster 0.016
Aster novae angliae New England Aster 0.031
Baptisia leucantha White Wild Indigo 0.078
Section 26, Page 27
TABLE 26.25
LOW PROFILE BROAD SPECTRUM PRAIRIE WITH FLOWER SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name
Lbs. per
Acre
Cassia fasciculata Partridge Pea 0.125
Ceanothus americanus New Jersey Tea 0.031
Coreopsis palmata Prairie Coreopsis 0.031
Dodecatheon meadia Shooting Star 0.016
Echinacea pallida
Pale Purple
Coneflower
0.281
Eryngium yuccifolium Rattlesnake Master 0.188
Lespedeza capitata
Round-Head Bush
Clover
0.125
Liatris aspera Rough Blazing Star 0.125
Liatris pycnostachya Prairie Blazing Star 0.188
Monarda fistulosa Prairie Bergamot 0.031
Parthenium integrifolium Wild Quinine 0.016
Petalostemum candidum White Prairie Clover 0.125
Petalostermum purpureum
Purple Prairie
Clover
0.156
Physostegia virginiana False Dragonhead 0.094
Ratibida pinnata Yellow Coneflower 0.125
Rudbeckia hirta Black-eyed Susan 0.063
Silphium laciniatium Compass Plant 0.006
Solidago nemoralis Old-Field Goldenrod 0.125
Solidago rigida Rigid Goldenrod 0.125
Verbena stricta Hoary Vervain 0.125
Veronicastrum virginicum Culver's Root 0.006
Veronia fasciculata Common Ironweed 0.188
Total Lbs. Per Acre 49.144
TABLE 26.26
SAND PRAIRIE WITH FLOWERS SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name Lbs. per Acre
Temporary Matrix
Avena sativa Seed Oats 32.000
Carex muhlenbergii Sand Sedge 0.063
Elymus canadensis Prairie Wild Rye 1.000
Stipa spartea Porcupine Grass 0.006
Permanent Matrix
Andropogon gerardii Big Blue Stem 0.125
Section 26, Page 28
TABLE 26.26
SAND PRAIRIE WITH FLOWERS SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name Lbs. per Acre
Andropogon hallii Sand Blue Stem 2.000
Andropogon scorparius Little Blue Stem 2.000
Bouteloua curtipendula Side Oats Grama 2.000
Bouteloua gracilis Blue Grama 1.000
Calamovilfa longifolia Sand Reed 1.000
Koeleria cristata June Grass 0.188
Sporobolus cryptandrus Sand Dropseed 0.125
Sporobolus heterolepis Prairie Dropseed 0.006
Sorghastrum nutans Indian Grass 0.063
Forbs
Arnorpha canescens Lead Plant 0.188
Anemone cylindrica Thimbleweed 0.063
Asclepias tuberosa Butterfly Weed 0.063
Aster azureus Sky Blue Aster 0.006
Baptisia leucantha White Wild Indigo 0.063
Cassia fasciculata Partridge Pea 0.156
Ceanothus americanus New Jersey Tea 0.031
Coreopsis lanceolata Sand Coreopsis 0.188
Coreopsis palmata Prairie Coreopsis 0.063
Desmanthus illinoensis
Illinois Bundle
Flower
0.094
Echinacea pallida
Pale Purple
Coneflower
0.25
Eryngium yuccifolium Rattlesnake Master 0.063
Gentiana puberulenta Prarie Gentian 0.006
Lespedeza capitata
Round-Head. Bush
Clover
0.188
Liatris aspera Rough Blazing Star 0.25
Lupinus perennis Wild Lupines 0.125
Monarda fistulosa Prairie Bergamot 0.016
Penstemon grandiflorus
Large-Flowered Beard
Tongue
0.125
Petalostemum candidum White Prairie Clover 0.031
Petalostermum purpureum Purple Prairie Clover 0.094
Polytaenia nutallil Prairie Parsley 0.031
Potentilla arguta Prairie Cinquefoil 0.016
Ratibida pinnata Yellow Coneflower 0.063
Rudbeckia hirta Black-eyed Susan 0.094
Salvia pitcheri Blue Sage 0.063
Solidago nemoralis Old-Field Goldenrod 0.031
Section 26, Page 29
TABLE 26.26
SAND PRAIRIE WITH FLOWERS SEED MIX
Scientific Name Common Name Lbs. per Acre
Solidago rigida Rigid Goldenrod 0.016
Solidago speciosa Showy Goldenrod 0.063
Verbena stricta Hoary Vervain 0.031
Total Lbs. Per Acre 44.047
SECTION 27
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
27.1 CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No Small Wind Energy System (SWES) shall be erected,
constructed, maintained or operated in a zoning district
except in conformance with the following regulations:
27.2 STANDARDS FOR ROOF-MOUNTED SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
A. Number for Residential Districts Except R4: A
maximum of one rotor per principal structure is
permitted on a lot.
B. Number for All Non-Residential Districts and the
R4 District: At least one rotor, with a maximum
of three rotors per acre of building footprint, is
permitted per lot, given the required setbacks and
provided the lot meets the minimum area for the
zoning district.
C. Number in Combination with Ground-Mounted SWES:
Roof-mounted SWES’s may be used in combination
with ground-mounted SWES’s (see Section 27.3-B) to
the extent that the combined number of rotors does
not exceed the greater maximum number allowed
under either standard (generally the groundmounted
standard), given the required setbacks and
other standards.
D. Rotor Diameter/Rotor Height Limit: The rotor
diameter of a horizontal axis SWES and the rotor
height of a vertical axis SWES shall be no more
than 7.5 feet.
E. Height Limit and Ground Clearance: As measured to
the rotor hub, top of the tower, or tip of the
blade in its vertical position, whichever is
higher, a roof-mounted SWES may extend to the
higher of 15 feet above the height limit for the
principal structure or 15 feet above the highest
point of the roof structure. (See illustration
A.)
The distance between the ground and any blades
shall be no less than 20 feet, measured at the
lowest point of the blade in its vertical
position. The distance between the floor of any
unenclosed accessory structure, such as a deck or
balcony, and any blades, shall be no less than 20
feet, measured as above. (See illustration B.)
F. Location: The SWES and its support structure
shall not be attached to or mounted upon any
building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The
SWES shall not be mounted or attached to any
outside wall of a building.
The distance from all lot lines to the pole of a
roof-mounted SWES shall be not less than twothirds
of the height of the SWES, measured from
where the SWES meets the outside surface of the
roof to the rotor hub, top of the tower, or tip of
the blade in its vertical position, whichever is
higher. (See illustrations C & D.)
The distance from any power line or third party
transmission line to the pole of a roof-mounted
SWES shall be not less than 110% of the height of
the SWES, measured from where the SWES meets the
outside surface of the roof to the rotor hub, top
of the tower, or tip of the blade in its vertical
position, whichever is higher.
On flat roofs, the support structure shall be set
back from the side(s) of the building facing a
street at least one-third of the depth of the roof
as it faces the street(s). (See illustration E.)
On pitched roofs, no more than 50 percent of the
support structure shall be mounted to any portion
of the roof facing any street.
27.3 STANDARDS FOR GROUND-MOUNTED SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS1
A. Number for Conditional Use: At least one rotor,
with a maximum of one rotor per acre of lot area,
up to an ultimate maximum number of 15, is
permitted per lot, given the required setbacks and
other standards, and provided the lot meets the
minimum area for the zoning district.
B. Number in Combination with Roof-Mounted SWES:
Ground-mounted SWES’s may be used in combination
with roof-mounted SWES’s (see Section 27.2-C) to
the extent that the combined number of rotors does
not exceed the greater maximum number allowed
under either standard (generally the groundmounted
standard), given the required setbacks and
other standards.
C. Rotor Diameter/Rotor Height Limit: The rotor
diameter of a horizontal axis SWES and the rotor
height of a vertical axis SWES shall be no more
than 13 feet.
D. Height Limit and Ground Clearance: The maximum
height for a ground-mounted SWES shall be 30 feet
above the height limit for the principal
structure, measured from the ground to the rotor
hub, top of the tower, or tip of the blade in its
vertical position, whichever is higher.
The distance between the ground and any blades
shall be no less than 20 feet, measured at the
lowest point of the blade in its vertical
position. The distance between the floor of any
unenclosed accessory structure, such as a deck or
balcony, and any blades, shall be no less than 20
feet, measured as above.
E. Location: The distance from all lot lines or any
building, structure, power line or third party
transmission line to any support base of a groundmounted
SWES shall be not less than 110% of the
height of the SWES, measured from the ground to
the rotor hub, top of the tower, or tip of the
blade in its vertical position, whichever is
higher.
No part of the SWES shall be located within the
required front yard building setback. No part of
the SWES shall be located within or extend over
any easement. No part of the SWES shall extend
over property lines.
F. Pole/tower Access: By design, the support base of
a ground-mounted SWES shall not be climbable for a
distance of 12 feet from the ground.
1By conditional use permit only.
27.4 APPEARANCE STANDARDS
A. Advertising, Illumination Prohibited: No signs,
advertising, or logos shall be permitted on or
attached to any SWES. No mark of any other kind
shall be permitted on, and no illumination shall
be allowed of, any SWES.
B. Color: All SWES’s must be monochromatic, nonreflective
and neutral in color.
C. Acceptable Style: When more than one is located
on a property, the SWES’s shall be uniform in
style and color.
SWES’s that visually appear to be substantially
similar in appearance to the following shall be
permitted:
Horizontal axis: Blades or airfoils with a
singular perpendicular connection to a main rotor
shaft that runs horizontally. Blades rotate like
a propeller or fan with no ring or diffuser
circling the tips of the blades.
Vertical axis: Helical blades or airfoils or a
single set of vertical blades connected at no more
than two horizontal planes to a main rotor shaft
that runs vertically. Blades rotate around the
shaft like an eggbeater or an upended paddle
wheel.
Mounting structure: Monopole. No trusses,
tripods, guy wires, guy towers or frame outside
the blades of the SWES.
27.5 AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING LIMITATIONS
Notwithstanding the above standards, no SWES shall be
erected or operate in a manner contrary to Chapter 26 of the
Municipal Code of the Village of Lake in the Hills, “Airport
Hazard Zoning Regulation,” or Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations.
27.6 NON-INTERFERENCE WITH TELECOMMUNICATIONS
No SWES shall operate in a manner contrary to the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other regulating
body governing interference with microwave, television,
radio or navigation signals.
27.7 DISUSE/DISMANTLING
Any SWES that fails to comply with any law or ordinance of
the Village of Lake in the Hills, shall cease operating
immediately upon receipt of notice of such non-compliance
and shall be brought into compliance within 30 days of the
mailing of such notice or shall be dismantled.
Any SWES that fails to comply with the above notice or
ceases to operate for any three consecutive months in a
residential district or six consecutive months in any other
district will be declared abandoned. A notice to that
effect shall be sent by certified mail to the property
owner.
At the property owner’s expense, an abandoned SWES shall be
dismantled and removed from the property on which it is
located and the property shall be restored to its original
condition within 30 days from the date of mailing the notice
of abandonment.
27.8 ILLUSTRATIONS
ILLUSTRATION A
HEIGHT LIMIT –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
MAXIMUM BUILDING
HEIGHT
HIGHEST POINT OF
ROOF STRUCTURE
15’
Maximum height limit = higher of
highest point of roof structure or
maximum height of building + 15’
20’
ILLUSTRATION B
GROUND CLEARANCE –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
MAXIMUM BUILDING
HEIGHT
HIGHEST POINT OF
ROOF STRUCTURE
15’
Minimum ground/deck
clearance = 20’
DECK
HEIGHT LIMIT –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
SIDE YARD
SIDE LOT LINE
FRONT LOT LINE
STREET
Minimum required lot line
setback of 15’ roof-mounted
SWES: 2/3 x 15’ = 10’
Minimum required lot line
setback of 19’ roof-mounted
SWES: 2/3 x 19’ = 12.67’
ILLUSTRATION C
LOT LINE SETBACK –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
12.67’
10’
ILLUSTRATION D
LOT LINE SETBACK –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
SIDE LOT LINE
Minimum required lot line
setback of 19’ roof-mounted
SWES: 2/3 x 19’ = 12.67’
Minimum required lot line
setback of 15’ roof-mounted
SWES: 2/3 x 15’ = 10’
15’
19’
MAXIMUM BUILDING
HEIGHT
HIGHEST POINT OF
ROOF STRUCTURE
HEIGHT LIMIT –
ROOF-MOUNTED SWES
15’
12.67’
10’
Minimum required roof
setback of 25’ roof depth:
1/3 x 25’ = 8.33’
Minimum required roof
setback of 40’ roof depth:
1/3 x 40’ = 13.33’
25’
8.33’
13.33’
40’
FRONT YARD
FRONT YARD
FRONT LOT LINE
STREET
STREET
ILLUSTRATION E
ROOF SETBACK – FLAT ROOFS
SIDE YARD
Section 28, Page 1
SECTION 28
COLLECTION BINS
28.1 LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to place or
allow to be placed on their property a collection bin without
first making application and securing an annual license from the
Community Development Department.
28.2 LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
28.2-1 Application: An applicant for a collection bin
license shall file an application therefor with
the Community Development Department, on a form
provided by the Department, which application
shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
A. The name, mailing address, telephone number
and electronic mail address of the applicant.
B. The name, mailing address, and telephone
number of the owner of the property on which
the collection bin will be installed or
placed, if different.
C. The street address of the property on which
the collection bin will be installed or
placed.
D. A site plan or aerial depiction of the
property on which the collection bin will be
installed or placed, which site plan or aerial
depiction shall indicate the location of the
proposed collection bin with distances to the
nearest lot lines.
E. Written authorization from the property owner
or authorized management company consenting to
the placement of a collection bin on the
subject property.
Section 28, Page 2
F. Payment of an annual nonrefundable collection
bin license application fee of $25.00. The
fee is per bin or up to 25 sq. ft. of ground
area.
G. Whenever a License needs to be replaced due to
loss, theft, or vandalism, a $2.00 replacement
license must be purchased.
28.2-2 Approval or denial of application; revocation
A. Approval: Upon receipt of a complete
application for a collection bin license, and
upon a determination that the application
satisfies the standards and conditions set
forth in the Section, the Community Services
Director or designee shall approve the
application and issue a collection bin license
to the applicant. The Community Services
Director or designee may condition approval of
the application upon additional provisions or
restrictions that are consistent with the
provisions set forth in this Section.
B. Denial or revocation: The Community Services
Director or designee may revoke a collection
bin license or deny an application for a
collection bin license upon a determination
that:
1. The application contains any false,
fraudulent or misleading material
statement.
2. Either the application or the proposed
donation collection bin does not satisfy
the standards and conditions set forth in
this Section.
3. The applicant has made false, fraudulent or
misleading material statement in the course
Section 28, Page 3
of operating a collection bin in the
Village.
4. The applicant has previously violated any
statue, ordinance, rule or regulation
relating to the operation of a collection
bin in the Village.
5. Installation, placement or operation of the
proposed collection bin will be injurious
to the public health safety or welfare.
C. Notification of denial or revocation: Upon
the revocation of an existing collection bin
license or the denial of an application
therefor, the Community Services Director or
designee shall notify the applicant by first
class mail.
D. License term: Each license issued pursuant to
this Section shall terminate on the 30th day
of April following its issuance.
28.3 STANDARDS
28.3-1 A license shall not be issued for a collection bin
unless it demonstrates compliance with the following
standards:
A. May only be placed on properties within the
permitted zoning districts as stated in
Section 11 of this Code.
B. Shall not be located on vacant properties or
where the collection bin is the principal
structure on the lot.
C. Shall not be placed within a required parking
space.
D. Shall not be placed within a required front
yard or within 10 feet of a side or rear lot
line.
Section 28, Page 4
E. Shall not be located in a drive-aisle or
located in such a manner as to cause a sight
obstruction for motorist.
F. Shall not reduce any sidewalk or paved space
designed for the passage of pedestrians to
less than 5 feet in width.
G. No more than three collection bins shall be
allowed on a zoning lot less than two (2)
acres in size. No more than four collection
bins shall allowed on a zoning lot equal to or
greater than two (2) acres in size.
H. No more than one collection bin operator is
allowed on a zoning lot.
I. Shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height and
twenty-five (25) square feet in ground area.
J. Shall be located on concrete or a paved
surface.
K. Shall contain the following contact
information clearly visible from the front of
the bin: the name, address, e-mail, and phone
number of the owner/operator. The collection
bin shall also include a legible notice
prohibiting the placement of items outside the
bin.
L. Shall not contain any advertising, beyond the
owner/operator of the bin.
28.4 MAINTENANCE
Collection bins shall be maintained in good condition with no
structural damage, holes, or visible rust. All bins shall be
free of debris and shall be serviced regularly so as to prevent
overflow of donations or the accumulation of junk, debris or
other material. Failure to maintain and operate the collection
bins in accordance with these regulations may result in
revocation of the license.
Section 29, Page 1
SECTION 29
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
29.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to define appropriately cited
solar energy systems (SES) as an inherently beneficial use for
all residential and commercial properties. Solar energy systems
preserve the Village’s public health, safety, and welfare by
reducing the carbon footprint of each property by creating a
clean, renewable energy source. Despite its inherent qualities,
this section will restrict the use of solar energy systems so as
to promote their compatibility with existing and future land
uses as described in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan.
29.2 CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
No solar energy system shall be erected, constructed,
maintained, or operated in a zoning district except in
conformance with the following regulations.
29.3 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
29.3-1 SESs shall be installed under an appropriate
building permit and in compliance with Village
adopted building codes.
29.3-2 No SEEs shall be constructed over existing
easements or onsite wastewater systems (e.g.
septic systems).
29.3-3 SESs over one-half acre in area require approval
of the Federal Aviation Administration. Approval
shall be in the form of a letter from the FAA
showing no impact following review of the planned
system. Request for review shall be on an FAA
Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction or
Section 29, Page 2
Alteration, which may be submitted online at the
FAA’s website.
29.3-4 Roof and building mounted SES’s shall comply with
applicable height and setback standards for the
appropriate use district as an integral part of
the building structure. The collector surface
and mounting devices for roof-mounted SESs shall
not extend more than 12 inches beyond the roof
edge or exterior perimeter of the principal
structure.
29.3-5 Ground-mounted SESs shall comply with applicable
height, setback, and lot coverage standards for
the appropriate use district and Sections 13 and
15 of this Zoning Ordinance. The Community
Services Director may approve use of eight-foot
chain link fencing for security purposes in Class
2 and 3 systems if it does not adversely impact
adjacent properties.
29.3-6 For purposes of determining compliance with
maximum lot coverage of buildings and structures
standards of the applicable zoning district, the
total horizontal projection area of all groundmounted
and free-standing solar collectors,
including solar photovoltaic cells, panels,
arrays, inverters, and solar hot air or water
collection devices, shall be considered 10
percent impervious coverage if the soil under the
collector is not compacted and is maintained in
vegetation and the equipment is oriented to drain
precipitation to the pervious surface.
A. For a tracing array or other moveable SESs,
horizontal projection area shall be
calculated at a 33 degree tilt angle.
B. Portions of SESs mounted over existing
impervious surfaces shall not be included in
the lot coverage area computation.
Section 29, Page 3
C. If vegetative cover is used within the
previous coverage area, the area must be
adequate to ensure the health and proper
growth of the vegetation.
29.3-7 When more than one roof-mounted or ground-mounted
system is located on a parcel, the SESs shall be
reasonably uniform in style and color as judged
by the Village’s Planning and Zoning Commission.
29.3-8 Written evidence shall be provided at the time a
building permit is requested that the utility
company has been notified of the customer’s
intent to install a SES.
29.4 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS, CLASS 2 & 3
29.4-1 If lighting is provided, it shall be shielded and
downcast such that the light does not spill onto
any adjacent parcel or the night sky. No solar
collectors shall have supplemental external
lighting.
29.4-2 Landscape buffering
A. SESs located at least 150 feet from an
adjacent public street right of way,
residentially zoned property, or residential
use shall not require screening.
B. SESs located less than 15 feet from an
adjacent public street right of way,
residentially zoned property, or residential
use shall require landscaping as prescribed
in Section 26.4, Perimeter Landscaping, of
this ordinance. In this application, the
perimeter landscaping may be placed at the
perimeter of the parcel, the perimeter of
the SES, or any location in between.
Section 29, Page 4
29.4-3 Have approval of the project from the electrical
distribution agency serving the site before a
building permit is issued.
29.4-4 Decommissioning Plan
A. A decommissioning plan signed by the party
responsible for decommissioning and the
landowner (if different) acceptable to the
zoning official and addressing the following
shall be submitted with the construction
permit application.
i. Conditions upon which decommissioning
will be initiated.
ii. Removal of all non-utility-owned
equipment, conduit, structures, fencing,
roads, and foundations.
iii. Restoration of property to the
conditions prior to the development of the
SES or to a condition similar to the
existing conditions around the SES at the
time of decommissioning.
iv. Time frame for completion of
decommissioning activities.
v. Copy of any agreement with the land
owner regarding decommissioning.
vi. Plans for updating the decommissioning
plan.
B. Before the final inspection, provide a copy
of the completed agreement showing it was
recorded with McHenry County against the
parcel.
Section 29, Page 5
29.5 APPEARANCE STANDARDS
29.5-1 No signs, advertising, or logos shall be
permitted on or attached to any SES except for
appropriate or required security and safety
signage.
29.6 DISUSE/DISMANTLING
Any SES that fails to comply with any law or ordinance of the
Village of Lake in the Hils shall cease operating immediately
upon receipt of notice of such non-compliance and shall be
brought into compliance within 30 days of the mailing of such
notice or shall be dismantled. Any SES that fails to comply
with the above notice or ceases to operate for any six
consecutive months will be declared abandoned. A notice to that
effect shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner.
At the property owner’s expense, an abandoned SES shall be
dismantled and removed from the property on which it is located
and the property shall be restored to its original condition
within 60 days from the date of mailing the notice of
abandonment.
SECTION 30
FEES
Each applicant for approval or relief pursuant to this Zoning
Code shall pay the fees applicable thereto. Such fees shall be
established by the Board of Trustees from time to time. Such
fees shall be paid to the Village Treasurer, who shall give a
receipt therefor. Each applicant shall, in addition to paying
such fees, bear the cost of public notice when public notice of
hearings is required; bear the cost of publication of ordinances
when publication of ordinances is required; and bear the cost of
all fees and expenses incurred by the Village, including but not
limited to fees charged by a professional land consultant,
landscape consultant, attorneys' fees and engineers' fees, when
those fees are incurred by the Village regarding any applications
for zoning amendments, use permits, certificates of use and
occupancy variations and application for planned development.
SECTION 31
INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Code,
those provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the safety, health, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this
Zoning Code to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any
ordinance, rules or regulations previously adopted and not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code, or
which shall be adopted, relating to the use of buildings or
premises, nor is it intended by this Zoning Code to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties, except that where this Zoning Code
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by such other ordinances or
such easements, covenants or other agreements, the provisions
of this Zoning Code shall apply and shall control.
Section 32 Page 1
SECTION 32
VIOLATIONS; PENALTY
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any provisions of this Zoning Code shall be
fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
Section 33 Page 1
SECTION 33
VALIDITY
If any section, clause, or provision of this Zoning Code is
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that
declaration shall not affect the validity of any part of this
Zoning Code other than that specific part so declared to be
invalid, nor shall such declaration affect the validity of any
different application of such part so declared to be invalid.