VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-1 OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: File Copy
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE: Upon adoption by the Village Board, this Village Code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of
Lincolnshire. This Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as
the LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by
authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided
in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney,
acting for said Village Board. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general
penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when
reference is made to this Village Code by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE: This Village Code, as hereby amended in printed form,
shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of
general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated
in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (1984 Code)
1-1-3: FILE COPY: Three (3) copies of this Village Code shall be kept on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form. It shall be the
express duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized by him, to insert in
their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the
intention of the Village Board to make the same a part of such Municipal
Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to
extract from such Municipal Code all provisions which may from time to time
be repealed by the Village Board. These copies of the Village Code shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be
considered the official General Municipal Code of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
(1971 Code, 1-6; and 1984 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS: It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to
change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this
Village Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or
tamper with same in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Village to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall
be punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1971 Code, 69-3)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-2 SAVING CLAUSE
Page 1
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES: All general ordinances of the
Village passed prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby
repealed, except such as are included in this Village Code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES: No ordinance relating to railroads or
railroad crossings with streets and other public ways or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be replaced by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to
repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly
repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance
or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or
any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way
whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim
arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that proceedings
thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such
proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-2 SAVING CLAUSE
Page 2
the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after
the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new
provisions upon the same subject or to any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action
now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in
this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as
waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Village Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: If any section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any part
thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part
thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1984 Code)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-3 DEFENITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRICTION
Revised 01/28/08 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Official Time
1-3-3: Corporate Seal; Use and Custody
1-3-4: General Definitions
1-3-5: Catchlines of Sections
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS: Whenever any word in any section of this
Village Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to
any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be
deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been
used. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village
Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine
gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males
and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section of this Village Code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been
changed in the content of this Village Code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original
ordinances.
Interpretation of other word usage shall be as follows:
COMPUTATION OF TIME The time within which any act provided by law is
to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last, unless the last day is or Sunday a legal holiday, and then it shall also
be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday
or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
IN THE VILLAGE The words "in the Village" or "within the Village" mean
and include all territory over which the Village now has or shall hereafter
acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory
powers.
OR, AND "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-3 DEFENITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRICTION
Revised 01/28/08 Page 2
SHALL The word "shall" as used herein is mandatory, while the word "may"
is permissive.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING The words "written" or "in writing" may include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to be affixed to any official
or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting
or such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1971
Code, §1-7-1)
1-3-2: OFFICIAL TIME: Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the
Village for the transaction of all Village business, except that from two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the last Sunday in April of each year official time for
the Village shall be advanced one hour, and at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on
the last Sunday in October of each year such official time shall be returned
to Central Standard Time by the deduction or retarding of one hour.
A. When the words "Daylight Saving" or "Daylight Saving Time" are used in
any official documents or contracts it shall be understood to have reference
to the time herein fixed for the period from the last Sunday in April to the last
Sunday in October in each calendar year.
B. All legal or official proceedings of the Village Board of the Village and of
official business of the Village shall be regulated by the time herein
established and when by ordinance, resolution or action of any Municipal
officer or body, an act must be performed at or within a prescribed time, it
shall be performed according to the official time herein prescribed.
C. All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises
maintained or controlled by the Village shall be set and run according to the
official time as provided in this Section, and it is hereby made the duty of the
officer or other person having control and charge of such buildings and
premises to see that the clocks or other timepieces are set and run in
accordance with the official time provided by this subsection.
D. All persons residing within the Village and all persons doing business within
the Village are hereby requested to set and run any and all clocks or other
timepieces under their control within the Village in accordance with the
official time as provided by this subsection. (1971 Code, §1-7-7)
1-3-3: CORPORATE SEAL; USE AND CUSTODY:1 The Corporate seal of the
Village shall be and remain in the custody of the Village Clerk, to be used in
all cases provided for by any provisions of this Code or other ordinances of
the Village or the laws of the State, and in all such cases whereby the laws
and customs of any state or nation the use of the Corporate Seal of the
Village becomes necessary. (1971 Code, §1-7-5)
1 See Section 1-6B-3-1J of this Title
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-3 DEFENITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRICTION
Revised 01/28/08 Page 3
1-3-4: GENERAL DEFINITIONS: In the interpretation and construction of this
Code, the following definitions shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Village Board or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
ACTION - Includes suits, prosecution and all judicial proceedings.
BOARD - The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lincolnshire,
Illinois. This shall be synonymous with Village Board.
COUNTY - The County of Lake in the State of Illinois. (1971 Code, §1-7-1)
FISCAL YEAR - The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on January 1 of
each calendar year. (Amd. Ord. 08-3021-04, eff. 1/28/08)
MAYOR - The Mayor of the Village of Lincolnshire.
MONTH - A calendar month.
OCCUPANT or TENANT - Applied to buildings or land, any person who
holds a written or an oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
OFFICER - Whenever the title of any Village officer is used, it shall be
construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Lincolnshire".
OWNER - Applied to buildings or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant of the whole or
a part or the holder of any beneficial interest of such building land.
PERSON - Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association
or any city state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY - Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined by this Section.
PRESIDENT - The President of the Village of Lincolnshire or the Mayor of
the Village of Lincolnshire, the word President and Mayor being
synonymous.
PROPERTY - Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WAY - Includes streets and sidewalks.
REAL PROPERTY - Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
shall embrace all chattels real.
SEAL - The Seal of the Village of Lincolnshire.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-3 DEFENITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRICTION
Revised 01/28/08 Page 4
SIDEWALK - That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE - The State of Illinois.
STREET or HIGHWAY - The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of what ever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TRUSTEE OF THE VILLAGE - The Trustees of the Village holding office.
This term shall not include the Mayor. The Trustees of the Village may be
referred in this Code as “Trustees”.
VILLAGE - The Village of Lincolnshire in Lake County, State of Illinois,
except as otherwise provided.
VILLAGE BOARD - The Mayor and all Trustees then holding office.
YEAR - A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1971 Code, §1-7-1)
1-3-5: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS: The catchlines of the several sections of this
Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of
such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so
provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1971 Code, §1-7-2)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-4 GENERAL PENALTY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability of Officers
1-4-4: Summons, Warrant for Violation
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY: Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the
Village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this Code or any ordinance shall be subject to the fine set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. Each day
any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed, for violation of this
Code or any ordinance of the Village, upon the order of the court or
magistrate before whom the conviction is had, may be committed to the
County jail until the fine, penalty, and costs are full paid. No imprisonment,
however, shall exceed six (6) months for any one offense.1 (1971 Code, §1-
7-3)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS: The penalty provided in this Chapter
shall be applicable to every section of this Village Code the same as though
it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a
violation of any section of this Village Code where any duty is prescribed or
obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is
forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this Village Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Village Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be
had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
165 ILSC 5/1-2-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-4 GENERAL PENALTY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 2
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Village Code and there shall be no
fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply.
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS: No provision of this Village Code designating
the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such
officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to
perform such duty, unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such
fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly
expressed in the section creating the duty. (1984 Code)
1-4-4: SUMMONS, WARRANT FOR VIOLATION: In all actions for the violation of
this Code or any ordinance of the Village, the first process shall be a
summons or a warrant. A warrant for the arrest of an accused person may
issue upon the affidavit of any person that this Code or an ordinance has
been violated, and that the person making the complaint has reasonable
grounds to believe that the party charged is guilty thereof. Every person
arrested upon a warrant, without unnecessary delay, shall be taken before
the proper officer for trial. (1971 Code, §1-7-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-5 MAYOR AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Revised 1/14/04 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Mayor
1-5-2: Village Board of Trustees
1-5-3: Meetings of the Village Board
1-5-3-1: Regular and Special Meetings
1-5-3-2: Mayor as Presiding Officer
1-5-3-3: Committees
1-5-3-4: Voting Requirements
1-5-3-5: Rules of Order
1-5-1: MAYOR:
A. Designation as Mayor: Pursuant to Section 1-1-2.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the Village President may be referred to as the Mayor of this Village.
(1971 Code, §2-1-1)
B. Election; Term of Office: The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4)
years and until his successor is elected and qualified, as provided by
Statute, and shall be the President of the Board of Trustees. (1971 Code,
§2-1-2)
C. Bond, Oath and Compensation: Before entering upon the duties of his
office, the Mayor shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the
Village Board conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties
in the sum as set forth under Section 1-6 of this Code. The Mayor shall take
the oath of office as prescribed by statute,1 and shall receive such
compensation for the performance of his duties as Mayor, as may be from
time to time established by the Trustees of the Village. (1971 Code, §2-1-5)
D. President Pro-Tem; Acting President:
1. During the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the Trustees of
the Village shall elect one of its members to act as President pro-tem,
who during the absence or disability of the Mayor shall perform the
duties pertinent to the office.
1 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-5 MAYOR AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Revised 1/14/04 Page 2
2. Whenever vacancy in the office of the Mayor occurs during his other
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next
municipal election, unless the vacancy is filled by a special election, as
provided by Statute. During the period from the time that the vacancy
occurs until a Mayor is elected, and has qualified, the vacancy may be
filled by the election of an acting Mayor by the Trustees of the Village.
(1971 Code, §2-1-6)
E. Duties:
1. General: The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Village,
and he shall perform all such duties as may be required by Statute or
ordinance. The Mayor shall have supervision over all employees of the
Village. The Mayor shall have the power and authority to inspect, at any
reasonable time, all books and records kept by any Village officer and
employee. (1971 Code, §2-1-3)
2. Designation of Duties: Whenever there is a question as to the respective
powers or duties of any appointed officer of the Village, this shall be
settled by the Mayor who shall have the power to delegate to any such
officer, any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has
been directed to perform the duty. (1971 Code, §2-1-4)
3. Issuance of Permits and Licenses: The Mayor shall sign all permits
granted by the Village Board and grant all licenses, except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance or this Code. (1971 Code, §2-1-7)
Powers as to Litigation: The Mayor shall sign, and is authorized to sign
on behalf of the Village, all instruments necessary to the prompt
prosecution or defense of any or all actions brought by or against the
Village, including bonds for injunction. (1971 Code, §2-1-8)
1-5-2: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A. Election; Functions: The members of the Village Board of Trustees
(“Trustees of the Village”), consisting of six (6) persons, shall be elected
to office for four (4) year terms, according to the method provided by
Statute. The trustees of the Village, along with the Mayor, where
appropriate, shall be the legislative department of the Village
government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as
may be delegated by Statute to it.1
1 65 ILCS 5/3-11-9
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-5 MAYOR AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Revised 1/14/04 Page 3
B. Oath, Salary: The Trustees of the Village shall take the oath of office
prescribed by Statute. They shall receive such compensation for
performance of their duties as Trustees as may be from time to time
fixed by ordinance. (1971 Code, §2-2-2)
1-5-3: MEETINGS OF THE VILLAGE BOARD:
1-5-3-1: REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS:
A. Time of Regular Meetings: The Village Board shall hold its regular meetings
on the second and fourth Monday of each month at such time, date and
place as provided in the annual notice and schedule of regular meetings
given in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.2 (Ord. 82-695-02;
Amd. Ord. 93-1274-04 eff. 3/8/93)(Amd. Ord. 03-1885-62, eff. 12/8/03)
B. Time of Committee of the Whole Meetings: A Committee of the Whole
Meeting shall be held by the Village Board on the second and fourth
Mondays of each month, at such time, date and place as provided in the
annual notice and schedule of regular meetings given in accordance with
the Illinois Open Meetings Act. (amd. Ord. 93-1309-39 eff. 11/22/93) (amd.
Ord. 93-1313-43 eff. 12/20/93)(Amd. Ord. 03-1885-62, eff. 12/8/03)
C. Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings of the Village Board shall be
open to the public. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may adjourn any
meeting to go into closed session as may be provided by law. (1971 Code,
§2-7-10)
D. Quorum: A majority of the Trustees of the Village or three (3) Trustees and
the Mayor shall constitute a quorum of the Village Board. (1971 Code, §2-7-
8)
2 5 ILCS 120/1
E. A special meeting of the Village Board of Trustees shall be held at the
written request of the Mayor or any two Trustees of the Village. The special
meeting shall be held as soon as is practicable after the written request that
one be held is received by the Village Clerk or his or her deputy. (Ord. No.
03-1825-02, eff. 1/13/03)
1-5-3-2: MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER: The Mayor shall be the presiding
officer of all regular and special meetings of the Village Board at all times
when the Board meets as a committee of the whole. The Mayor shall be an
ex-officio member of all committees and boards of the Village but without
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-5
Page 4
Revised 1/14/04
the power to vote on those committees and boards except as otherwise
designated. (1971 Code, §2-7-4)
1-5-3-3: COMMITTEES:
A. There shall be a Committee of the Whole consisting of the Mayor and all
Trustees of the Village which shall meet on as "as needed" basis, but shall
take no final action.
B. The Mayor shall also appoint individual Trustees to act as liaison to the
following Boards and Commissions and/or the following subject area:
Zoning Board (Ord. Amd. 03-1882-59, eff. 11/10/03)
Architectural Review Board
Finance and Human Resources
Public Works
Public Safety and Legal
Parks and Recreation
(Ord. 93-1279-09 eff. 3/8/93)
C. All special committees shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Village Board. (Ord. 81-686-39; and. Ord. 83-763-17)
1-5-3-4: VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Mayor to Have Deciding Vote: The Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution or motion except (1) where the vote of the Trustees of the Village
has resulted in a tie; or (2) where one-half (1/2) of the Trustees of the
Village elected have voted in favor of an ordinance resolution or motion
even though there is no tie vote; or (3) where a vote greater than a majority
of the corporate authorities is required by law to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion. In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote.
Nothing in this Section shall deprive an acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem from
voting in the capacity of Trustee of the Village but shall not also be entitled
to another vote in the capacity of acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem.
B. Voting on Ordinances; Veto:
1. Every ordinance and resolution shall be reduced to writing and
presented to the Village Board before a vote is taken.
2. The passage of all ordinances for whatever purposes, and of any
resolution or motion (1) to create any liability against the Village or (2)
for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the
concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office of the
Village Board, unless otherwise expressly provided by law.
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-5
Page 5
Revised 1/14/04
All such designated resolutions and motions and all ordinances shall be
decided by a roll call vote, the result of which vote shall be recorded. All
ordinances passed by the Village Board shall be deposited with the
Village Clerk. If the Mayor approves of them, the Mayor shall sign them.
Those which are disapproved shall be returned to the Trustees with
specific written objections at the next regular meeting of the Village
Board occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The
Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any
ordinance, resolution, or motion making a appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove
entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If
the Mayor fails to return any ordinance, resolution or motion with his
written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective
despite the absence of the Mayor’s signature. (1971 Code, §2-7-6)
Every resolution, motion or ordinance which has been disapproved by
the Mayor and returned to the Trustees shall be voted upon again by the
Trustees. If two thirds of all the Trustees then holding office then vote to
adopt the resolution, motion or ordinance despite the Mayor’s
disapproval, it shall become effective.
C. Procedure of Reconsideration: Vote of the Village Board upon the adoption
of an ordinance, resolution or motion may be reconsidered at the same
meeting at which the vote was taken or at the next regular meeting on
motion of any Trustee not present at the time the ordinance, motion or
resolution was adopted, or on the motion of any Trustee previously voting
on the prevailing side of the ordinance, motion or resolution. However, no
ordinance, resolution or motion shall be rescinded except by the same
number of votes which were required to pass the matter sought to be
reconsidered.
No vote of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be reconsidered at a
special meeting, unless there are present at that special meeting as many
of the Mayor and Board of Trustees as were present when the vote was
taken. (1971 Code, §2-7-7)
1-5-3-5: RULES OF ORDER: The following rules of order shall be adhered to in all
cases, but the same maybe suspended when no objections are made, or
upon a vote of a majority of the Village Board, except Rules 4, 7, and 12:
(1971 Code, §2-7-9)
Rule 1. The order of business at all regular meetings of the Village
Board shall be as follows:
1. A fifteen (15) minute period prior to the beginning of the regular meeting
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-5
Page 6
Revised 1/14/04
for an informal gathering of the Village Board to receive citizen
comments.
2. Roll Call.
3. The minutes of the proceedings of the last meeting shall be read and
approved.
4. Reports of Village Officers.
A. Mayor
B. Village Clerk
C. Village Treasurer
D. Village Manager
5. Payment of Bills.
6. Petitions and Communications.
7. Citizens wishing to address the Village Board on agenda items.
8. Consent Agenda. An item shall be removed from the Consent Agenda at
the request of any one Trustee. Any such item so removed shall then be
considered during unfinished business. A roll call shall be taken on
approval of the Consent Agenda and recorded in the minutes.
9. Reports of General Business.
A. Planning, Zoning and Land Use.
B. Finance and Administration.
C. Public Works.
D. Public Safety.
E. Parks and Recreation.
F. Judiciary and Personnel.
10.Reports of Special Committees.
11.Unfinished Business.
12.New Business.
13.Executive Session
14.Adjournment (Ord. 83-763-17; amd. Ord. 93-1279-09 eff. 3/8/93)
Rule 2. The Mayor shall decide all questions of order and in all cases
where these rules are not applicable, the Village Board shall be
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-5
Page 7
Revised 1/14/04
governed by parliamentary law as laid down in Roberts' Rules of
Order.
Rule 3. Trustees discussing a question shall address the Mayor and no
Trustee shall be deemed to have the floor until recognized by
the Mayor.
Persons who are not Trustees shall be permitted to address the
Village Board only as established by the agenda or with
permission of the Mayor or the majority of the Trustees.
Rule 4. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances, and upon all propositions to create any liability
against the Village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its
money, and in all other cases at the request of the Mayor or any
Trustee, which shall be entered on the journal of its
proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of all the Village
Board shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance
or proposition unless otherwise provided by Statute.
Rule 5. All resolutions and amendments shall be reduced to writing
before action shall be taken.
Rule 6. Standing and special committees, to whom references are
made, shall in all cases make their reports in writing.
Rule 7. Upon the request of any two (2) Trustees present final action on
any report to the Village Board relating to any Ordinance,
Resolution or motion shall be deferred to the next regular
meeting of the Village Board. (amd. 94-1365-49 eff. 10/10/94)
Rule 8. No bill against the Village shall be allowed by the Village Board
until the same has been referred to an appropriate committee
for examination unless otherwise ordered, and in all cases,
receipts for money paid out and proper vouchers shall
accompany each bill.
Rule 9. Every member who shall be present when a question is stated
by the chair shall vote thereon, unless excused by the rest of
the Village Board, or unless the person is directly interested in
the question, in which case the person’s action shall be
governed by applicable law.
Rule 10. When a question is before the Village Board, no motion shall be
in order but these: (1) to adjourn; (2) to lay on the table; (3) for
the previous question; (4) to postpone indefinitely; (5) to
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-5
Page 8
Revised 1/14/04
postpone to a certain time; (6) to commit; (7) to amend. These
motions shall be privileged and have precedence in the order in
which they are made to succeed each other by this rule; and
motions to adjourn, to lay on the table, and for the previous
question shall be decided without debate.
Rule 11. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order except (1) when a
member is in possession of the floor, (2) when the yeas and
nays are being called, (3) when the members are voting, (4)
when adjournment was the last preceding motion, (5) when it
has been decided that the previous question shall be taken; and
the "previous question" shall be as follows: "Shall the main
question now be put?"
Rule 12. The Village Manager, under the direction of the Mayor, shall
prepare an agenda (including Consent Agenda) for each
meeting of the Village Board. The Consent Agenda shall include
all items of a routine and noncontroversial nature. The Village
Manager shall be responsible for determining what items are
subject to placement on the Consent Agenda. The Consent
Agenda shall include a specific enumeration of the various
items and the proposed action relating thereto. Any such item
on the Consent Agenda is subject to removal at the request of
the Mayor or Trustee at the Board meeting as indicated above
in Rule 1. (Ord. 79-570-17)
Rule 13. amd. 94-1365-49, eff. 10/10/94 - deleted in its entirety
Rule 14. No Ordinance or Resolution need be presented or read at a
regular Village Board Meeting more than once before being
acted upon, and the same may be acted upon at the same
meeting at which it is first introduced, so long as the Ordinance
or Resolution was read and considered at at least one prior
Committee of the Whole Meeting held by the Village Board.
(Ord. 93-1274-04, eff. 3/8/93) (Amd. Ord. 93-1315-45, eff.
12/20/93)
If an Ordinance or Resolution is presented for the first time at a
regular Village Board Meeting, however, it may be acted upon
without a second reading at a subsequent Regular Village
Board Meeting upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees
present voting on a motion to waive first reading and to permit
action on the Ordinance or Resolution at the meeting at which it
is first introduced. (Amd. Ord. 93-1315-45, eff. 12/20/93)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Personnel Manual Adopted
1-6-2: Official Bonds
1-6-3: Salaries
1-6-4: Public Works Wage Rates
1-6-5: Participation in Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-6-6: Payment of Moneys to Village Treasurer
1-6-7: Conflict of Interest Policy
1-6-8: Hiring Policy
1-6-1: PERSONNEL MANUAL ADOPTED: There is hereby adopted a document
known as the Employee Handbook containing the rules and regulations
governing the operation of the personnel activities of the Village, and as
may be amended from time to time with the approval of the Village Board,
and three copies of said document will be kept in the office of the Village
Clerk for public inspection. (Amend Ord. 97-1489-13)(Amend Ord. 98-1558-
20)(Amend Ord. 98-1599-61)(Amd. Ord. 00-1699-07, eff. 2/14/00)(Amd. Ord. 00-
1710-18, eff. 5/8/00)(Amd. Ord. 00-1728-36, eff. 8/7/00)(Amd. Ord. 01-1755-13,
eff. 4/23/01)(Amd. Ord. 01-1778-36, eff. 9/10/01)(Amd. Ord. 02-1804-14, eff.
5/13/02)(Amd. Ord. 03-1847-24, eff. 5/12/03)(Amd. Ord. 05-1964-28, eff.
4/25/05)(Amd. Ord. 05-1967-31, eff. 5/9/05)(Amd. Ord. 06-2037-29, eff.
5/22/06)(Amd. Ord. 06-2969-61, eff. 12/11/06)(Amd. Ord. 08-3018-01, eff.
01/14/08)(Amd. Ord. 08-3030-13, eff. 04/14/08)(Amend Ord. 08-3075-58, eff.
12/8/08)(Amd. Ord. 09-3120-43, eff. 12/14/09)(Amd. Ord. 11-3221-43, eff.
12/12/11)
1-6-2: OFFICIAL BONDS:
A. Requirement; Sureties: The bond of each officer shall be in the favor of the
Village, and be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
office and the payment to the proper officers all monies coming into the
person’s hands by virtue of office. The sums stated in such justification on
the bond of any officer shall, in the aggregate, amount to the penalty of
such bond.
Only surety companies licensed to carry on business in Illinois shall be
acceptable sureties in the Village of Lincolnshire. Individual sureties will not
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 2
be accepted. The bond shall be executed by an officer of the surety before
some person authorized to take acknowledgments. After the approval by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk shall endorse the date
of approval on the bond. (1971 Code, §2-6-1)
B. Bond Schedule: The amount of the official bonds required by this Code
shall be as follows:
Mayor $3,000.00
Village Manager $10,000.00
Village Attorney $1,000.00
Collector $10,000.00
Finance Director $10,000.00
Treasurer $10,000.00
All other offices $1,000.00
(Ord. 75-402-32; amd. 0rd. 87-927-13)
C. Failure of Officers to Qualify: No officer shall be commissioned until the
required bond has been given. (1971 Code, §2-6-3)
D. Payment of Bond Premium: All premiums charged by the corporate sureties
on bonds shall be paid by the Village out of its general funds, and in no
case, by the individual officer furnishing the bond. (1971 Code, §2-6-4)
1-6-3: SALARIES: The salary of all officers, employees and appointees shall be
the amounts fixed by the annual appropriation ordinance. (1971 Code, §2-
10)
1-6-4: PUBLIC WORKS WAGE RATES: To the extent and as required by "An act
regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workmen employed in
any public works by the State, county, city or any public body or any political
subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works," approved June
26, 1941, as amended,1 the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality
for laborers, mechanics and other workmen engaged in the construction of
public works coming under the jurisdiction of this Village is hereby
ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction
work in Lake County areas as determined by the Department of Labor of
the State of Illinois, a copy of that contained shall be construed to apply
said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction of this Village to the extent
required by the aforesaid act.
1
820 ILCS 130/1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 3
The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of this Village this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage and shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses,
requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the
particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates.
The Village Clerk shall also promptly file a certified copy of this Section with
both the Secretary of State and the Department of Labor of the State of
Illinois. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of a certified copy with the
Secretary of State, the Village Clerk shall cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the area a copy hereof and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and that
this is the determination of this public body. (Ord. 81-670-23)
1-6-5: PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND: The
Village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund effective January 1, 1977, and the Village Clerk be and is hereby
directed to promptly file a certified copy hereof with the Village Board of the
Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund. (Ord. 76-454-84)
1-6-6: PAYMENT OF MONEYS TO DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL SYSTEMS: Any
money intended for the Village, coming into the hands of any officer or
employee of the Village, shall immediately be turned over to the Director of
Financial Systems. (1971 Code, §2-9)
1-6-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY: There is hereby adopted and made a
part hereof by reference a conflict of interest policy to govern the
relationship between the Village and its elected or appointed officials, and
supervisory Village employees, including but not restricted to Village
Manager, Village Treasurer, Chief of Police, and Building Inspector.
Among other things, said conflict of interest policy requires the filing of an
annual questionnaire relating to the economic interests of the Village's
elected or appointed officials, and supervisory Village employees except
when such official or employee is required by the Illinois Governmental
Ethics Act to file a Statement of Economic Interest with the Lake County
Clerk and who, in fact, timely files such a statement with the Lake County
Clerk. determination being incorporated herein by reference. The definition
of any terms appearing in this Section which are also used in the aforesaid
act shall be the same as in said act. Nothing herein Said questionnaire to
be filed annually by May 15 of each calendar year with the firm of Peat,
Marwick, Mitchell and Company, Chicago, Illinois, the present public
accounting firm of the Village, or such other public accounting firm
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 4
employed by the Village from time to time. This filing requirement does not,
and shall not, apply to professional consultants appointed and/or hired by
the Village for professional services, including the Village Engineer, Village
Attorney, Land Planning Consultant and Public Accounting Auditor.
The failure of any elected or appointed Village official or supervisory Village
employee to file a complete and accurate questionnaire by May 15 of each
calendar year will constitute grounds for removal or disbarment from office,
and in the case of supervisory Village employees, dismissal of any such
employee in the discretion of the Village Board. (Ord. 73-313-28)
1-6-8: HIRING POLICY: (Deleted per Ord. 01-1779-37, effective 9/10/01)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 5
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Creation of Office; Appointment
1-6A-2: Qualifications
1-6A-3: Duties
1-6A-4: Removal from Office
1-6A-5: Village Collector
1-6A-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT: There is hereby created the
office of Village Manager. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the Trustees as signified by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Village Board then holding office, and for
such compensation as the Village Board shall determine.
1-6A-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Desirable Knowledge, Skills, Abilities and Experience: Applicants for the
position of Village Manager shall have the following qualifications:
Graduation from an approved college or university with specialization in
public and/or business administration with a master's degree in Public
Administration preferred.
Experience as a Village Manager, or any equivalent combination of training
and experience.
Proven executive and administrative qualifications with respect to controlling
and supervising the operations, personnel and functions of a municipality.
B. Residency Not Required: The Village Manager need not be a resident of
the Village.
1-6A-3: DUTIES: The Village Manager shall have the following duties:
A. To administer and enforce all policies, directives, laws and ordinances
adopted by the Village Board; to oversee the administration of all Municipal
departments; to review departmental procedures and to determine that
recommendations are carried out.
B. To act as business manager for the Village under the direction of the Mayor
and the Village Board.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 6
C. To act as the Village's chief administrative and financial officer; to
administer Village personnel rules, policies and procedures; to approve
appointments and removal of employees of the Village; to approve
appointments and removal of Department Heads of the Village after
consultation with the Village Board.
D. To prepare annual operating and capital improvement budgets for all
Municipal departments and submit them to the Finance Advisory Group and
the Village Board with a message describing the important features; to
prepare the annual appropriation ordinance and be responsible for the
administration and implementation after adoption, including the preparation
of periodic statements analyzing and accounting for variations between
budgeted and appropriated amounts and actual expenditures; to analyze
variations in estimated and actual income showing reasons therefor.
E. To prepare a written report to the Village Board at least semiannually
describing progress to date and accomplishments, including problems and
solutions for Village affairs and suggestions for future improvements in
Village operations for more efficient operations, together with constructive
criticisms.
F. To initiate investigations and conduct inquiries related to citizen complaints
concerning the conduct of employees and the quality of Municipal services;
to speak before public and private groups to explain the functions and
operations of the Village's government.
G. To recommend to the Village Board a standard schedule of pay for each
employee of the Village, including minimum and maximum rates of pay, and
to recommend periodic merit, promotion and service increases.
H. To attend all meetings of the Village Board unless excused therefrom and
to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Board, but
with no right to vote.
I. To attend meetings of Village committees and commissions when
requested and available.
J. To act as the Village's chief purchasing agent; to administer purchasing
activities and to supervise bidding procedures; and to approve major
purchases subject to the consent of the Village Board.
K. To coordinate and direct all Municipal services; to undertake studies of the
manner in which such services are provided and to make recommendations
to the Village Board for changes in the types and quality of service
provided.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 7
L. To perform related work to all of the above, and such other duties as
required by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
1-6A-4: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE: The Village Manager may be removed at any
time by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Village Board then holding
officer. (Ord. 76-440-70)
1-6A-5: VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
A. Director of Financial Systems to Act as Collector. The Director of Financial
Systems shall be Collector and shall perform all duties of that office. The
Director of Financial Systems shall give bond, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of duties, in the sum as set forth under Section 1-6-2 of this
Chapter. Such bond shall be approved by the Village Board. (amd. Ord. 93-
1286-16)
B. Powers and Duties: The Village Collector shall have all the powers and
perform all the duties prescribed by statute. Among other things, the
following shall be the Collector’s duties:
1. To execute all warrants for special assessments and other warrants
required by law and the ordinances of the Village. The Collector shall
collect all water, sewer, and other charges, and all license fees for any
and all licenses issued, under the ordinances of the Village, together
with all permit fees and other monies due to the Village, the collection of
which is not by law or ordinance provided to be made by some other
officer of the Village;
2. To keep an accurate record of all bonds, notes and other obligations
issued by or payable to the Village, with the date, the person to whom or
by whom payable, the rate of interest, and such other particulars as may
be necessary for a full understanding thereof;
3. To keep the books and accounts in such manner as the Village Board
may prescribe. Such warrants, books and papers pertaining to the office
shall, at all times, be open to the inspection of, and subject to the
examination of, the Mayor, Village Treasurer, and any member of the
Board of Trustees.
4. To deposit daily to the credit of the Village in such depository as the
Village Board shall designate, all monies, collected from any source
whatever. The Collector shall receive a receipt for all such deposits.
Any violation of this provision shall subject the Collector to removal from
office.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 8
5. To make a report, in writing, to the Village Board, and the Village
Treasurer, of all monies collected, the account for which collected, or
any other matter in connection with his office, when required to do so by
the Village Board, the Village Treasurer, or the ordinances of the Village.
6. To file in the office of the Village Clerk, annually between May 1 and
May 10, a statement of all monies collected during the preceding fiscal
year, the particular warrant, special assessment or account on which
collected, the balance of monies uncollected or all warrants on hand,
and the balance remaining uncollected at the time of the return on all
warrants which shall have been returned during the preceding year.
7. To make return in the time and manner provided by law, of all special
assessment warrants and make report in writing of all delinquent lists of
special assessments and special taxes.
8. To devote such time as is necessary for the proper performance of the
duties of the office, and to receive a salary which shall be fixed by the
Village Board. This salary shall be in lieu of any fees or other
compensation to which the Collector might otherwise be entitled under
law. (Ord. 87-926-12)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 9
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Qualification; Term
1-6B-2: Bond, Oath, Salary
1-6B-3: Powers and Duties
1-6B-3-1: General Powers and Duties
1-6B-3-2: Powers and Duties Concerning Documents
1-6B-3-3: Additional Duties
1-6B-4: Deputy Clerk
1-6B-1: QUALIFICATION; TERM: The Clerk shall be a qualified elector of the
Village who shall have resided within the Village at least one year next
preceding election to office. The Clerk shall be elected for a term of four (4)
years, or until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.
(Ord. 86-901-38)
1-6B-2: BOND, OATH, SALARY: Before entering upon the duties of office, the
Village Clerk shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Village
Board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Clerk’s duties in the
sum as set forth under Section 1-6-2 of this Code. The Clerk shall take the
oath of office as prescribed by statute. The Clerk shall receive such salary
as is determined by the Village Board in the annual appropriation
ordinance. (Ord. 84-797-11)
1-6B-3: POWER AND DUTIES:
1-6B-3-1: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES: The Village Clerk shall have all the
powers and perform all the duties now or hereafter provided by the laws of
this State and the ordinances of the Village. Among other things, the Clerk
shall have the following duties:
A. To keep an office at the place appointed by the Village Board;
B. To attend all meetings of the Village Board and to take minutes of all its
proceedings;
C. To record such minutes, together with all ordinances passed by the Village
Board in books to be kept for that purpose;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 10
D. To publish all proceedings of the Village Board and all ordinances required
by law to be published;
E. To serve all notices, either by personal service, by publication or by posting,
required by law or the order of the Village Board or the Mayor, unless such
notices are expressly ordered to be served by some other person; (1971
Code, §2-3-3)
F. (Rep. by Ord. 87-925-11)
G. (Rep. by Ord. 87-925-11)
H. To notify, within five (5) days after the declaration of the results of any
election or appointment to office, all persons elected or appointed to any
Village office of their election or appointment, and unless such persons
shall respectively qualify within ten (10) days after such notice, the office
shall become vacant.
I. To administer the oath of office to each such person so elected or
appointed, except that the Mayor shall administer such oath of office to the
Clerk.
J. To file all ordinances, communications, receipts and documents required to
be filed and to arrange the same in systematic order for ready reference.
K. To keep the Corporate Seal of the Village and affix the same to all papers
which require it.
L. To be the custodian and keeper of all the books, records, ordinances and
papers of the Village, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
M. To make copies of any papers in the Clerk’s office, and transcripts from
journals and other records, certified under the Corporate Seal for use in
evidence when required.
N. To file or cause to be filed a certified copy of each tax levy ordinance with
the County Clerk of Lake County within the time required by law;
0. To maintain a record of the date of commencement and expiration of the
term of office of each elected Village officer and of each appointed Village
official. (1971 Code, §2-3-3)
1-6B-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES CONCERNING DOCUMENTS:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 11
A. General: The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents
belonging to the Village which are not assigned to the custody of some
other officer. (1971 Code, §2-3-4)
B. Indexes: The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all
documents and records kept by the Clerk for ready access and use. (1971
Code, §2-3-5)
C. Licenses and Permits:
1. (Rep. by Ord. 87-925-11)
2. The Village Clerk shall keep a full record of all licenses granted,
transferred or revoked by the Village Board or the Mayor, or under their
authority, with the date that the same were granted, transferred or
revoked, and if revoked, the cause of revocation, with the number and
the full name and residence of applicants for such licenses. These shall
be kept in a book along with bonds, and the names of the sureties.
(1971 Code, §2-3-7)
D. Petitions, Communications: All petitions or other communications
addressed to the Village Board shall be received by the Village Clerk and
read at the next meeting of the Village Board succeeding their receipt,
unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and or the Village Board. The Clerk
shall, without delay, deliver to the officers of the Village, and to any
committee of the Village Board, all communications referred to such officers
or committee by the Mayor or the Village Board. (Ord. 87-925-11)
E. Ordinances, Resolutions: The Village Clerk shall, without delay, deliver to
the Mayor all ordinances or resolutions which may require approval or other
action by the Mayor, with all papers on which the same were founded.
(1971 Code, §2-3-9)
1-6B-3-3: ADDITIONAL DUTIES: In addition to the duties provided in this Article B,
the Village Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be
required by Statute, ordinance or the Village Board. (1971 Code, §2-3-10)
1-6B-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of Deputy
Clerk. The Village Clerk is authorized to appoint a Deputy Clerk who shall
have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or
ordinance to be executed by the Village Clerk, and affix the Seal of the
Village whenever required. (Ord. 68-193-8)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 12
B. Residence Requirements: The Deputy Clerk need not be a resident of the
Village. (Ord. 79-580-27)
C. Affix Signature: When signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign
the name of the Village Clerk followed by the word "By" and the Deputy
Clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk".
D. The powers and duties shall be exercised by the Deputy Clerk only in the
absence of the Village Clerk from office, and only when either written
direction has been given by the Village Clerk to exercise such power, or the
Village Board has determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
E. The Deputy Clerk shall have such further power and authority as may be
provided by statute. (Ord. 68-193-8)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 13
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Appointment
1-6C-2: Bond
1-6C-3: Powers and Duties
1-6C-4: Deposit of Funds
1-6C-5: Special Assessment Funds
1-6C-6: Access to Financial Records
1-6C-7: Additional Duties
1-6C-1: APPOINTMENT: There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Trustees.
1-6C-2: BOND: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village Treasurer shall
give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Village Board, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his duties in the sum as set forth under
Section 1-6-2 of this Chapter. The amount of such bond shall in no case be
less than that required by Statute for village treasurers and shall be
conditioned upon indemnification of the Village for any loss by reason of
any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer. (Ord. 79-557-4)
1-6C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES: The Village Treasurer shall be responsible to the
Village Board. The Treasurer shall have the power to perform the duties set
forth in the ordinances of the Village. Among other things, the Treasurer
shall review and approve the Village procedures with respect to the
following matters: (Ord. 79-557-4; and. Ord. 91-1207-20)
A. To receive all monies due or belonging to the Village and pay all orders or
warrants, including special assessment and other bonds and interest
coupons, authorized by the Board of Trustees and duly executed by the
proper officers of this Village.
B. Keeping suitable books of account of the Village financial transactions,
including from whom and on what account funds have been received and a
record of all monies paid out, including to whom and on what account or
fund and for what purpose the payment was made. The books shall be
balanced at least monthly.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 14
C. Keeping a separate account with each fund or appropriation stating at the
head of each account the amount appropriated and giving the several
debits and credits.
D. Keeping a general ledger, by funds, showing the activities and transactions
affecting each fund including the necessary accruals for annual reports and
other purposes.
E. Keeping an account with each special assessment under its general
description and number, detailing all receipts and disbursements, and
accounts receivable balances.
F. Keeping proper records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the water and sewerage system.
The annual audit shall be made by an independent auditing concern of the
books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewerage
system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, this annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water and
wastewater facilities, including depreciation, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amount required
to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet
these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the
current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of non-metered users.
6. A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and
volume of waste discharged.
G. Assurance of a monthly report from the Director of Financial Systems to the
Mayor and Village Board and Village Manager. The report shall include the
total receipts and disbursements for each account or fund from
commencement of the fiscal year to date; the amount budgeted and the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 15
amount appropriated; the amount under-expended or over-expended in
each account or fund for the current fiscal year. The report shall be filed in
the Village Hall and a summary provided to the Board. All canceled
vouchers and invoices covering all transactions set forth in the report shall
be retained by the Finance Director and reviewed by the Treasurer. (Ord.
79-557-4)
H. The annual review and approval, within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the end of the fiscal year, of a full and detailed account of all receipts and
disbursements of the Finance Director during the preceding fiscal year of
the Village. The account shall show the state of the Treasury at the close of
the fiscal year. The account shall also show the aggregate revenues
received during the fiscal year in each fund and will also show the
aggregate disbursements for each fund and each budget category within a
fund. Such account shall be published in pamphlet form and three (3)
copies of the account shall be placed on file for public inspection in the
office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 79-557-4; and. Ord. 79-582-29)
This account will be filed with the Village Clerk who shall cause to be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village
of Lincolnshire, a notice of the filing of such account. The notice shall be in
a form substantially as follows:
(Please see following page)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 16
H) STATE OF ILLINOIS ) Notice of Filing of
)
COUNTY OF LAKE ) Municipal Treasurer's
)
VILLAGE OF LINCONLSHIRE ) Annual Account
Please take notice that the annual account of all monies received and
expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year has been filed in my
office by the Village Treasurer of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois. Copies
of said account with detailed receipts and expenditures are available for
public inspection in the Village Clerk's office Village Hall, One Olde Half Day
Road, Lincolnshire, Illinois during the hours of 8:30 AM. and 4:30 PM.,
Monday through Friday.
Said account reflects total balances as follows.
Beginning balance May 1, 20____ $_____
Monies received May 1, 20____ to April 30, 20____ $_____
Expenditures incurred May 1, 20____ to April 30, 20____ $_____
Balance April 30, 20____
$_____Dated___________ 20___
______________________
Village Clerk
The failure to publish such notice shall not be construed as a violation of the
requirements of this Section, nor of the requirements of Section 3-10-5.1 of
the Illinois Municipal Code, and publication of such account in pamphlet
form shall be deemed in full compliance with the provisions of this Section.
A copy of such account, as filed with the Village Clerk and bearing the
affidavit thereof, shall be filed with the County Collector before September 1
of each year, or as soon thereafter as the same is available for filing.
The procedure for the preparation, filing and publication of the annual
account shall be deemed to be in compliance with and in lieu of the
requirements of Section 3-10-5.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, and any
amendments by virtue of and under the home rule powers of the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 17
To the extent of any conflict, the provisions of Section 3-10-5.1 are hereby
declared to be of no force and effect under the home rule powers of the
Village. Compliance with the provisions of this Section under the home rule
powers of the Village shall constitute full authority to the Lake County
authorities to disburse all appropriate tax monies to the Village.
1-6C-4: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS: The Village Treasurer shall review and approve the
deposit of village funds by the Director of Financial Systems in such
depositories as may be selected from time to time as provided by law
and/or by Village ordinance.
The Treasurer shall review and approve procedures for the handling of
village funds to assure that Village money is kept separate and distinct from
the money of any individual and to assure that no individual may make
private or personal use of any Village money.
1-6C-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS: All monies received on any Special
Assessment shall as a special fund to be applied only to the principal and
interest payment of the improvement, bond or vouchers for which they were
received.
The money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to reimburse the
Village for the money expended for such improvement
Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the laws
of the State of Illinois.
The Treasurer shall review the books and accounts to assure that proper
prorations in payments of principal and interest can be made and
ascertained and unpaid receivable balances quickly calculated.
1-6C-6: ACCESS TO FINANCIAL RECORDS: Any citizen of the Village and
representative of any agency of the State of Illinois shall have access to
review and examine any financial books, documents, papers and records of
the Village except those precluded by law.
1-6C-7: ADDITIONAL DUTIES: Examples of such duties are as follows:
A. Assist in the pre-audit of revenue and expenditures.
B. Review the Village procedures for the preparation of payrolls.
C. Participate in the development of the Village's annual operating budget and
appropriation ordinance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 18
D. Assist in establishing procedures for transfer of funds.
E. Assist in the preparation of and maintenance of long-range cash position
and capital funding plans.
F. Review special cost analysis studies of various Village operations.
G. Review periodic and special reports related to budgetary and financial
matters, such as the monthly Treasurer's cash receipts and disbursements
statements.
H. Review and make recommendations for improved forms, procedures and
systems in financial and general administrative areas.
I. Provide data required by outside certified public accountants in connection
with the annual audit of the Village's records. (Ord. 79-557-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-6 VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Revised 12/12/11 Page 19
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE D. LEGAL COUNSEL
SECTION:
1-6D-1: Legal Counsel Retained
1-6D-1: LEGAL COUNSEL RETAINED: Legal counsel shall be retained by the
Village Board to advise the Village on legal matters, to prosecute and
defend legal actions, and draft legal documents and furnish opinions. Said
counsel shall be retained from time to time at the will of the Village Board
with such compensation as they shall determine. (1971 Code §2-0)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-7 VILLAGE DEPARTMENT
Revised 1/27/14 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Creation and Composition; Official Status
1-7A-2: Appointments, Promotions, Suspensions and Discharges
1-7A-3: Oath of Police Officers
1-7A-4: Chief of Police; General Powers and Duties
1-7A-5: Departmental Rules and Regulations
1-7A-6: Badge of Police Officers
1-7A-7: Powers and Duties of Police
1-7A-8: Custody of Lost, Stolen or Abandoned Property
1-7A-9: Prohibited Acts.
1-7A-10: Policemen's Pension Fund
1-7A-1: CREATION AND COMPOSITION; OFFICIAL STATUS:
A. There is hereby created and established a Police Department of the Village.
The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
police officers as shall from time to time be determined by the Village
Board. (1971 Code §55-1-1)
B. The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department shall be
officers of the Village. (1971 Code §55-1-16)
1-7A-2: APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND DISCHARGES:
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Village Trustees. Appointments to, promotions within and
discharges from the Police Department shall be made by the Chief of Police
with the consent of the Village Manager. The Chief of Police shall furnish
the Village Board with a written notice of the intent to make any original
appointment or promotion. The swearing in of an officer by the Mayor
before the Village Trustees shall constitute approval of the Village Board.
The members of the Police Department, including the Chief of Police, need
not be residents of this Village either at the time of their appointment or
during their service as a member of the Police Department.
Any suspension of any member of the Police Department for a period of
more than five (5) days shall be made only upon approval of the Village
Manager who shall in turn make a report of such suspension to the Village
Board. Any police officer so suspended for cause shall not be entitled to
pay while suspended. (1971 Code §55-1-15)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-7 VILLAGE DEPARTMENT
Revised 1/27/14 Page 2
The Chief of Police may be suspended for a period of not more than five (5)
days by the Village Manager. A discharge or suspension of more than five
(5) days may be ordered only by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Village Board.
1-7A-3: OATH OF POLICE OFFICERS: All members of the Police Department
shall, before entering upon duty as a police officer, take and subscribe to an
oath of office substantially in the following form:
"I do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the
United States and of the State of Illinois and that I will faithfully discharge
the duties of the office of police officer of the Village of Lincolnshire to the
best of my ability".
Such oath shall be subscribed and sworn to before the Mayor in the
presence of the Village Trustees. (1971 Code §55-1-2) (Amd Ord. 14-3312-
38, eff. 01/27/14)
1-7A-4: CHIEF OF POLICE; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the Village jail and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated in the jail. The Chief of Police shall keep
such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the
Department as may be required by Statute, ordinance or the Village
Manager. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police
Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept a record of all persons arrested
or committed to the jail or the house of corrections. The Chief shall keep a
record of expenses of the Police Department, of all property placed in the
Chief's charge, and such other books and records as the business of the
Department may require. The Chief shall make a report of any matter or
thing concerning the Department to the chairman of the Police Committee.
(1971 Code §55-1-3)
1-7A-5: DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS: The Chief of Police may
make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the
members of the Department as the Chief shall see fit and, except to the
extent to expressly in conflict with the Code, such rules shall carry the same
force and effectiveness as though adopted by ordinance of the Village
Board. (1971 Code §55-1-4; Ord. 77-483-17) (Amd Ord. 14-3312-38, eff.
01/27/14)
1-7A-6: BADGE OF POLICE OFFICERS: Every member of the Police Department
shall wear a suitable badge, to be furnished by the Village, and any
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-7 VILLAGE DEPARTMENT
Revised 1/27/14 Page 3
member who shall lose or destroy the same shall be required to pay the
cost of replacing it. When any member shall leave the Department, the
member shall immediately deliver to the Chief of Police his badge and all
other articles in the officer’s possession belonging to the Village. (1971
Code §55-1-9)
1-7A-7: POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE:
A. General Duties:
1. It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department, including
the Chief of Police, to see to the enforcement of this Code and all other
ordinances of the Village and laws of the State of Illinois and to preserve
order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators of the law.
2. It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department, including
the Chief of Police, when on duty, to devote their time and attention to
the Municipal affairs of the Village, and to preserve its safety and
cleanliness. To this end they shall execute and enforce this Code and all
other ordinances of the Village and all police regulations and orders of
the Village Board.
3. It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department, including
the Chief of Police, to act in a proper and law abiding manner and to
avoid the use of unnecessary force. (1971 Code §55-1-5)
B. Powers:
1. The members of the Police Department of the Village shall have the
power and authority within the Village and outside the same, when
necessary and lawful, to serve and execute warrants and other process
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with the
violation of this Code or other ordinances of the Village or any crime
against the laws of the State of Illinois, or held for examination or trial, or
taken in execution for the commission of any crime. They shall have the
power and authority, and it shall be their duty, to serve and execute all
civil process issued on behalf of the Village by any court of proper
jurisdiction. While serving or executing or assisting in the service or
execution of any such warrant or process, they shall be vested with and
have all the powers and authority conferred on constables at common
law and by the laws of this State.1
2. They shall have the power to arrest any person in the Village found in
1 65 ILCS 5/3-9-4
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-7 VILLAGE DEPARTMENT
Revised 1/27/14 Page 4
the act of violating this Code or other ordinance of the Village or of the
State of Illinois, or aiding or abetting any such violation, and to bring
such person so arrested before the court and proper jurisdiction to be
dealt with according to law. (1971 Code §55-1-6)
C. Duty of Arresting Officers to Attend Trial: All members of the police force
making arrests shall attend as witnesses when required by the court where
the trial may be had, and shall procure all necessary evidence in their
power, and furnish a list of witnesses to the court. No police officer shall be
entitled to any witness fee to be taxed against the Village on any action for
a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance where the
Village is plaintiff. (1971 Code §55-1-7)
D. Report of Accidents: It shall be the duty of each police officer, whenever
any accident shall occur within the Village, of which he has notice or
knowledge, to report immediately, in writing, to the Chief of Police the place,
day and nature of the accident; such report shall also include the hour of
the day or night when such accident occurred, the condition of the weather,
if at night, whether street lights were or were not lighted, the name of each
person injured, the extent and nature of the injury suffered; the names and
residences of the principal witnesses and the name and residence of the
examining physician, if any, all of which shall be entered in full upon a
record to be kept for that purpose in the office of the Chief of Police. (1971
Code §55-1-10)
1-7A-8: CUSTODY OF LOST, STOLEN, OR ABANDONED PROPERTY: The Chief
of Police shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in
the Village. It shall be the duty of police officers to report and deliver to the
Chief of Police all property seized or found by them immediately after the
same shall have come into their possession, which property, with the date
of delivery and description of the same, and the name of the police officer
depositing the same, shall be entered in a book kept for that purpose by the
Chief of Police, who shall be responsible for the same. (1971 Code §55-1-
8)
1-7A-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Police Officers Not to Furnish Bail: No member of the Police Department
shall furnish bail for any person arrested for violation of this Code or any
other ordinances of the Village or of the criminal laws of the State of Illinois.
(1971 Code §55-1-11)
B. Assuming to Act as a Police Officer: No person, other than a member of the
Police Department shall assume to act as a police officer of this Village.
(1971 Code §55-1-12)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-7 VILLAGE DEPARTMENT
Revised 1/27/14 Page 5
C. Impersonating a Police Officer: No person shall impersonate any of the
members of the Police Department, or shall maliciously or with intent to
deceive, use or to imitate any of the signs, signals or other devices adopted
and used by the Police Department, or shall wear in public, the uniform
adopted as the police uniform after having been removed or suspended.
(1971 Code §55-1-13)
D. Resisting Police Officer: No person shall resist any police officer in the
discharge of duty, or in any manner interfere with, hinder or prevent the
officer from discharging a duty as such police officer or offer or attempt to
do so. No person shall in any way assist any person in custody of any
police officer to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. (1971
Code §55-1-14)
1-7A-10: POLICEMEN'S PENSION FUND: Fund Created, Authority: Pursuant to the
special election held on November 2, 1976 on the question of whether the
Village shall adopt Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code, there is hereby
created and established a Policemen's Pension Fund in and for the Village
in Illinois which shall be maintained and operated pursuant to Chapter 40
ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq.
A. Policemen's Pension Fund Board of Trustees:
1. The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the Village is
hereby created for the administration of the Fund. The members of said
Board shall be appointed and serve as provided by laws of the State of
Illinois.
2. The rights, powers, duties and functions of said Board and its members,
and the rights and benefits of the various beneficiaries of the Pension
Fund shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 1
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCES
SECTION:
1-8 Village Finances
1-8A Deposit and Investment of Village Funds
1-8B General Obligation Revenue Bonds
1-8C Reserved (repealed by Ordinance No. 99-1654-38)
1-8D Reimbursement of Village Expenses
1-8E Bidding Procedures and Awarding Contracts
1-8F Payment of Fees, Fines, Forfeitures and Taxes
1-8G Acceptance of Credit Cards
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 2
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appropriations
1-8-2: Tax Levy
1-8-3: Village Indebtedness
1-8-4: Submission and Payment of Bills
1-8-5: Audit
1-8-1: APPROPRIATIONS:
As required by Statute,1 the Village Board shall enact an appropriation
ordinance which shall itemize all anticipated expenditures to be met
during the coming year, other than those payable from bond issues. This
ordinance shall be published as required by law within ten (10) days after
its enactment. (1971 Code §15-1)
1-8-2: TAX LEVY:
A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the County
Clerk of Lake County not later than the last Tuesday in December.
(1971 Code §15-2)
1-8-3: VILLAGE INDEBTEDNESS:
It is the intent and covenant of the Village Board not to exceed any
limitation placed, now or hereafter, on the powers of non-home rule
municipalities to levy general real estate taxes. Specifically, the Village
Board shall not exceed the rate of twenty five hundredths percent (.25%)
of the Village’s assessed valuation for corporate fund real estate taxes
(exclusive of those separate levies permitted to be levied by non-home
rule municipalities.)
165 ILCS 5/8-2-9
265 ILCS 5/8-3-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 3
1-8-4 SUBMISSION AND PAYMENT OF BILLS:
All bills payable by the Village shall be submitted to the Village Board
for approval before payment except as listed below. (1971Code §15-5)
If the wage or salary of an employee has been previously approved by
the Village Board, then each periodic payment of that wage or salary
need not be approved.
Except for payment on bonds, notes and tax anticipation warrants, the
Finance Director/ Village Treasurer shall pay all bills and salaries only upon
written authorization signed by any two of the following: 1) Mayor; 2)
Village Manager; 3) Finance Director/Village Treasurer. Such authorization
shall state the items to be paid and the fund from which payment is to be
made.
Upon review and reconciliation of invoices received, the Finance Director/
Village Treasurer is authorized to pay the following bills upon receipt of
invoice prior to formal Village Board approval:
a.) Utilities (Natural Gas, Electricity, Internet/Network Services, Telephone)
b.) Postmaster for Postage
c.) Governmental Agencies
d.) Long-Term Debt (Previously Approved by Village Board)
e.) Refunds
f.) Insurance Premiums
g.) Fuel Invoices
h.) Payroll Processing Services
i.) Credit Card Payment/Processing Services
j.) Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund/Social Security
1-8-5: AUDIT:
The Village Board shall designate an auditor to audit all accounts of the
Village no later than three (3) months prior to the end of each fiscal year.
Copies of such audit report shall be filed with the Village Clerk and with
the Director of the State Department of Revenue and in such other
places as may be required by law. 3 (1971 Code§15-7)
365 ILCS 5/8-8-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 4
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCES
ARTICLE A. DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF VILLAGE FUNDS
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Deposit of Village Funds
1-8A-1-1: Designation of Depositories
1-8A-1-2: Qualifications of Depositories
1-8A-1-3: Maximum Deposit Restrictions
1-8A-1-4: Authorized Signatures on Checks and Drafts
1-8A-1-5: Disqualification; Notice Given
1-8A-2: Investment of Village Funds
1-8A-1: DEPOSIT OF VILLAGE FUNDS:
1-8A-1-1: DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES:
The Village Board shall, from time to time by ordinance, designate
certain banks and financial institutions as depositories for the funds and
money of the Village, and the Finance Director/Village Treasurer shall be
required to keep all Village funds and money in his custody in such
places of deposit, subject to the provisions set forth below.
The Village Clerk shall file with each said depository a certified copy of
the ordinance so designating such bank or financial institution as a
depository, and shall also file with any such depository a certified
statement of the persons from time to time holding the offices of Mayor,
Village Manager, Finance Director/ Village Treasurer, and the Clerk of
the Village.
1-8A-1-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF DEPOSITORIES:
No bank or financial institution shall be qualified as a depository for
Village funds and money unless the following conditions are met:
A. That the corporate authorities of the Village so designate it as a place of
deposit by ordinance, and that prior to the time of passage of said
ordinance the corporate authorities shall have received copies of the last
two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities which said bank or
financial institution is required to furnish the Commissioner of Banks and
Trust companies or the Comptroller of Currency.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 5
B. That said bank or financial institution shall, while acting as such
depository, agree to and actually furnish the corporate authorities of the
Village with copies of all sworn statements of the resources and
liabilities which such bank or financial institution is required to furnish to
the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or to the Comptroller
of Currency.
C. That prior to actual deposit of any funds in any such bank or financial
institution, the corporate authorities of the Village shall cause the sureties
of the Finance Director/Village Treasurer to be notified in writing at least
five (5) days prior thereto that such bank or financial institution has been
so designated as a place of deposit. (Ord. 74-330-6)
1-8A-1-3: MAXIMUM DEPOSIT RESTRICTIONS:
In no event shall any Village funds or monies deposited in any bank or
financial institution exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the capital stock
and surplus of such bank or financial institution. The Finance
Director/Village Treasurer shall not be discharged from responsibility for
any such funds or monies deposited in said bank or financial institution in
excess of such limitation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such deposits
may exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus,
provided that such bank or financial institution makes an unrestricted and
unencumbered pledge of Federal securities in an amount equal to such
excess, which securities shall be general obligations of the United States
government and which will be unencumbered, and which securities shall
be pledged to the Village and deposited in escrow with the Federal
Reserve Board with instructions to deliver said securities to the Village in
the event the bank or financial institution becomes bankrupt or is in any
way unable to deliver Village funds or monies upon demand. In the event
that such deposits are made in excess of seventy five percent (75%) and
are so secured, then in that event the Finance Director/Village Treasurer
shall be discharged from responsibility for such funds or monies so
deposited and secured. (Ord. 76-460-90)
1-8A-1-4: AUTHORIZED SIGNATURES ON CHECKS AND DRAFTS:
The Finance Director/Village Treasurer; along with either the Mayor
or Village Manager of the Village, shall have signatory authority to
sign in the name and on behalf of the Village of Lincolnshire the
following:
Checks;
Automated Clearing House (ACH) payments;
Wire Transfers;
Direct Debit Agreements;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 6
and other appropriate financial documents required to pay Village
of Lincolnshire obligations approved by the corporate authorities.
The Finance Director/Village Treasurer shall prepare detailed Wire
Instructions and initiate electronic transfers and payments only after
obtaining verbal approval by either the Mayor or Village Manager;
followed by signed affirmation to said instructions.
Additionally, the Finance Director/Village Treasurer shall sign and
obtain counter signature from either the Mayor or the Village
Manager affirming payment.
1-8A-1-5: DISQUALIFICATION; NOTICE GIVEN:
Any bank or financial institution designated as a depository in
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall automatically cease
to be an authorized depository if it becomes disqualified under the
provisions of this Code or the laws of the State of Illinois, or at such time
as the Village Board repeals such designation and the depository
receives written notice that it is no longer designated as a depository for
Village funds or money.
1-8A-2: INVESTMENT OF VILLAGE FUNDS:
The Finance Director/Village Treasurer shall make such investments of
Village funds and monies in accordance with the Village of Lincolnshire
Investment Policy approved by the Village Board. Such investments shall
be made in accordance with State law. All funds so invested will be
solely in securities or other investments which will mature or be
redeemable on a date or dates prior to the time when the funds will be
required for expenditure. All payments received as to principal, interest
or otherwise, derived from any investment authorized by this Section,
shall be credited by the Finance Director/Village Treasurer to the
particular fund of this Village for which such investment was made. (Ord.
74-330-6)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 7
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCES
ARTICLE B. GENERAL OBLIGATION REVENUE BONDS
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Authority to Borrow
1-8B-2: Bond Ordinance Procedures
1-8B-3: Payment of Bonds, Tax Levy
1-8B-4: Use of Bond Revenues
1-8B-5: Refunding Bonds
1-8B-6: Compliance Required
1-8B-7: Post-Issuance Compliance Procedures
1-8B-1: AUTHORITY TO BORROW:
The Village, acting by its Village Board, may from time to time borrow
money for proper public purposes and in evidence of such borrowing
issue its full bonds as provided by law. Such bonds may be issued
without the submission of the question of their issuance to the electors of
the Village for their approval. This shall in no way be deemed to limit the
village with respect to the use of any other form of borrowing or the
execution or issuance of any other instruments evidencing debt.
The Village Board shall not issue general obligation bonds of the Village
in excess of the debt limit established for such bonds for non-home rule
municipalities.
1-8B-2: BOND ORDINANCE PROCEDURES:
A. The Village shall adopt an ordinance (hereinafter designated as the
"Bond Ordinance") describing the public purpose or proposes to be
accomplished by such borrowing and in such Bond Ordinance shall
make a finding and determination that such borrowing of money is
necessary for the welfare of the government and affairs of the Village, is
for a proper public purpose or purposes and is in the public interest,
which finding and determination shall be deemed conclusive.
B. The Bond Ordinance shall indicate the amount of money necessary to
be borrowed, the amount of bonds to be issued in evidence thereof,
shall fix the details of such bonds, including the date, number,
denomination and maturity, which shall not exceed forty (40) years
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 8
from the date of said bonds, and the maximum rate of interest shall
not exceed eight percent (8%) per annum payable semiannually. The
bonds shall be sold in such manner and at such time as may be
determined by the President and Board of Trustees. If the bonds are
sold to bear interest at the maximum rate, they shall be sold at a price
of not less than par. If the bonds are sold to bear interest at a rate less
than the maximum interest rate, they may be sold at a price of less
than par, provided the price shall be such that the interest cost to the
Village of the money received as proceeds of the sale of said bonds
shall not exceed the maximum interest rate per annum, based on the
average maturity of all bonds sold as a single issue, computed
according to standard tables of bond values.
A contract for the sale of such bonds may be entered into prior to the
adoption of the Bond Ordinance or the Bond Ordinance may provide for
the subsequent sale of the bonds therein authorized. In the event of
such subsequent sale and bonds are sold bearing interest at a rate or
rates less than that authorized in the Bond Ordinance, prior to the
delivery of such bonds the taxes levied in the Bond Ordinance shall be
abated by that amount representing the savings resulting from the sale
of said bonds at a lower rate of interest than authorized in the Bond
Ordinance.
C. The Bond Ordinance shall direct the execution of the bonds therein
authorized on behalf of the Village by the signatures of the Mayor and
the Village Clerk, shall require the Seal of the Village to be affixed to
such bonds, shall determine whether such bonds to be issued shall be
registered in the name of the owner as to principal only or whether the
same shall be fully registered as to both principal and interest, shall
indicate the place or places of payment of the principal and interest
maturing on said bonds and shall set forth the form of bonds.
D. Upon the adoption of any Bond Ordinance by the Village and its approval
by the Mayor, the same shall, within ten (10) days after passage, be
published in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the
Village if there be one and if there is no such newspaper then in a
newspaper with a general circulation within the Village, and said
ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after the date of such
publication.
1-8B-3: PAYMENT OF BONDS, TAX LEVY:
The Bond Ordinance shall make provisions for the payment of such
bonds, both principal thereof and interest thereon until maturity, by the
levy of a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the Village
sufficient for such purpose. A copy of such Bond Ordinance, as adopted,
certified to by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the offices of the County
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 9
Clerk of the county or counties within which any part of the Village may
be situated. Such Bond Ordinance, as so filed, shall constitute the
authority for the County Clerk or County Clerks in and for each of the
years for which taxes are levied in said Bond Ordinance, to extend such
taxes for collection against all the taxable property situated within the
Village. The taxes so levied for the payment of principal of and interest on
the bonds shall be extended annually by the several County Clerks
without limitation as to rate or amount and such taxes shall be in addition
to and in excess of all other taxes levied or authorized to be levied by the
Village. Except as provided herein, such taxes so levied shall not be
subject to repeal or abatement in any manner whatsoever until such time
as all the bonds authorized and issued under the terms of said Bond
Ordinance shall have been paid in full, both principal thereof and interest
thereon up to and including the date of maturity: provided, however, that
if the Village of Lincolnshire has other funds available, the Village Board
may appropriate such funds and deposit them in trust with the paying
agent for the purpose of the payment of any of the maturities of bonds or
interest thereon, in which event the taxes so levied to pay such principal
or interest may be abated by the amount so deposited, such abatement
to be directed by ordinance of the Village of Lincolnshire, duly adopted
and placed on file with the respective County Clerks at any time prior to
the extension of such taxes for collection.
1-8B-4: USE OF BOND REVENUES:
The provision of any Bond Ordinance shall constitute an appropriation of
the amounts required as therein referred to and described, and upon the
delivery of the bonds therein authorized the proceeds thereof shall be
used solely and only for the purpose or purposes for which the bonds
were authorized.
1-8B-5: REFUNDING BONDS:
Any bonds authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of any Bond
Ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof, and also any
bonds heretofore issued and outstanding, which by their terms are
payable from taxes unlimited as to rate or amount and levied against all
the taxable property within the Village, may be refunded prior to their
maturity or at their maturity, and including the refunding of matured
interest coupons evidencing interest upon such unpaid bonds. The
issuance of refunding bonds shall be authorized by a Refunding Bond
Ordinance, which shall be adopted in the manner and subject to the
terms, conditions and provisions as herein required for the issuance of
bonds for public purposes. Any such refunding shall be authorized on the
basis of an exchange of par for par for bonds and matured interest
coupons to be refunded, or such refunding bonds shall be sold at not less
than par and the proceeds thereof used for the purpose of paying
maturing principal of such outstanding bonds and matured interest
coupons thereon.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 10
1-8B-6: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by section 6 of Article VII of the
Constitution of Illinois, 1970, the procedures herein set forth for the
issuance of full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) shall be
controlling and shall be complied with by the Village in the borrowing of
money through the issuance of general obligation bonds of the Village,
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in the Illinois
Municipal Code and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary
thereto and in any other law or laws of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 76-432-
62)
1-8B-7: POST-ISSUANCE COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
The Village Board from time to time shall designate a Village officer to
serve as the Compliance Officer to implement the terms and conditions
of the Bond Post-Issuance Compliance Policy adopted by the Village
Board. The Bond Post-Issuance Compliance Policy is designed to help
ensure the Village remains in compliance with the laws and regulations
enforced by the IRS and the SEC related to the issuance of tax exempt
securities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 11
CHAPTER 8
ARTICLE C.
RESERVED (repealed by Ordinance No. 99-1654-38)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 12
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCE
ARTICLE D. REIMBURSEMENT OF VILLAGE EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Developers Fees and Charges
1-8D-2: Late Payments
1-8D-1: DEVELOPERS FEES AND CHARGES:
In connection with all petitions and applications for building permits,
annexation, rezoning, special use permits, variations and plats of
subdivision, the owner and developer shall reimburse the Village for all
actual expenses incurred by the Village, including expenses
incurred for legal, engineering, planning and forestry reviews. The Village
Manager or his designee may require each Village consultant to
submit a budget estimate in advance indicating projected review costs.
The Village Manager or his designee shall invoice the owner and
developer for an estimated amount prior to directing that work
proceed on such reviews. If the actual cost for such reviews exceeds
the budgeted amounts, the owner and developer shall reimburse the
Village for such excess, and if the actual cost is less than such
budget estimates, the Village will reimburse the owner and developer for
the difference. In the event the actual costs for such reviews exceeds
the budgeted amounts and a good faith estimate of the remaining
costs exceeds Five Hundred Dollars ($500), the Village Manager or his
designee may require an additional deposit equal to the additional
estimate of remaining costs.(Amd. Ord. 07-2981-09, eff. 4/23/07)
1-8D-2: LATE PAYMENTS:
Whenever under any of the codes or ordinances of this Village, or
otherwise, any person becomes indebted to this Village and the Village
has rendered an invoice or bill to such person for such indebtedness or
the person has been required to pay a fine and the same has not been
paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of such invoice, bill or judgment,
such indebtedness due shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be
delinquent and simple interest equal to two percent (2%) per month of the
principal amount due shall be added to such indebtedness. Such
additional amount shall continue to accrue and accumulate until the full
indebtedness (both the original indebtedness and such simple interest) is
paid in full. The final amount of such interest shall be computed to and
including the date of payment in full. Provided, however, the provisions of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 13
this Section shall not apply to delinquent water and sewer use bills which
shall continue to be governed by the separate code provisions regarding
late payment of such bills. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff. 10/8/07)
In the event an individual or entity is in default to the Village for the
reimbursement of any or all of the fees and charges provided for in this
Chapter 8, any such developer shall not be entitled to the issuance of any
building permits, real estate transfer tax stamps, certificates of
occupancy, permits or licenses of any kind whatsoever by the Village
while any such default remains. (Ord. 81-634-37, Amd. Ord. 92-1260-38
eff. 8/10/92)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 14
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCES
ARTICLE E. BIDDING PROCEDURES AND AWARDING
CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-8E-1: Competitive Bidding Required
1-8E-2: Formal Contract
1-8E 3: Notice Inviting Bids
1-8E-4: Bid Deposits
1-8E-5: Bid Opening Procedure
1-8E-6: Rejection of Bids
1-8E-7: Bidders In Default to Village
1-8E 8: Award of Contract
1-8E-9: Open Market Procedure
1-8E-10: Professional Services Exempt From Building Requirements
1-8E-11: Emergency Purchases
1-8E-12: Cooperative Purchasing
1-8E-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessment and all purchases of, and
contracts for supplies, materials and services shall, except as
specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on
competitive bids. (Ord. 84-799-13)
1-8E-2: FORMAL CONTRACT4:
All work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or
in part by special assessment, except as otherwise provided herein, when
the estimated cost thereof shall exceed twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding
is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all Trustees then holding office.
All purchases of, and contracts for supplies, materials and services,
except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof
shall exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be
purchased by formal written contract from the lowest responsible bidder,
after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
4See also Section 1-8-4 of this Village Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 15
Trustees then holding office. (Ord. 84-799-13; and Ord. 86-895-32; Ord. 89-
1112-79)(Amd. Ord. 08-3071-54, eff. 12/8/08)
1-8E-3: NOTICE INVITING BIDS:
A. Notice Published: Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once
in a newspaper with a general circulation within the Village.
B. Scope of Notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and the
time and place for opening bids.
C. Bulletin Board: The Village shall also advertise all pending work or
purchases by posting a notice on the Village of Lincolnshire website
www.lincolnshireil.gov and public bulletin board in the Village Hall.
1-8E-4: BID DEPOSITS:
When deemed necessary by the Village Board, bid deposits shall be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of their bid deposits upon
the award of the contract by the Village Board. A successful bidder shall
forfeit any bid deposit required by the Village Board upon failure on his
part to enter into a contract within ten (10) days after the award.
1-8E-5 BID OPENING PROCEDURE:
A. Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
B. Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in
the public notices.
C. Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Village
Board or by a Village employee, in which event, a tabulation of the bids
shall be furnished to the Village Board at its next regular meeting.
1-8E-6: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The Village shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids
when the public interest to do so.
1-8E-7: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
The Village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on
the payment of taxes, licenses, or other monies due the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 16
1-8E-8: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
A. Authority In Village: The Village Board shall have the authority to
award contracts within the purview of this Section.
B. Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of
the Village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the
Village Board shall consider:
1. The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
2. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
3. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
4. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
5. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
6. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
7. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
8. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
9. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid;
10. Whether the bidder has a place of business in the Village.
C. Performance Bonds: The Village Board shall have the authority to
require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such
amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests
of the Village. (Ord. 84-799-1 3)
1-8E-9: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 17
All work and purchases of supplies, materials and services of less than
the estimated value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be
made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without
observing the procedure prescribed by this Chapter for the award of
formal contracts. When making such open market purchases, and where
practicable, the Village must solicit the advertised prices of at least three
(3) vendors of work, supplies, materials or services, as the case may be,
before entering into a purchase agreement. The Village Board must
consider all offers solicited before entering into a purchase agreement.
The following factors may be considered in deciding among the offers: (1)
the price of the goods or services offered, (2) the quality of the goods
or services offered, (3) the degree to which the goods or services
specifically satisfy Village needs, (4) any experience the Village has with
the specified vendor, (5) any applicable warranties, and (6) any other
factors the Village Board considers beneficial or detrimental to the
Village. (Ord. 89-1112-79) (Amd. Ord. 08-3071-54, eff. 12/8/08)
All bulk purchases of gasoline required for the Village gasoline storage
tank located at the public works facility shall be made using the open
market procedure without newspaper advertisement and without
observing the procedure prescribed by this Chapter for the award of
formal contracts, provided that each purchase does not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) gallons and provided that competitive price quotations
are obtained for each purchase. These purchases shall be made by the
Director of Public Works with the prior approval of the Village Manager.
(Ord. 65-643-27)
1-8E-10: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING
REQUIREMENTS:
All contracts for professional services including, but not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers, auditors, architects and
Village planners may be entered into by the Village without observing the
bidding procedures prescribed by this Chapter for the award of formal
contracts.
1-8E-11: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate work or
purchase of supplies materials or services, the Village Board shall be
empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at
the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or services
regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
1-8E-12: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 18
The Village shall have the authority to join with other units of government
in cooperative purchasing plans when to do so would serve the best
interests of the Village. (Ord. 84-799-13)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 19
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCE
ARTICLE F. PAYMENT OF FEES, FINES, FORFEITURES AND
TAXES
SECTION:
1-8F-1: Payment of All Village Obligations Prior to Any Village Action.
1-8F-1: PAYMENT OF ALL VILLAGE OBLIGATIONS PRIOR TO
ANY VILLAGE ACTION.
The Village shall not enter into any contract, neither shall the Village
take any action on any request for a license, permit, real estate transfer
stamps, annexation, rezoning or development if the person seeking the
contract or action owes any fees, fines, forfeitures or taxes to the
Village of Lincolnshire, or is in violation of any laws or regulations of the
Village of Lincolnshire, or that the Village is authorized to enforce.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 20
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE FINANCE
ARTICLE G. ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARDS
SECTION:
1-8G-1: Acceptance of Credit Cards
1-8G-2: Convenience Fees
1-8G-3: Eligible Payments
1-8G-4: Relief From Underlying Indebtedness
1-8G-1: ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARDS:
The Village Board elects to accept credit card payments for the forms of
indebtedness described in this Chapter. The term “credit card” shall
include an instrument or device, used to obtain credit, money, goods or
services, issued to the holder of the card, including major credit cards,
bank cards, charge cards, debit cards, secured credit cards, or smart
cards.
1-8G-2: CONVENIENCE FEES:
A. The Village is authorized to collect, in addition to the amount owed to
the Village, a convenience fee to wholly or partly offset the amount of any
processing fee incurred by the Village from the credit card financial
institution or service provider, provided that no such fee shall be imposed
unless allowed under the operating rules and regulations of the credit
card involved. The amount of the fee shall not exceed any discount or
processing fee incurred the Village, shall be established from time to time
by the Village Manager in accordance with the limitations described in
paragraph B and recorded in Title 1, Chapter 15, Comprehensive Fee
Schedule.
B. Said fees will also be subject to the following limitations set forth in the
Local Government Acceptance of Credit Cards Act:
1. the fee imposed by the Village is no greater than a fee charged
by the financial institution or service provider accepting and
processing credit card payments on behalf of the Village; and
2. the Village shall fully disclose the amount of the fee to the
cardholder by placing a schedule of fees on the Village website.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-8 VILLAGE FINANCES
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 21
1-8G-3: ELIGIBLE PAYMENTS:
The Village shall accept payment by credit card for the following forms of
indebtedness:
Form of Indebtedness
Real Estate Transfer Tax
Liquor Licenses
Beach Tags
Park User Fees
Amusement Devices
Application Fees
Engineering Fees
Planner Fees
Plan Review Fees
Annexation Fees
Building Permit Fees
Acreage Impact Fees
Forester Fees
Misc. Licenses & Fees
Yard Waste Refuse Stickers
Alarm Fines & Fees
Administrative Tow Fees
Tree Revenue
Water User Fees
Sewer User Fees
New Water Meter
Connection Fees
Park Donations
Donations
Miscellaneous Fines
Garage Sale Permit
1-8G-4: RELIEF FROM UNDERLYING INDEBTEDBESS:
A person who makes a payment by credit card to the Village shall not be
relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that
the Village realizes final payment of the underlying obligation in cash or
the equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or
other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, then the
underlying obligation shall survive and the Village shall retain all remedies
for enforcement that would have applied if the credit card transaction had
not occurred.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-9 SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 1
CHAPTER 9
SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Relief Grant to Senior Citizens
1-9-3: Application for Grant
1-9-4: Decision on Award of Grant
1-9-5: Confidentiality of Records
1-9-6: Recovery of False Claims; interest
1-9-7: Sunset Clause
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
HOUSEHOLD A senior citizen hereunder or a senior citizen and his spouse
living together in the same residence, regardless of whether other family
members also reside therein.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME The combined income of the members of a
household.
INCOME Adjusted gross income, properly reportable for Federal income tax
purposes under the provisions of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, modified
by adding thereto the sum of the following amounts to the extent deducted
or excluded from gross income in the computation of adjusted gross
income: An amount equal to all amounts paid or accrued as interest or
dividends during the taxable year;
B. An amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the excess of net long-term capital
gain over the net short-term capital loss for the taxable year.
C. An amount equal to all amounts received during the taxable year as an
annuity under an annuity, endowment or life insurance contract or under any
other contract or agreement.
D. An amount equal to all amounts received as income from tax exempt
obligations of Federal, State or local governments or governmental
agencies and any other tax exempt income under the U.S. Internal Revenue
Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-9 SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 2
E. An amount equal to the amount of benefits paid under the Federal Social
Security Act during the taxable year.
F. An amount equal to the amount of benefits paid under the Railroad
Retirement Act during the taxable year.
G. An amount equal to the total amount of cash public assistance payments
received from any governmental agency during the taxable year.
H. An amount equal to the amount of unemployment compensation benefits
received during the taxable year.
REAL ESTATE Ad valorem real estate property taxes levied against a
PROPERTY TAX residence, but does not include special assessments,
interest or water and sewer and other user charges.
RESIDENCE The principal dwelling place in the Village occupied by a
senior citizen or senior citizen's household, and includes single-family
homes and personally owned apartment, townhouse and condominium
units, but not apartment, townhouse and condominium buildings. (Ord. 79-
561-8)
SENIOR CITIZEN Any individual who is:
A. The owner of and residing in a single family residence or individual
apartment, condominium, or townhome unit in the Village upon which he or
she is legally obligated to pay real estate property taxes.
B. Of the age of sixty-five (65) years or older. (Ord. 82-701-8)
C. Whose household income as defined herein does not exceed the total
maximum social security benefits allowed to be collected. (Ord. 97-1490-14,
eff. 5/12/97)
1-9-2: RELIEF GRANT TO SENIOR CITIZENS: Any senior citizen, as defined
herein, whose household is liable for payment of real estate property taxes
is entitled to a grant pursuant to this Section, which grant will be in an
amount equal to that portion of his or her real estate property tax which was
levied by and on behalf of the Village. If the senior citizen has resided in the
residence being taxed for less than the full year in the applicable taxable
year, he or she shall be entitled to a grant prorated on the basis of onetwelfth
(1/12) of the total for each month or portion of a month that he or she
owned and occupied that residence.
1-9-3: APPLICATION FOR GRANT: Each senior citizen entitled to a grant
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-9 SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 3
hereunder shall file an application for such grant with the Village Manager or
his/her designee on a form to be provided to the Village by December 31 of
the year after the year of the applicable real estate property tax levy (e.g.
December 31, 2018 for a grant to apply against the 2017 real estate
property tax levy). Such application shall be accompanied by a signed copy
of the applicant's real estate property tax bill for the year for which the grant
is sought and the applicant's completed personal U.S. Income Tax Return
for the taxable year (2017 Personal Income Tax Return if seeking a grant
against the 2017 real estate property tax levy), and such accompanying
documents as may be requested by the Village to prove entitlement to the
grant, including, but not necessarily limited to, a personal affidavit regarding
income received by the senior citizen and his or her spouse which is not
reported on said personal Income Tax Return. If the senior citizen and his or
her spouse file separate Income Tax Returns, both such returns shall
accompany the application and both may be required to submit additional
information as aforesaid.
The right to file an application and receive a grant hereunder shall be
personal to the applicant and shall not survive the applicant's death, but
such right may be exercised on behalf of the applicant by the applicant's
legal guardian or custodian or attorney-in-fact; provided, however, if an
applicant dies after having filed a timely claim, and said applicant is survived
by his or her spouse, then the grant shall be paid to such spouse if such
spouse is also a senior citizen.
Only one member of a household may file an application and receive a
grant hereunder. While both members of a household are otherwise entitled
to a grant, they must agree as to which of them will file an application.
1-9-4: DECISION ON AWARD OF GRANT: Upon receipt of a timely filed
application and all accompanying documentation as may be required, the
Village Manager or his/her designee shall, as soon as practical thereafter,
determine whether the applicant is a person entitled to a grant under this
Section. If the Village Manager determines that the applicant is entitled to a
grant hereunder, he/she shall submit his recommendation that the grant be
made to the Village Board for final approval and payment.
If the Village Manager determines that the applicant is not so entitled to
receive a grant hereunder, he/she shall so notify the applicant in writing and
the applicant shall have ten (10) days after receipt of such notice to appeal
such determination to the Village Board. Such appeal shall be deemed
properly made by filing a written statement with the Village Clerk within said
ten (10) day period, which statement shall include a statement of the
reasons upon which the appeal is based, including a statement of any errors
alleged to have been made by the Village Manager. As soon as practicable
after such appeal is filed, the Village Board shall consider such appeal and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-9 SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 4
make a final determination based upon the written documents submitted by
the Village Manager and the applicant. There shall be no oral presentation
of such appeal except as may be permitted by the Village Board. If an oral
presentation is permitted, both the Village Manager and the applicant will be
entitled to participate therein.
The decision of the Village Board shall be final, and there shall be no
recourse in either a court of law or otherwise. The decision of the Village
Board shall be non-reviewable, and no applicant shall be entitled to a grant
hereunder if the applicant or his/her spouse files a lawsuit to obtain a grant
hereunder, or to claim any other violation of this Section, it being specifically
the intent of the Village Board that this Section would not have been
adopted if such prohibition against review of the decision of the Village
Board in a court of law is unconstitutional or void, such prohibition being
non-severable.
1-9-5: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS: All records and documents filed with
the Village under this Section, or obtained from any investigation conducted
hereunder, shall be confidential, except for use for official Village purposes
or as may be provided by any law specifically applicable to home rule
municipalities as a limit on such home rule municipality's authority.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Village from publishing or making
available reasonable, in the discretion of the Village, statistics concerning
the operation of this grant program provided that it is published or made
available in a manner so that no individual grant or claim is disclosed.
1-9-6: RECOVERY OF FALSE CLAIMS; INTEREST: The Village may recover
from any claimant any amount paid under this Section on account of an
erroneous, false or fraudulent claim, together with interest thereon at twelve
percent (12%). (Ord. 79-561-8)
1-9-7: SUNSET CLAUSE: Any person not already enrolled or having submitted a
grant application by December 31, 2018 shall not be eligible to submit future
grant applications nor receive grants within the definitions of this program.
For the purpose of this sunset provision, any person who has not filed a
grant application within the preceding two (2) years shall not be considered
enrolled in the grant program or eligible to apply for a new grant.
Furthermore, if a senior citizen skips an application year, such senior citizen
shall no longer be eligible to apply for a new grant.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-10 ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
Revised 12/13/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 10
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Petition for Annexation
1-10-2: Annexation Fees
1-10-3: Notices
1-10-4: Pre-Annexation Agreements
1-10-5: Approval of Plat of Annexation
1-10-1: PETITION FOR ANNEXATION: Anyone desiring to annex territory
contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the Village shall file with the
Village Clerk a legally sufficient petition for annexation as provided by law.
Such petition will be reviewed by the Village to determine its adequacy,
including whether such territory is, in fact, contiguous to the Village and
whether the form of petition meets with all legal requirements. If the owner
of record of said territory is a land trust, the petitioner will comply with the
land trust disclosure ordinance of the Village1 by filing concurrently with the
petition for annexation an appropriate land trust disclosure statement.
Attached to said petition for annexation shall be a plat of annexation
covering the territory involved in said annexation. If such petition is found to
be in satisfactory form, it shall be then transmitted to the Village Board.
1-10-2: ANNEXATION FEES: For any annexation of territory to the Village there
shall be charged a fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Such fee shall be due and
payable no later than thirty (30) days after annexation of the territory by the
Village. Such fee shall not be applicable to involuntary annexations.
1-10-3: NOTICES: Repealed Ord. 93-1279-09 eff. 3/8/93
1 See Chapter 11 of this Title
1-10-4: PRE-ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS: If the territory which is the subject
matter of a petition for annexation either under section 7-1-8 of the Illinois
Municipal Code or other applicable sections of the Illinois Municipal Code, is
proposed to be annexed pursuant to a pre-annexation agreement under
sections 11-15.1-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code, an additional
petition must be filed proposing said preannexation agreement, which
petition shall be accompanied by an additional filing fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-10 ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
Revised 12/13/10 Page 2
Code. Such petition shall be made in triplicate, shall be in such form and
accompanied by such information as shall be prescribed by the Village from
time to time, but shall in any event include the following:
A. The petitioner's name, address and interest in the petition, and the name,
address and interest of every person represented by the petitioner in the
petition.
B. A draft of the proposed pre-annexation agreement.
C. A statement containing all the circumstances, factors and arguments that
the petitioner offers in support of the proposed agreement.
Such petition for a pre-annexation agreement will be filed with the Village
Manager, or his designee, who will conduct a thorough review and study of
the proposed pre-annexation agreement, make his recommendations
regarding modifications of the same, if any, and otherwise report all relevant
factors and circumstances to the Village Board. The Village Manager, or his
designee, shall consult with the heads of the Village Departments and
Village Attorney as he deems desirable or necessary in connection with
said pre-annexation agreement. All costs incurred by the Village in relation
to review of the pre-annexation agreement shall be subject to
reimbursement under the terms of pre-annexation agreement. (Ord. 75-
367-17; amd. Ord. 93-1279-09 eff. 3/8/93)
1-10-5: APPROVAL OF PLAT OF ANNEXATION: The Village Board shall upon
motion and majority vote, approve the annexation of any property and
authorize the Mayor and Village Clerk to sign the original tracing. The
certificate shall be in the following form: (Ord. Amd. 98-1541-03, eff. 2/9/98)
Approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lincolnshire
at a meeting held
________________________________
Mayor
--------------------------
Village Clerk
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-11 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND STANDARDS
Revised 7/27/99 Page 1
CHAPTER 11
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Comprehensive Plan
1-11-1-1: Establishment
1-11-1-2: Availability for inspection
1-11-2: Official Map and Standard Requirements
1-11-2-1: Establishment
1-11-2-2: Designation of Public Ways
1-11-2-3: Standard Requirements
1-11-2-4: Identification of Maps and Standards
1-11-2-5: Applicability
1-11-2-6: Availability for Inspection
1-11-3: Rights Under Prior Laws Reserved
1-11-4: Separability
1-11-1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
1-11-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT: The official comprehensive plan of this Village is
designated as the "Official Comprehensive Plan for Present and Future
Development of The Village of Lincolnshire and Contiguous Territory not
More Than One and One-Half (1/2) Miles Beyond The Corporate Limits and
not included in Any Municipality" and the following designated documents
comprise said comprehensive plan:
A. A comprehensive plan entitled "Comprehensive Policies Plan, Lincolnshire,
Illinois", prepared by Barton-Aschman Associates, Inc. and as revised and
approved by the Lincolnshire Plan Commission on May 4, 1976.
B. Sanitary sewer layout master plan (a map) dated February 3, 1972 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
C. Water main layout master plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
D. Storm sewer master layout plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
E. Parks and recreational areas including school districts and fire districts (a
map) dated February 3, 1972 and prepared by Charles W. Greengard
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-11 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND STANDARDS
Revised 7/27/99 Page 2
Associates, Inc.
F. Major street plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and prepared by
Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
G. The Building Code of the Village of Lincolnshire adopted June 13, 1966. as
amended.1
H. The Subdivision Code of the Village of Lincolnshire adopted June 13, 1966,
as amended.2
I. The Zoning Code of the Village of Lincolnshire adopted April 28, 1960,
amended December 27, 1965, and as further amended.3
J. The Lincolnshire Airport Zoning Code adopted November 10, 1970, as
amended.4 (Ord. 76-437-67)
K. The amendment to the comprehensive plan entitled "Subarea Design Plan"
prepared by Jacques A. Gourgechon, A. I. P., and as reviewed and
approved by the Village Board on October 11, 1977. (Ord. 77-501-35)
1See Title 5 of this Code.
2 See Title 7 of this Code.
3 See Title 6 of this Code.
4See Title 8, Chapter 4 of this Code.
L. The amendment to the comprehensive plan entitled "Half Day Development
Study" prepared by Camiros Ltd./F.J. Koepke. (Ord. 79-563-10)
M. Park and recreational objectives as prepared by the Lincolnshire park Board
and referred to as Section One of the Lincolnshire Park Board Master Plan.
To the extent of conflict between this subsection M and subsection E
above, the provisions of this subsection M shall prevail and be deemed
controlling. (Ord. 79-567-14)
N. The amendment to the comprehensive plan entitled Concept Plan for the
Lincolnshire Business Center Units II through IX, inclusive, consisting of the
following:
1. Plat of Subdivision prepared by Donald Manhard Associates, Inc. dated
July 10, 1985, and revised July 23, 1985, plus the nine (9) conditions set
forth thereon.
2. Improvement Plan prepared by Donald Manhard Associates, Inc. dated
July 26, 1985.
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-11
Page 3
Revised 7/27/99
3. Landscape Concept Plan prepared by Donald Manhard Associates, Inc.
dated July 23, 1985, and revised July 30, 1985. (Ord. 85-853-37)
O. The amendment to the comprehensive plan entitled the Planning
Guidelines and Conceptual Plan for the Unincorporated Story Book Lane
Territory adjacent to the Village of Lincolnshire. (Ord. 92-1270-48 eff.
12/14/92)
1-11-1-2: AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION: The official comprehensive plan for
present and future development of the Village of Lincolnshire and
contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond
the corporate limits and not included in any municipality and the official map
and standard requirements, provided for in Section 1-11-2 of this Chapter,
shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be available
at all times during business hours for public inspection and copies of said
plan, and all codes and ordinances implementing the same and including
the official map and standard requirements, shall be made available to all
interested parties upon payment of fees as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code.(Ord. 72-263-7; amd. Ord. 93-1279-09 eff. 3/8/93)
1-11-2: OFFICIAL MAP AND STANDARD REQUIREMENTS:
1-11-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT: The official map and standard requirements of this
Village shall be designated "Official Map and Standard Requirements for
Development of The Village of Lincolnshire and Contiguous Territory not
More Than One and One-Half (1-1/2) Miles Beyond The Corporate Limits
and not included in Any Municipality", and the following designated maps
comprise the official map of the Village:
A. The official map prepared and approved by the Lincolnshire Plan
Commission on May 4, 1976.
B. Sanitary sewer layout master plan (a map) dated February 3, 1972 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
C. Water main layout master plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
D. Storm sewer master layout plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
E. Parks and recreational areas including school districts and fire districts (a
map) dated February 3, 1972 and prepared by Charles W. Greengard
Associates, Inc.
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-11
Page 4
Revised 7/27/99
F. Major street plan (a map) dated December 30, 1971 and prepared by
Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc.
G. "Original District Zoning Map for the Lincolnshire Zoning Code enacted as a
Whole on April 28, 1960 and as amended December 27, 1965", filed,
passed and approved December 27, 1965, and as further amended and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard Associates, Inc. (Ord. 76-437-67)
1-11-2-2: DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC WAYS: Such maps which are made a part of
said official map or an amendment thereof may show existing and proposed
rights of way of streets, alleys, other public ways, streams, storm sewer
drainage channels and sewers, sites of parks, Schools and other public
grounds. Acquisition of unsubdivided land, designated as a park site, school
site or other public grounds should take place at or before the time the land
is subdivided and in any event no later than one year from the date of
approval of a final pat of subdivision.
1-11-2-3: STANDARD REQUIREMENTS: The standard requirements relating to the
size of streets, alleys, public ways, parks, play grounds, school sites, other
public grounds, and ways for public service facilities; the kind and quantity
of materials which shall be used in the construction of streets and alleys;
and the kind and quality of materials for public service facilities as may be
consistent with Illinois Commerce Commission or Industry Standards; the
standards required for drainage and sanitary sewers and collection and
treatment of sewage; shall all be as provided in the below listed codes or as
otherwise below indicated:
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARD REQUIREMENTS ARE
OR IMPROVEMENT HEREBY SET AS PROVIDED IN THE:
1. Standard requirements relating
to the size of streets, alleys, public
ways, parks, playgrounds, school
sites, other public grounds and
ways of public service facilities.
1. "The Subdivision Code of the
Village of Lincolnshire adopted June
13, 1966, as amended", "Major
Street Plan (a map) dated
December 30, 1971 and prepared
by Charles W. Greengard
Associates, Inc.", and "Parks and
Recreational Areas including School
Districts and Fire Districts (a map)
dated February 3, 1972 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard
Associates, Inc."
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-11
Page 5
Revised 7/27/99
2. The kind and quantity of materials
which shall be used in the
construction of streets and alleys.
2. "The Subdivision Code of the
Village of Lincolnshire adopted June
13, 1996, as amended", and "Major
Street Plan (a map) dated
December 30, 1971 and
prepared by Charles W. Greengard
Associates, Inc."
3. The kind and quality of materials
for public service facilities.
3."Illinois Commerce Commission
and Industry Standards", "The
Building Code of the Village of
Lincolnshire adopted June 13, 1966,
as amended", and "The Subdivision
Code of the Village of Lincolnshire
adopted June 13, 1966 as
amended."
4. Standards required for drainage
and sanitary sewer and collection
and treatment of sewage.
4. "The Subdivision Code of the
Village of Lincolnshire adopted June
13, 1966, as amended", "Major
Street Plan (a map) dated
December 30, 1971 and prepared
by Charles W. Greengard
Associates, Inc.", "Sanitary Sewer
Layout Master Plan (a map) dated
February 3, 1972 and prepared by
Charles W. Greengard Associates,
Inc." and "Storm Sewer Master
Layout Plan (a map) dated
December 30, 1971 and prepared
by Charles W. Greengard
Associates.Inc.
1-11-2-4: IDENTIFICATION OF MAPS AND STANDARDS: Previously printed maps
and standard requirements as referred to in this Section or an amendment
thereto shall be identified by the following statement marked or stamped
thereon:
"Adopted by reference as part of 'An Official Map and Standard
Requirements for Development of the Village of Lincolnshire and
Contiguous Territory not More Than One and One-Half (1 '/2) Miles Beyond
the Corporate Limits and not included in any Municipality', passed by the
corporate authorities of the Village of Lincolnshire." (Ord. 72-263-7)
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 1-11
Page 6
Revised 7/27/99
1-11-2-5: APPLICABILITY: This Section and the terms hereof are hereby and
herewith made applicable to land situated within the corporate limits of the
Village and territory not more than one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond
the corporate limits of this Village and not included in any other municipality.
(Ord. 76-437-67)
1-11-2-6: AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION: Copies of such maps and standards as
are designated in this Section as comprising the official map and standard
requirements of this Village and any amendment thereto, shall be kept on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.
1-11-3: RIGHTS UNDER PRIOR LAWS RESERVED: This Chapter shall not be
construed or held to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed
against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the
former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right or claim arising before this Chapter takes effect, save
only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force
at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable.
1-11-4: SEPARABILITY: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village
Board that the several provisions of this Chapter are separable, in
accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this Chapter not specifically included in said judgment; and
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any
provision of this Chapter to a particular property, building, or other structure,
such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(Ord. 72-263-7)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-12 LAND TRUSTS
Revised 7/27/99 Page 1
CHAPTER 12
LAND TRUSTS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Definitions
1-12-2: Disclosure of Interests
1-12-3: Application to Other Codes
1-12-4: Penalty
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS: As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AGENT Any person authorized to act on behalf of any other person.
APPLICANT Any person who makes application to the Village for, or
otherwise seeks from the Village, any benefit, authorization, license or
permit, either under this Code or any other existing codes or regulations of
the Village including, but not limited to the Lincolnshire Zoning Code, the
Lincolnshire Building Code and the Lincolnshire Subdivision Code. 1 Where
the context of said codes or other regulations so indicate, the term applicant
shall be synonymous with the use of the words "owner", "petitioner",
"person" or other similar designation.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal
such interest may be, in a land trust, held by a trustee for the benefit of
beneficiaries of such land trust.
BENEFICIARY Any person having a beneficial interest in a land trust.
LAND TRUST Any express agreement or arrangement whereof a use,
confidence or trust is declared of any land, or of any charge upon land, for
the use or benefit of any beneficiary, under which the title to real property,
both legal and equitable, is held by a trustee, subject only to the execution
of the trust, which may be enforced by the beneficiaries who have the
1 See Title 5, 6 and 7, respectively, of this Municipal Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-12 LAND TRUSTS
Revised 7/27/99 Page 2
exclusive right to manage and control the real estate, to have the
possession thereof, to receive the net proceeds from the rental, sale,
hypothecation or other disposition thereof, and under which the interest of
the beneficiary is personal property only.
LESSEE Any person who has an interest in real estate by virtue of a lease,
either oral or written.
NOMINEE Any person designated to act for any other person, with limited
authority.
OPTION HOLDER Any person having the right to purchase real estate
upon compliance with the conditions which are provided in the option or
contract, which option or contract may be oral or written.
1-12-2: DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS: Whenever any applicant seeks from the
Village any benefit, authorization, permit or license relating to real estate, or
any interest in said real estate, improvements thereto or use thereof, and a
land trust is an option holder regarding said real estate or said real estate is
the subject of a land trust, the applicant shall, under oath, identify each
beneficiary of such land trust by name and address and define his interest
therein. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing the words "benefit,
authorization, permit or license" shall include, but not be limited to requests
for annexation, pre-annexation agreements, contracts for water an/or sewer
service, rezoning or zoning amendments, special use permits including
planned unit developments, zoning variations, approvals of preliminary
and/or final plats of subdivision, escrow agreements regarding public
improvements, building and related permits, certificate of occupancy, liquor
licenses, and any other applicable licenses or permits. Also, the "interest"
required to be disclosed by the applicant or any beneficiary of a land trust
shall include, but not be limited to, any interest in any and all contracts,
commitments or encumbrances to which the beneficiaries or the land trust
shall have entered into with regards to the transfer of any beneficial interest
to said land trust, or any contracts or commitments regarding the
conveyance, transfer, encumbrance or alienation of the real estate, and if
so, to whom.
All such applications, petitions or requests relating to such real estate shall
be signed by the owner, lessee or option holder of said land, or the agent or
nominee of either.
All such applications, petitions or requests shall be verified by the trustee of
the land trust in his capacity as trustee, or by a beneficiary (or beneficiaries)
as a beneficial owner of an interest in such land trust. If said application is
filed by a body politic or other corporate entity, it shall be verified by a duly
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-12 LAND TRUSTS
Revised 7/27/99 Page 3
authorized officer of such body politic or other corporate entity for whom the
application is made.
Such disclosure under oath shall be required regardless of whether the
applicant is merely a lessee of said real estate, or an agent or nominee of
another.
1-12-3: APPLICATION TO OTHER CODES: The provisions of this Chapter,
including the penalty provisions set forth below, shall apply to and hereby
are declared amendments of, all other codes and regulations of the Village
including, but not limited to, the Lincolnshire Zoning Code, the Lincolnshire
Building Code and the Lincolnshire Subdivision Code.
1-12-4: PENALTY: Any person making a false or incomplete statement in any
application, petition or other request, or anyone otherwise refusing to
comply with the requirements set forth above in this Chapter, shall be
penalized as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. lOrd. 74-328-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-13 VILLAGE CONTRACTOR’S INSURANCE REQUIRMENTS
Revised 10/98 Page 1
CHAPTER 13
VILLAGE CONTRACTOR'S INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Capital Projects
1-13-2: Contractual Services
1-13-1: CAPITAL PROJECTS: All contractors hired by the Village to perform construction
work on Village capital projects must submit certificates of insurance to the Village
as provided for in Section 7-1-7 of this Code showing that they have all the
insurance policies and coverages set forth in subsections 7-1-7A and B of this
Code. In addition, the Village shall be named as an additional insured on all such
required insurance policies. No contractor shall commence work on any such
Village capital project until he has obtained all required insurance under this
Section and has filed the certificates of insurance and the certified copies of the
insurance policies with the Village.
1-13-2: CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: (Amd. Ord. 98-1601-63, eff. 10/12/98)
A. Except as otherwise stated in this Section 1-13-2, all contractors hired by the
Village to perform professional consulting services for the Village including but not
limited to lawyers, engineers, architects, financial consultants, landscape
architects, appraisers and foresters, must subject certificates of insurance to the
Village as provided for in Section 7-1-7 of this Code showing that they have the
following insurance policies and coverages: (1) Workers Compensation and
Employers Liability Insurance (minimum limit of $100,000) as required by the State
of Illinois, (2) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance with a minimum limit of
$1,000,000, (3) Comprehensive Automobile Liability to include employers nonowned
and hired car coverage) including bodily injury (per accident) and property
damage coverage; a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000; and (4)
Professional Liability Insurance with a minimum limit of $1,000,000. An outside
service provider as described in this Section (A) may apply to the Village Board for
a waiver of all or a portion of the professional liability coverage. The Village Board,
in its sole discretion, may approve such a waiver.
B. All contractors hired by the Village to perform contractual services (nonprofessional)
for the Village (including but not limited to landscaping, computers,
printing and building maintenance) must submit certificates of insurance to the
Village as provided for in Section 7-1-7 of this Code showing that they have the
following insurance policies and coverages (1) Workers Compensation and
Employers Liability Insurance (minimum limit of $100,000) as required by the State
of Illinois, (2) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance with a minimum limit of
$1,000,000; and (3) Comprehensive Automobile Liability (to include employers
non-owned and hired car coverage) including bodily injury (per accident) and
property damage coverage; a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000. An
outside provider of services to the Park Board, as described in this Section (B)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-13 VILLAGE CONTRACTOR’S INSURANCE REQUIRMENTS
Revised 10/98 Page 2
above, may request and receive a waiver of the Village's liability insurance
requirement, or any portion thereof, for any one or more of the following types of
programs:
1. General artistic programs, including but not limited to painting, drawing,
sketching, drafting, penciling, and/or other similar programs;
2. General artistic programs, including but not limited to sculpturing, clay
modeling, pottery, soft sculpturing, and/or similar programs;
3. General arts and crafts;
4. Reading, writing, composition, storytelling, and/or other similar programs;
5. General education programs not involving athletic activities and/or athletic
equipment usage;
6. Yoga, stretching, Tai Chi, and/or other similar low impact, non-contact
activities;
7 Preschool dance.
No waiver of the Village's liability insurance requirement or any portion thereof
shall be allowed for any of the following types of programs:
1. Athletic and/or other activities involving physical contact, or the possibility of
physical contact, including but not limited to baseball, softball, football,
basketball, and/or soccer.
2. Athletic and/or other activities involving the use of a racket, paddle, bat, stick,
mallet, club, and/or other similar device.
3. Athletic and/or other activities involving the striking, hitting, throwing, catching,
dodging, and/or other similar contact with any objects;
4. Athletic and/or other activities involving personal locomotion by use of wheels,
motors, and/or other similar propellants, including but not limited to unicycling,
bicycling, motorcycling, dirtbiking, driving, go-carting, and/or other similar
activities;
5. Athletic and/or other activities involving running for the purpose of catching
and/or retrieving any person, object, or item and/or other similar activities;
6. Athletic and/or other activities involving sparring or personal combat, including
but not limited to boxing, wrestling, any type and/or style of martial arts,
kickboxing, and/or other similar activities;
7. Any dance activities (other than preschool dance);
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-13 VILLAGE CONTRACTOR’S INSURANCE REQUIRMENTS
Revised 10/98 Page 3
8. Athletic and/or other activities involving aerobic exercise, including but not
limited to aerobics, whether low, moderate, or high impact, step and/or aquatic,
running, cycling, swimming, and/or other similar activities.
If any activity or program does not fall within one of the categories set forth above,
staff with request advice and counsel of the Village Attorney. The Village Attorney
shall make a recommendation concerning waiver or non-waiver, based upon the
activity's similarities to any one or more of the foregoing categories and review of
the likelihood of injury and/or bodily harm to any participant. This recommendation
shall be forwarded to the Park Board for review and the Park Board's
recommendation would be forwarded to the Village Board for final approval.
C. All contractors hired by the Village to perform inspection services for the Village
(including but not limited to elevator, electrical, plumbing and plan review
inspectors), must subject certificates of insurance to the Village as provided for in
Section 7-1-1 of this Code showing that they have the following insurance policies
and coverages: (1) Workers Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance
(minimum limit of $100,000) as required by the State of Illinois; (2) Comprehensive
General Liability Insurance with a minimum limit of $1,000,000; and (3)
Comprehensive Automobile Liability (to include employers non-owned and hired
car coverage) including bodily injury (per accident) and property damage
coverage; a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.
Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability (Subsection (1) of Sections A, B
and C) shall not apply to a single person contractor.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-14: DISCONNECTION OF TERRITORY
Revised 07/27/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 14
DISCONNECTION OF TERRITORY
SECTION:
1-14-1: Supersede Section 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code
1-14-2: Section 7-3-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code; The Exclusive
Disconnection Procedure
1-14-1: SUPERSEDE SECTION 7-3-6 OF THE ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE: The
provisions of this Chapter 14 shall supersede the disconnection provisions
of Section 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code.1
1-14-2: SECTION 7-3-4 OF THE ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE; THE EXCLUSIVE
DISCONNECTION PROCEDURE: The provisions of Section 7-3-4 of the
Illinois Municipal Code shall be the exclusive disconnection provisions in
this Village under Division 3 of Article 7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord.
91-1190-03)
1 65 ILCS 5/7-3-6
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 1
CHAPTER 15
COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
Purpose
1-15-1: Administration
1-15-2: Boards and Commissions
1-15-3: Business and License Regulations
1-15-4: Health and Sanitation
1-15-5: Building Regulations
1-15-6: Zoning
1-15-7: Subdivisions and Land Development
1-15-8: Public Ways and Property
1-15-9: Police Regulations
1-15-10: Motor Vehicles and Traffic
1-15-11: Misdemeanors
1-15-12: Sign Control
1-15-13: Tree Preservations and Landscaping
Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to include all Village fees and charges in one
chapter for ease of application and understanding by Village personnel and the public.
1-15-1: ADMINISTRATION (TITLE 1)
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Annexation of territory, per acre $500.00 1-10-2
Pre-annexation agreement, per filing $500.00 1-10-4
Audit $20.00 1-15-2
Budget $20.00 1-15-2
Entire Municipal Code (loose leaf) $225.00 1-15-2
Building Code $33.00 1-15-2
Landscaping Code $20.00 1-15-2
Public Works Standards $30.00 1-15-2
Sign Code $22.00 1-15-2
Subdivision Code $26.00 1-15-2
Zoning Code $45.00 1-15-2
Comprehensive Plan $35.00 1-15-2
Zoning and House Number Maps $1.00 1-15-2
Land Use Maps $2.00 1-15-2
Board Meeting Recordings $5.00 1-15-2
Electronic Media $.75/per CD or DVD 1-15-2
Video Tapes (Police Department) $100.00 1-15-2
Audio Tapes (Police Department) $50.00 1-15-2
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 2
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
For all documents or records copied on Village
black/white Photocopier – letter size or legal
size
$.15/page 1-15-2
For all documents or records copied on Village
black/white Photocopier – 11”X17”
$.20/page 1-15-2
For all documents or records copied on Village
colored Photocopier – letter size or legal size
$.25/page 1-15-2
For all documents or records copied on Village
colored Photocopier – 11” X 17”
$.30/page 1-15-2
For all plans and oversize prints $5.00/page 1-15-2
Filing fee, preliminary plat of subdivision $1.00 per lot, but no less
than $25.00
1-15-2
Returned Check Fee (NSF Check –All
Departments)
$25.00 1-15-2
Traffic Crash Accident Report Fee (Police
Department)
$5.00 1-15-2
Accident Reconstruction Report Fee (Police
Department)
$20.00 1-15-2
Appeals to Administrative Decisions/Rebuttals
to Board and Commission recommendations
$100.00 1-15-3
-Architectural Review Board: Minor
improvements to existing sites/structures
-Major Improvements, per structure or type of
structure
$250.00
$500.00
1-15-3
1-15-3
Planned Unit Developments $2000.00 1-15-3
Newsrack inspection fee if reinstalled after
removal
$10.00 1-15-8
1-15-2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (TITLE 2)
BOARDS & COMMISSIONS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
None
1-15-3: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS (TITLE 3)
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Retail Occupation Tax, percent of gross
receipts
1.00% 3-1-1
Service Occupation Tax, percent of cost of
tangible property
1.00% 3-1-2
Natural Gas Tax on distributor, supplier,
furnisher or seller
5.0% of gross receipts 3-1-3-2
Utility Tax, percent of gross receipts 5.00% 3-1-3-2(A-C)
Electricity Consumption Tax imposed upon the
privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the
Village at the following rates, calculated on a
-For the first 2,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.536 cents per kilowatt
hour.
3-1-3-2.1A-(1a)
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 3
monthly basis for each purchaser.
Electricity Consumption Tax imposed upon the
privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the
Village at the following rates, calculated on a
monthly basis for each purchaser
-For the next 48,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.366 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the next 50,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.325 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the next 400,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.321 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the first 500,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.319 cents per kilowatt
hours.
-For the next 2,000,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.315 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the next 2,000,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.250 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the next 10,000,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.150 cents per kilowatt
hour.
-For the next 2,000,000
kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month,
0.100 cents per kilowatt
hour.
3-1-3-2.1A-(1a)
Gas Use Tax $.045 per therm 3-1-3-2.2-(B1)
Hotel and motel room Tax, percent of gross
revenues
5.00%
Effective 08/01/01
3-1-4-2
Admission Tax on the sale price of the ticketmovie
theater
4.00% 3-1-5-2
Admission Tax on the sale price of the ticketlive
theater
1.50% 3-1-5-2
Real Estate Transfer Tax, per $1,000 of selling
price
$3.00 3-1-6
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 4
Municipal Replacement Vehicle Tax $50.00 per vehicle 3-1-8
Appendix B
LIQUOR CONTROL AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Liquor License, application $250.00 3-3-4-2
Liquor License, Review Fee $250.00 3-3-4-2
Liquor License – Class A (Not-for-profit clubs
and organizations)
$500.00 plus $200.00
ea. bar
3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class B (Restaurant – full
liquor)
$2,500.00 plus $500.00
ea. bar
3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class C (Restaurant – beer
and wine only)
$2,500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class D (Hotel/motel) $2,500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class E (Bar or lounge –
hotel/motel only)
$2,500.00 plus $500.00
ea. bar
3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class F (Golf courses and
private clubs for profit)
$2,500.00 plus $500.00
ea. bar
3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class G (One day license) $25.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class H (Package liquor) $2,000.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class I (Package beer and
wine only)
$1,500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class J (Catering) $500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class K (Brew Pub – full
liquor)
$2,500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class L (Salon/Day Spas) $1,000.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class M (Movie Theaters) $2,500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License – Class N (Banquets) $3,000.00 3-3-2-3
Additional licenses, per license $500.00 3-3-2-3
Liquor License, Change of Location,
Upgrading of License, Sale of Business
$2,500.00 3-3-4-8
AMUSEMENTS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Entertainment on licensed premises, additional
fees
$100.00 3-3-8
Exhibitions, carnivals, application fee, per day $50.00 3-4A-2
Athletic Events – Less than 100 seats $100.00 3-4B-1
Athletic Events – 500 to 1,000 seats $200.00 3-4B-1
Athletic Events – over 1,000 seats $300.00 3-4B-1
Motion Picture Theatrical – Less than 500
seats
$100.00 3-4C-1
Motion Picture Theatrical –500 to 1,000 seats $200.00 3-4C-1
Motion Picture Theatrical – over 1,000 seats $300.00 3-4C-1
Dance, public, each dance $5.00 3-4D-2
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 5
Automatic Amusement Device, License
Application Fee
$250.00 3-4E-2
Automatic Amusement Device, decal, per
machine
$75.00 3-4E-9
Automatic Amusement Device, transfer fee,
per machine
$10.00 3-4E-9
FIREWORKS DISPLAYS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Fireworks License $50.00 3-4F-3
PEDDLER AND SOLICITOR AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Raffles License, per annum $25.00 3-4G5
Peddlers & Solicitors License Fee, license per
year
$25.00 3-5-5
BROADBAND (CABLE) COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Cable-TV Franchise Fee, percent of gross
revenues
5.00% 3-7-7(A)
SURCHARGE FOR E911 TELEPHONE
SYSTEM
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Emergency 911 Telephone Tax, per month,
per line
$1.50 3-9-2(A)
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Simplified Telecommunications Tax 6.00% 3-11-2
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Sexually Oriented Business License, due at
time of application
$2,500.00 3-12-10
Sexually Oriented Business Employee
License, due at time of application
$500.00 3-12-10
1-15-4: HEALTH & SANITATION (TITLE 4)
NUISANCES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Lien Release Fee – Foreclosures $25.00 4-1A-3
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Controlled Burn Permit Fee:
Commercial/Industrial, per season, per
address
Residential, per season, per address
$100.00
$50.00
4-2A-3C-2(d)
1-15-5: BUILDING REGULATIONS (TITLE 5)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Extension of 10% of entire building permit fee
valid permit minus bond and utilities
Minimum $200.00 5-1-8-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 6
BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Occupancy – Final Residential
Commercial
0 to 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 50,000 square feet
Over 50,000 square feet
$50.00
$135.00
$275.00
$400.00
5-2-3(C)
Final Occupancy – Commercial
Other than construction
Same as “Occupancy –
Final” fee Schedule
5-2-3(C)
Occupancy – Residential
Temporary Commercial
$125.00
Double the Final
occupancy fee
5-2-3-1(A)
Temporary Residential
Certificate of Commercial
Occupancy –
Cash Deposit
Minimum $1,000.00
Minimum $2,000.00
5-2-3-1(B)
Uncompleted Construction Lien Release Fee $15.00 5-2-3-1(H)
Uncompleted TCO Work, Administrative Fee $500.00 5-2-3-1(I)
PLAN REVIEW $0 - $5,000
FEE $5,001 - $10,000
COMMERCIAL $10,001 - $50,000
(Based on $50,001 - $100,000
Construction costs) $100,001 - $300,000
Includes 3 reviews $300,001 and over
Residential, New Single Family
Includes 3 reviews Dwelling
New Two Family Dwelling
Additional - 4th and subsequent reviews
thereafter
Additional Commercial Review – 4th and
subsequent reviews thereafter
$10.00
$25.00
$50.00
$125.00
$300.00
$500.00 plus $35.00 per
1,000 square feet.
$400.00
$225.00 per unit
$50.00 per additional
review
$100.00 per additional
review
5-3-1
Expedited Review Fees – Double the
applicable fees for the cash receipt codes (on
fee sheets) listed to the right.
Consultants – Consultant cost
Review Fee
(118), (114), (115),
(116), (154), (113)
Per Invoice
5-3-1
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Building Permit Fee (Based on Construction
Cost)
$1 - $200,000
$200,001 - $500,000
Multiply by 1%
Multiply the cost in
excess of $200,000 by
5-3-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 7
$500,001 and over
Minimum Permit Fee Inspection
0.6% plus above
Multiply the cost in
excess of $500,000 by
0.25% plus both above
fees $50.00
$40.00 per inspection
Deck Permit Planning & Building
Permit Fee Schedule
5-3-1
Detached Accessory Structure Permit Planning & Building
Permit Fee Schedule
5-3-1
Demolition Permit
-Residential
- Commercial
$6,000.00/$2,500.00
refundable deposit
$6,000.00/$5,000.00
refundable deposit
5-3-1
Dumpster Permit – Min. 7 days, Max. 28 days $40.00 per 7-day
increments, plus $100.00
refundable deposit
5-3-1
Electrical Permit – 0.3% of electrical
construction cost
-Amps
-Circuits
Inspection
Minimum $50.00
$25.00 per 100 amp
$4.00 per circuit
$40.00 per inspection
5-3-1
Heating, Venting Construction and Air
Conditioning (HVAC) Permit – 0.3% of
mechanical cost
Equipment
Inspection
Minimum $50.00
$50.00 per Unit
$40.00 per inspection
5-3-1
Plumbing Permit – 0.3% of plumbing
construction cost
Fixtures
Inspection
Minimum $50.00
$8.00 per fixture
$60.00 per inspection
5-3-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 8
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Elevator Permit
-Building Permit Fee
-Schedule
-Electrical/Plumbing Fees
(may apply)
Consultant Review/Consultant Cost
-Fee
-Inspection
(Construction related)
-Semi-annual Inspection – Not included in
permit fees, performed by Consultant, invoiced
separately (Amd. Ord 14-3314-40, eff 2/10/14)
-Re-Inspection
Per Invoice
$55.00 per inspection
$55.00 per inspection
$55.00 per reinspection
5-3-1
5-3-2
Emergency Home Repair Permit – Permit Fee
(HVAC, Water Heater, etc.)
Inspection
$10.00
$40.00
5-3-1
Exterior Satellite (only for dishes 6’ in diameter
and greater)
Earth Station
S.E.S.A. Permit
Consultant/Consultants Costs
Review Fees
$10.00
$40.00
5-3-1
Fence Permit
- Residential
- Commercial
$50.00
Building Permit Fee
Schedule
5-3-1
Lawn Irrigation Permit
- Residential
- Commercial
$50.00
Building Permit Fee
Schedule
5-3-1
Moving a Structure Permit Fee
A Cash Deposit(s) may apply
$50.00
Amount to be
determined by each
department on case-bycase
basis
5-3-1
Roofing Permit
- Residential
- Commercial
- Consultant Cost
$50.00
Building Permit Fee
Schedule
Per Invoice
5-3-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 9
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Sign Permit
-Directional
-Illuminated
-Non-Illuminated
-Temporary
-Consultant Cost
-Electrical Fee may apply
$25.00
$70.00, plus $1.00 per
square foot
$50.00, plus $1.00 per
square foot
$50.00
Per Invoice
Permit fee schedule
5-3-1
Swimming Pool Permit
-Planning & Building Permit Fee Schedule
-Electrical/Plumbing & Mechanical fees may
apply
Minimum $50.00 per
fee schedule
5-3-1
Tent Permit
-3 Day
-7 Day
-30 Day
-120 Day
-180 Day
$50.00
$70.00
$90.00
$120.00
5-3-1
Construction Trailer Permit
-Residential
-Commercial
$10.00 per trailer, per
month, thru duration of
construction
$100.00 per trailer, per
month, thru duration of
construction, (6) six
month minimum
5-3-1
Underground Storage Tank (UGST)/Above
Ground Storage Tank (AGST) Permit – Copy
of permit from the OSFM required prior to
issuance of permit
Review Fee
Inspection/Consultant Costs
$40.00 per tank
Consultant cost to be
passed to applicant
Per Invoice
5-3-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 10
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Fire Alarm System Permit
Review Fee
Inspection/Consultant Costs
$100.00
$100.00 or Consultant
cost to be passed to
applicant, plus
administrative fee (Min.
$10.00, Max. $50.00),
determined by the
Building Official, based
on project needs.
Per Invoice
5-3-1
5-3-2
Fire Suppression/Systems Permit
Review Fee
Inspection/Consultants Costs
$100.00
$100.00 or Consultant
cost to be passed to
applicant, plus
administrative fee (Min.
$10.00, Max. $50.00),
determined by Building
Official, based on
project needs.
Per Invoice
5-3-1
5-3-2
Fire Suppression/Alternate System Permit
(wet chemical, dry chemical, Halon, etc.)
Review Fee
Inspection/Consultants Costs
$100.00
$100.00 or Consultant
cost to be passed to
applicant, plus
administrative fee (Min.
$10.00, Max. $50.00),
determined by Building
Official, based on
project needs.
Per Invoice
5-3-1
5-3-2
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 11
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Kitchen Hood and Ansul System Permits
Review Fee
Inspection Fee
$100.00
$100.00 or Consultant
cost to be passed to
applicant, plus
administrative fee (Min.
$10.00, Max. $50.00),
determined by Building
Official, based on
project needs
Per Invoice
5-3-1
5-3-2
Wooded Site Development – New
Construction
-Commercial Subdivision and Property Unit
Development
-Residential Lot
Wooded Site Development – Alteration
-Commercial Subdivision and Property Unit
Development
-Residential Lot
$200.00/acre of green
space
$200/lot
$125/acre of green
space
$100/lot
5-3-1
13-1-1
Reinspection Fees – Inspector’s discretion,
based on contractor readiness
$40.00 per inspection 5-3-1
Final Reinspection Fees – Inspector’s
discretion, based on contractor readiness
$80.00 per discipline 5-3-1
Administrative Fee – 5% of the combined
building permit fees (account – 118)
Minimum $10.00 5-3-1
Expired or Cancelled Application (Applicable
when Review Fees incurred):
- Residential
- Commercial
- Miscellaneous
$50.00 plus internal
review fee or consultant
fees.
$100.00 plus internal
review fee or consultant
review fees.
Base fee determined by
the Building Official plus
internal review fee or
consultant review fees.
5-3-1
5-3-2
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 12
BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Renewal of Expired or Cancelled Application
(Fees for “Expired or Cancelled Application”
must be paid prior to renewal)
- Residential
- Commercial
- Miscellaneous
$50.00
$100.00
Base fee determined by
the Building Official plus
cost incurred.
5-3-1
5-3-2
Renewal of Expired Permit – 10% of permit Minimum $200.00 5-3-1
ENGINEERING FEES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Driveway Permit
- Residential
- Commercial
$50.00
$100.00, plus
performance deposit
(calculated by Village
Engineer
5-3-1
Parking Lot Improvement Permit, plus $40.00
per required inspection
- New or Remove/Replace
- Overlay, Resurface, or Sealing
$200.00, plus $150.00
refundable deposit.
$100.00, plus $75.00
refundable deposit.
5-3-1
Sidewalk Permit, plus $40.00 per required
inspection.
- Residential
- Commercial
$50.00 (Incl. 2
Inspections)
$100.00 (Incl. 2
Inspections)
5-3-1
Utility Permit – Repairs, Disconnections, or
work that does not require connection fees
plus $40.00 per required inspection.
- Residential Storm
- Residential Water or Sanitary
- Commercial Storm
- Commercial Water or Sanitary
$50.00 (Incl. 2
Inspections)
$100.00 (Incl. 3
Inspections)
$50.00 (Incl. 2
Inspections)
$150.00 (Incl. 3
Inspections)
5-3-1
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 13
WATER & SEWER CONNECTION
CHARGES
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Water Fees – Water Connection Charge, per
EDU
$2,242 (Eff. 12/08/14) 5-3-4(C)
Water Fees Outside – Water connection
Charge, corporate limits, per EDU
$3,923 (Eff. 12/08/14) 5-3-4(C)
Sewer Fees – Sewer Connection Charge, per
EDU
$1,115 (Eff. 12/08/14) 5-3-4(D)
Sewer Fees Outside – Sewer Connection
Charge, corporate limits, per EDU
$1,951 (Eff. 12/08/14) 5-3-4(D)
SITE GRADING, DRAINAGE & EROSION
CONTROL
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Major Site Work Permit Fee More than 5,000
square feet of disturbed are
$250, plus required
inspections – minimum
of 2 @ $40 each.
5-8-6
Minor Site Work Permit Fee $50.00 (includes two
inspections, permits
and review)
$40.00/each additional
inspection
5-8-6
Major Site Work Review Fee
Includes: 4 reviews for Residential
3 reviews for Commercial
Expedited Reviews:
$250/acre, minimum
one acre)
$30.00/each additional
review
$100.00/each additional
review
Double the applicable
fees (permit, review and
inspection)
5-8-6
Subdivision Plan Review Fee Consultant Cost, plus
5% of combined permit
fees.
5-8-6
1-15-6: ZONING (TITLE 6)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Site Plan Review Process:
- Single Subdivided
- Any other property per acre lot
- Minimum charge
- Shall not exceed
$150.00
$50.00
$150.00
$2,500.00
6-14-16
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Special Use:
- per single residential subdivided lot of
record
- all other petitions
$500.00
$500.00 plus costs
incurred
6-14-16
Variations:
- Per single residential subdivided lot of
record
- All other petitions
$250.00 plus costs
incurred
$250.00 plus costs
incurred
6-14-16
Zoning Map Amendments $500.00 plus costs
incurred
6-14-16
Zoning Text Amendments $500.00 plus costs
incurred
6-14-16
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Temporary Use Permit – Garage Sales $10.00 6-3-6
Temporary Use Permit - Other $100.00 6-3-6
1-15-7: SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT (TITLE 7)
ACREAGE FEES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Conservancy area monument, per marker $50.00 7-1-5(A)
Acreage Fees, per acre $1,300.00 7-1-5
Subdivision – Filing Preliminary Plat $1,000.00 plus costs
incurred
7-3-3(D)
VARIABLES USED IN CALCULATING DEVELOPER DONATIONS: The following variables
shall be used to determine developer donations for school, park and library purposes in
accordance with the method of calculation and provisions outlined in Title 7 of the Village
Code
AMOUNT OF
VARIABLE
Basic Library Contribution:
- One Bedroom Dwelling Unit
- Each additional Bedroom
- Fair Market Value of Once Acre Land
- Mean number of Persons per Occupied
Housing Unit (Per latest United States
Census or Special Census Statistics)
(Amend. Ord. 95-1371-01, eff. 1/9/95), Amend.
Ord. 99-1666-50, eff. 8/9/99), (Amend. Ord.
03-1842-19, eff. 4/28/03), (Amend. Ord. 04-
1890-05, eff. 03/08/04), (Amend. Ord. 06-
2961-53, eff. 11/13/06), (Amend. Ord. 07-
3012-40, eff. 12/10/07)
$200.00
$100.00
$545,000.00
2.75
7-7-1
Appeals to Developer Donations – Cash
Deposit
$10,000.00 7-7-4
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 15
1-15-8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY (TITLE 8)
SWIMMING FACILITIES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Per day, resident $4.00 8-1A-1(A)
Per day, guest of resident $4.00 8-1A-1(A)
Per day, non-resident $8.00 8-1A-1(A)
Per year, resident $24.00 8-1A-2(A)
Per year, resident family $60.00 8-1A-2(A)
Per year, non-resident $48.00 8-1A-2(A)
Per year, non-resident family $120.00 8-1A-2(A)
Beach Permit Application $10.00 8-1A-5
Beach Use by school district/not-for-profit
groups
$1.50 per person 8-1A-5(IJ)
PICNIC PERMITS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Picnic Permit Application, resident – 30 to 99
guests
$50.00 8-1B-2(B)
Picnic Permit Application, non-resident – 30 to
99 guests
$100.00 8-1B-2(B)
Picnic Permit Application, resident – 100 to
200 guests
$100.00 8-1B-2(B)
Picnic Permit Application, non-resident – 100
to 200 guests
$200.00 8-1B-2(B)
FIRE PLACE/FIRE PIT PERMITS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Resident use fire place Season at North Park $25.00 8-1B-3(B)
Non-Resident use of fire place at North Park $50.00 8-1B-3(B)
CANOE LAUNCH RACK PERMIT AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Canoe Structure Permit
- Seasonal
- 3-Day Rental
$50.00
$5.00
8-1D-4(A)
ATHLETIC FIELDS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Baseball/Softball/Soccer/Kickball
Classification A No Fee. No deposit
required.
8-1E-1(A)
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 16
ATHLETIC FIELDS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Baseball/Softball/Soccer/Kickball
Classification B A $35.00 per participant
fee charged for
unlighted fields. No
deposit required.
$15.00 per hour fee
charged for lighted
fields. No deposit
required.
8-1E-1(A)
Classification C $75.00 per participant
fee charged for
unlighted fields. No
deposit required.
$80.00 per hour fee
charged for lighted
fields. No deposit
required.
8-1E-1(A)
ATHLETIC FIELDS – TEAM FEES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Baseball/Softball/Soccer/Kickball
Team Fees
(only applicable to Classification C)
Team Fees:
5 – 16 hours:
$1,200.00 per team for
12 – 13 week season.
17 – 32 hours:
$2,400.00 per team for
12 – 13 week season.
33 – 48 hours:
$3,600.00 per team for
12 – 13 week season.
For every 5% of the
team participants who
are Lincolnshire
residents a 5%
reduction fee will be
provided to a minimum
fee of:
5 – 16 hours: $375.00
per season.
17 – 32 hours:
8-1E-2(A1)
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 17
$1,275.00 per season
33 – 48 hours:
$2,475.00 per season.
Any hours requested
over the maximum 48
will require an hourly
payment at the rate of
$80.00 per hour.
No Deposit Required
1-15-8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY (TITLE 8)
WATER AND SEWER RATES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Utility Service Filing Fee $150.00 Water
Connection Charge, Per
EDU
8-2-3
Well Permit $50.00 8-2-3(B)
Sewer – Excess BOD Surcharge $.13 per excess BOD 8-2A-1(B1)
Sewer – Excess SS Surcharge $.19 per excess SS 8-2A-1(B2)
Residential Water rate, per 1,000 gallons $6.83 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Residential Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage
$6.49 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Residential Water rate, Out-of-Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage
$7.51 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Residential Sewer rate, Out-of-Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage
$7.14 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
COMMERCIAL WATER AND SEWER RATES
Commercial Water rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, first 50,000 gallons
$6.83 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, first 50,000 gallons
$6.49 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, first 50,000
gallons
$7.51 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons, first 50,000 gallons
$7.14 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 51,000 gallons - 400,000 gallons
$7.08 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 51,000 gallons - 400,000 gallons
$6.73 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 51,000 gallons -
400,000 gallons
$7.78 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage,51,000 gallons -
400,000 gallons
$7.40 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 18
Commercial Water rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 401,000 gallons - 750,000
gallons
$7.56 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 401,000 gallons - 750,000
gallons
$7.19 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 401,000 gallons
- 750,000 gallons
$8.32 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 401,000 gallons
- 750,000 gallons
$7.92 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 751,000 gallons - 1,099,000
gallons
$8.10 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 751,000 gallons - 1,099,000
gallons
$7.70 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 751,000 gallons
- 1,099,000 gallons
$8.90 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 751,000 gallons
- 1,099,000 gallons
$8.47 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 1,100,000 gallons or more
$8.66 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, per 1,000 gallons of
water usage, 1,100,000 gallons or more
$8.23 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Water rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 1,100,000
gallons or more
$9.52 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Commercial Sewer rate, out of Village, per
1,000 gallons of water usage, 1,100,000
gallons or more
$9.06 (Eff. 1/1/20 Billing
Period)
8-2A-2
Construction use water, per acre (one acre
minimum for all building permits involving
construction water)
$125.00 8-2A-2(D)
¾” M-25 meter with Orion ME encoder and
brass connection set
$355.00 Effective
3/12/18,18-3765-193
8-2A-2(E)
¾” M-35 meter (short) with Orion ME encoder
and brass connection set
$385.00 Effective
3/12/18, 18-3765-193
8-2A-2(E)
1” M-55 meter with Orion ME encoder and
brass connection set
$455.00 Effective
3/12/18, 18-3765-193
8-2A-2(E)
1” M-70 meter with Orion ME encoder and
brass connection set
$490.00 Effective
3/12/18, 18-3765-193
8-2A-2(E)
1 ½” M-120 elliptical long meter, Orion ME
encoder, with cast iron connection set
$790.00 Effective
1/28/19, 19-3794-224
8-2A-2(E)
2” Recordall compound meter, Orion ME $2,640.00 Effective 8-2A-2(E)
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 19
encoder, with cast iron round connection set 1/28/19, 19-3794-224
3” Recordall compound meter, Orion ME
encoder, with cast iron round connection set
$3,045.00 Effective
1/28/19, 19-3794-224
8-2A-2(E)
4” Recordall compound meter, Orion ME
encoder, with cast iron round connection set
$4,535.00 Effective
1/28/19, 19-3794-224
8-2A-2(E)
6” Recordall compound meter, Orion ME
encoder, with cast iron round connection set
$6,300.00 Effective
1/28/19, 19-3794-224
8-2A-2(E)
Lien Release Fee $15.00 8-2A-6
Unpaid Water/Sewer Fees – Lien Release Fee $15.00 8-2A-6
WATER AND SEWER RATES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Discontinuing Service – Administration Fee $25.00 8-2A-7
Reinstatement of Utility Service Admin. Fee $25.00 8-2A-7
Residential meters are installed by Water Department personnel. Meter fee includes purchase of
the meter, inspection, all accessories, administrative costs and installation.
Commercial meter installation is performed by the contractor. Meter fee includes purchase of the
meter, all accessories, administrative costs and inspection. (Amd. Ord. 08-3074-57, eff. 12/8/08),
(Amd. Ord. 11-3186-08, eff. 2/28/11).
CONNECTION FEE ESTABLISHED
In order for the Village to collect a fair and reasonable charge for connection to the water and
sanitary sewer systems of this Village, the parcels as set forth in Exhibit “A” shall pay to the
Village, prior to connecting to the system of the Village, the sums as set forth in Exhibit “B” for
each such parcel. Such sums shall be in addition to, and not as a credit against, all other
connection or hook-on fees as may be imposed by other rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance
of this Village, or shown by its fee schedule, the connection fee hereby imposed being directly
related to the costs to the Village of constructing, expanding and extending the existing systems
to accommodate the parcels as set forth in Exhibit “A”.
ADJUSTMENT FOR FUTURE COSTS AND EXPENSES
The allocation of connection fees as set forth in Exhibit “B” is based upon actually incurred as well
as estimated future costs to the Village of constructing, expanding and extending the water and
sewer systems as determined as of the date of this ordinance. In the event costs as actually
incurred by the Village vary from those estimated, the Village reserves the right, for any parcel for
which payment in full of connection fees has not been received, to modify, alter or amend the
allocation of connection fees to such parcel to reflect the actual costs to the Village of
constructing, expanding and extending the waterworks and sewerage systems. The Village
further reserves the right to increase such connection fees to reflect any financing and interest
costs or other changes which the Village reasonably determines are to be allocated to the
construction, expansion and extension of said water and sewer systems.
The allocation of connection fees (Exhibit “B”) is further based upon the presently existing or
anticipated future zoning of such parcels and the anticipated water and sewer requirements
related thereto. In the event any such parcel is zoned differently than anticipated at the time of
request for connection to the Village water or sanitary sewer system, the Village reserves the right
to alter or amend the connection fees for such parcel in order to reflect such change in zoning
and water or sewer requirements.
This ordinance shall further serve as notice to affected property owners of the additional
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 20
connection fees associated with connection of their parcels to the Village water and sewer
systems. Affected property owners must contact the Village in order to determine the adjustment,
if any, to the connection fee figures as set forth herein which will be applicable to any specific
parcel and arising out of changes in costs, allocation of interest or other charges, charges in
zoning, or other similar costs related to the construction, expansion and extension of the systems.
STREETS AND PARKWAYS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Excavation Permit Fee Deposit $100.00 8-3-2
Right-of-Way Obstruction $100.00 8-3-9
Right-of-Way Obstruction Fee (may apply) $100.00 8-3-9(D)
REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE
HAULER SERVICES
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Wastehauler, 4 or more regular annual
customers
$500.00/year 8-4-5(A)
Wastehauler 3 or fewer regular annual
customers
$250.00/year 8-4-5(A)
Wastehauler, periodic, annual $50.00/year 8-4-5B(B)
NEWSRACKS AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Newsrack permit $30.00 8-5-5(B)
Newsrack renewal $30.00 8-5-5(C)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Collocation, single small wireless facility on
existing utility pole or wireless support structure
$650.00 8-6-4(G)
Collocation, more than one small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure
$350.00/each 8-6-4(G)
Installation, small wireless facility that will
require a new utility pole
$1,000.00 8-6-4(G)
1-15-9: POLICE REGULATIONS (TITLE 9)
TYPE AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
None
1-15-10: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC (TITLE 10)
ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment Tow Fee $350.00 Effective
1/1/07
10-1-13-2
1-15-11: MISDEMEANORS (TITLE 11)
TYPE AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
None
1-15-12: SIGN CONTROL (TITLE 12)
SIGN PERMIT AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
TITLE 1-VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE 15: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Revised 11/25/2019 Page 21
Directional sign permit fee $25.00 12-4-1(J)
Illuminated sign permit fee
- plus cost per square foot
$70.00
$1.00
12-4-1(J)
Non-illuminated sign permit fee
- plus cost per square foot
$50.00
$1.00
12-4-1(J)
Temporary Sign Permit Fee $50.00 12-13-1(A1)
Sign Variance Filing Fee $250.00 12-17-1(E)
1-15-13: TREE PRESERVATION AND LANDSCAPING (TITLE 13)
TREE PRESERVATION AMOUNT OF FEE CODE SECTION
Tree Removal Permit $50.00 for up to 10
trees, $5.00 per
additional tree
13-1-1
Wooded Site Development – New
Construction:
- Commercial Subdivision and Property
Unit Development
- Residential Lot
Alteration:
- Commercial Subdivision and Property
Unit Development
- Residential Lot
$400.00/acre of green
space
$400.00/lot
$125.00/acre of green
space
$100.00/lot
13-1-1
Non-Wooded Site Development – New
Construction:
- Commercial Subdivision and Property
Unit Development
- Residential Lot
Alteration:
- Commercial Subdivision and Property
Unit Development
- Residential Lot
$200.00/acre of green
space
$200.00/lot
$125.00/acre of green
space
$100.00/lot
13-1-1
Tree Replacement Fee – Appendix A Tree
Species
$150.00 per caliper
inch of tree
replacement required –
Paid to Village Tree
Bank
13-1-3(E)
Tree Replacement Fee – Non-Appendix A Tree
Species
$50.00 per caliper inch
of tree replacement
required
13-1-3(E)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 1
CHAPTER 16
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
SECTION
1-16-1: Incorporation of State Law
1-16-2: Gift Ban
1-16-3: Prohibited Political Activities
1-16-4: Ethics Advisor
1-16-5: Penalties
1-16-6: Amendments; Severability
1-16-1: INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW:
A. The provisions of Sections 1-5 (5 ILCS 430/1-5)(definitions) and 5-15 (5
ILCS 430/5-15)(prohibited political activities) and Article 10 (5/ILCS 430/10-
10 through10-40)(gift ban) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act,
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”) are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of
this governmental entity to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
B. Not in limitation of the foregoing, but for the purpose of expressing the
scope of this Chapter, the following terms have the definitions ascribed to
them.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-
Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support
or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action (as those
terms are defined in Section 2 of the Lobbyist Registration Act), (ii) relating
to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person's official Village duties.
CANDIDATE: a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at either a general primary election or general election.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 2
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: has the same meaning as that term is
defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, including the
bargaining over terms and conditions of employment, including hours,
wages, and other conditions of employment.
COMPENSATED TIME: any time worked by or credited to a Village
employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed
as a condition of employment with the Village, but does not include any
designated holidays or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers and employees whose hours are not fixed,
“compensated time” includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the Village and other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: any authorized time off earned by or
awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked
in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a
condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section
9-1.4 of the Election Code, including but not limited to a gift, subscription,
donation, dues, loan, advance, deposit of money, or anything of value that
constitutes an electioneering communication made or received in concert or
cooperation with or at the request, suggestion, or knowledge of a candidate,
a political committee, or any of their agents.
EMPLOYEE: 1. Any person employed by the Village, whether full-time, parttime,
or pursuant to a contract and whose employment duties are subject to
the direction and control of the Village with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed or 2. Any appointee.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an employee, member, or officer.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: any period during which a Village employee does
not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards
pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the Village.
OFFICER: An elected or appointed official of the Village; regardless of
whether the official is compensated.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 3
POLITICAL: any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign
for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities
(i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action (as those terms are defined in Section 2 of the
Lobbyist Registration Act), (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that
are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties or governmental
and public service functions.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: a party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code, but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county
clerk.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
1. Is seeking official action -
a. By the member or officer or
b. In the case of an employee, by the employee or by the member,
officer or other employee directing the employee;
2. Does business or seeks to do business -
a. With the member or officer or
b. In the case of an employee, with the employee or with the member,
officer or other employee directing the employee;
3. Conducts activities regulated -
a. By the member or officer or
b. In the case of an employee, by the employee or by the member,
officer or other employee directing the employee;
4. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee; or
5. is registered or required to be registered with the Secretary of State under
the Lobbyist Registration Act, except that an entity not otherwise a
prohibited source does not become a prohibited source merely because
a registered lobbyist is one of its members or serves on its board of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 4
directors.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
1. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
2. Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of,
selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
3. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding any thing of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
4. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum
question.
5. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an
election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
6. Assisting at the polls on Election Day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
7. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political
organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an
effort to get voters to the polls.
8. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any
petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
9. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
10. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 5
11. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature,
campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate
for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
12. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
13. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
14. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
15. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election, except to the extent that under subsection (d) of Section 6 of
Article IV of the Illinois Constitution each house of the General
Assembly shall judge the elections, returns, and qualifications of its
members.
1-16-2: GIFT BAN:
A. Solicitation: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no officer or
employee shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited
source. This ban applies to and includes the spouse of and immediate
family living with the officer or employee.
B. Offer: No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that
violates this Section.
C. Disposition of gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not
violate this Chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from
income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
D. Exceptions. The restrictions set forth in this Section shall not apply to the
following:
1. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 6
2. Anything for which the officer or employee pays the market value.
3. Any -
a. Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or under
this Act or
b. Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
4. Educational materials and missions.
5. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss Village business.
6. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as
father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother,
half sister, and including the grandfather or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancé.
7. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship
unless the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee and not because of the personal
friendship.
In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal
friendship, the officer or employee shall consider the circumstances
under which the gift was offered, such as:
a. The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift
and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
b. Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a
tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
c. Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 7
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or
similar gifts to other officers or employees.
8. Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a single
calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are
a. Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or
b. Catered for the purposes of this Section, "catered" means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to eat and delivered by any
means.
9. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting
from the outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the duties of the officer or employee as an
office holder or employee) of the officer or employee, or the spouse of
the officer or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or
enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or
employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
10. Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this
Act, "intra-governmental gift" means any gift given to a officer or
employee of the Village from another officer or employee of the Village;
and "inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to a officer or
employee of the Village, by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
11. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
12. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and
independent of one another.
E. Parity: It is the intent of the Village that this Section be interpreted no more
strictly or liberally than the corresponding provisions of the Act.
1-16-3: POLITICAL PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 8
activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the Village in connection with
any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other
officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of
that employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any
compensated time off.
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any
prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded any additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of
a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment,
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for the officer's or employee's
participation in any prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit activities that are otherwise permissible
for an officer or employee to engage in as a part of his or her official or
employment duties or activities that are undertaken by an officer or
employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.
1-16-4: COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Complaints alleging a violation of this Ordinance shall be filed with the
Village Attorney.
B. Within 3 business days after the receipt of a complaint, the Village Attorney
shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the
respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Village Attorney shall send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the
complainant within 3 business days after receipt by the Village Attorney.
C. The Village Attorney shall review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this Ordinance,
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence
presented by the complainant, to proceed. The Village Attorney shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the Village Attorney's ruling
on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to
proceed within 10 business days after receiving the complaint.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 9
D. In the event the Village Attorney finds the complaint to be sufficient and
there is probable cause to proceed, the Village Attorney will refer the matter
to the Village Prosecutor or the Lake County State’s Attorney for
prosecution.
E. In lieu of or in addition to filing a complaint as provided for in paragraph D,
the Village Attorney may file with the respondent’s supervisor a
recommendation to issue any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge; provided the Village Attorney may not recommend resignation or
removal of an elected officer. Any discipline provided for under this Chapter
shall comply with any collective bargaining agreement applicable to the
respondent.
F. Special Rules for Elections: If a complaint is filed during the 60 days
preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate,
the Village Attorney shall render its decision as required under subsection
(C) within 7 days after the complaint is filed, and if during the 7 days
preceding that election, the Village Attorney shall render such decision
before the date of that election, if possible.
1-16-5: PENALTIES; LIMITATIONS:
A. Fines:
1. Any person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2 of this
Chapter shall be fined in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not
more than $5,000.
2. Any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation
of this Chapter shall be fined in an amount of not less than $1,001 and
not more than $5,000.
3. Any person who knowingly and intentionally obstructs or interferes with
an investigation and hearing conducted under this Chapter shall be fined
in an amount not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000.
B. Criminal Penalties: The penalties for violations of Section 3 of this Chapter
shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5(a) for
similar violations of the Act.
C. Limitations: A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed within
one year after the alleged violation.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 1-16: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT
Revised 02/26/2018 Page 10
1-16-6: AMENDMENTS; SEVERABILITY:
A. Amendments: Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this Chapter shall be incorporated into this Chapter by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption shall not be
incorporated into this Section by reference without formal action by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Severability: If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this Section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed
without further action if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois
Supreme Court.
If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but
upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address
the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this
Section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
Section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be
deemed repealed without further action by this governmental entity.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 1 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
SECTION:
1-17-1: Purpose
1-17-2: Administrative Fines
1-17-3: Boards & Commissions
1-17-4: Business and License Regulations
1-17-5: Health and Sanitation
1-17-6: Building Regulations
1-17-7: Zoning
1-17-8: Subdivision and Land Management
1-17-9: Public Ways and Property
1-17-10: Police Regulations
1-17-11: Motor Vehicles and Traffic
1-17-12: Misdemeanors
1-17-13: Sign Control
1-17-14: Tree Preservation and Landscaping
1-17-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to include all Village fines in one chapter for ease of application
and understanding by Village personnel and the public.
1-17-2: ADMINISTRATION (TITLE 1)
ADMINISTRATION FINES
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
General Penalty
$5.00
$1,000.00
1-4-1
1-17-3: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (TITLE 2)
BOARDS & COMMISSIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
None
1-17-4: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS (TITLE 3)
BUSINESS & LICENSE REGS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
HOTEL & MOTEL ROOM
TAXES
$50.00 First Offense
$100.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
$500.00 First Offense
$500.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
3-1-4-8
ADMISSIONS TAX
$50.00 First Offense
$100.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
$500.00 First Offense
$500.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
3-1-5-8
REAL ESTATE - (Including
$50.00 First Offense
$500.00 First Offense
3-1-6-9
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 2 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
Beneficial Interests Therein)
TRANSFER TAX Persons found
guilty in court of resisting or
opposing enforcement of any
provision of this Section.
$100.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
$500.00 Second &
each Subsequent
Offense
WARNING TO MINORS
Subject to fine if you purchase
alcoholic liquor or misrepresent
your age for the purpose of
obtaining alcoholic liquor.
Requires posting AWarning to
Minor@ sign.
$100.00 for each
offense and every day
that such violation is
continued shall
constitute a separate
offense.
Up to $500.00 3-3-3-6
POWERS OF LIQUOR
CONTROL COMMISSIONER
In lieu of suspension or revocation
the Liquor Control Commissioner
may levy a fine on the licensee.
Up to $2,500.00 $10,000.00 3-3-4-2A
LIQUOR CONTROL
Any person violating any provision
of this Chapter.
$100.00 for each
offense and every day
that such violation is
continued shall
constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
$2,500.00 for each
offense and everyday
that such violation is
continued shall
constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
3-3-10
1-17-4: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS (TITLE 3)
BUSINESS & LICENSE REGS MINIMUM FINE MAXIMUM FINE CODE SECTION
ILLEGAL CONDUCT OF
RAFFLE
$25 Any penalties
prescribed for a Class C
Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
3-4G-10
PEDDLERS & SOLICITORS
Any person violating any
provisions of this Chapter.
$25.00 for each
offense and every day
that such violation is
continued shall
constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
$500.00 for each
offense and every day
that such violation is
continued shall
constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
3-5-11
CABLE & VIDEO CUSTOMER
PROTECTION LAW
$0.00 $750/day; $25,000 for
each occurrence of a
material breach per
customer
3-7-10-3
UNLAWFUL ACTS
Unlawful Interception of or
Tampering with Cable System or
Cable Services
$0.00 $500 3-7-23
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 3 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
1-17-5 HEALTH AND SANITATION (TITLE 4)
HEALTH AND SANITATION
REGS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
VEGETATION NUISANCES
Any owner who shall refuse or
neglect to abate a nuisance
$100.00 per offense
per day
$1,000.00 per offense
per day
4-1A-2
ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTROL
The violation of any of the
provisions of this Article
$500.00 per violation
per day
4-2A-4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
REGS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
SMOKING REGS
Any person who smokes in an area
where smoking is prohibited
$50.00
$750.00
4-4-12-A
SMOKING REGS
Any person who owns, manages,
operates or otherwise controls a
Public Place, a Place of
Employment or an Open Air
Dining Area that knowingly
permits smoking in an area where
smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this chapter
$100.00 for first
offense
$250.00 for second
offense
$1,000.00 for third
or subsequent
offense
4-4-12-B
SMOKING REGS
Any person who fails to post the
signs required by this Chapter
$250.00
4-4-12-C
1-17-6: BUILDING REGULATIONS (TITLE 5)
BUILDING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
Public Utilities
Any person who causes or breaks,
severs, damages, interrupts, or
otherwise interferes with, or who
causes a break, severance, and/or
interruption of, damage to, and/or
other interference with, any utility
line located anywhere within the
Village.
$2,500.00
5-1-5-F.1
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 4 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
BUILDING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
STOP WORK ORDER
Minor Stop Work Order
Inspection for Compliance
Major Stop Work Order
Inspection for Compliance
Work Without a Permit
$100.00
$ 50.00
$400.00
$150.00
200% of the
Combined Permit
Fee, Minus Utility &
Bonds
$100.00
$ 50.00
$400.00
$150.00
200% of the Combined
Permit Fee, Minus
Utility & Bonds
5-1-8-1
VIOLATION AND
ENFORCEMENT OF
REGULATIONS
(1) Any person who shall violate
any provisions of this Code or the
other technical codes which have
been adopted by reference or
otherwise; or (2) shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a
building or structure; or (3)
perform any engineering,
landscaping or earthwork of any
approved plan or direction of the
Building Official or of any permit
or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Code
$100 - $500.00 per
violation per day
$500.00 - $2,500.00
per violation per day
5-1-8-1
FAILURE TO INSTALL OR
CONSTRUCT ACCORDING
TO PLANS - Residential
$1,000.00 - First
Offense
$2,500.00 - Second
Offense
5-1-8-8
FAILURE TO INSTALL OR
CONSTRUCT ACCORDING
TO PLANS - Commercial
$2,500.00 - First
Offense
$3,500.00 or 20% of
entire Building Permit
Fee, whichever is
greater
5-1-8-8
SANITARY SEWERS,
PROHIBITED
CONNECTIONS AND FLOWS
A person who shall discharge
sump pumps into Village streets
from November 1 to April 1 of each
year.
$25.00 per violation
per day
$500.00 per violation
per day
5-4B-5-5
BUILDING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
SANITARY SEWERS,
PROHIBITED
CONNECTIONS AND FLOWS
Violation of provisions of this
Article.
$200.00 per
violation per day
$1,000.00 per
violation per day
5-4B-6
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 5 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
BUILDING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
FIRE CODE
Person who shall violate a
provision of this code or fail to
comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved
construction documents or
directive of the code official or of a
permit certificate used under
provisions of this code.
$1,000.00 per
violation per day
5-4D-1B
FIRE CODE
Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served
with a stop work order
$500.00 per day
$1,000.00 per day
5-4D-1C
MECHANICAL CODE Person
who shall violate a provision of
this code or fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, install, alter,
repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction
documents or directive of the code
official or of a permit certificate
used under provisions of this code
$1,000.00 per
violation per day
5-4E-1D
MECHANICAL CODE
Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served
with a stop work order
$500.00 per day
$1,000.00 per day
5-4E-1E
BUILDING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
FUEL GAS CODE
Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or fail to
comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved
construction documents or
directive of the code official or of a
permit certificate used under
provisions of this code.
$1,000.00 per
violation per day
5-4J-1D
FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION - Violations of
the provisions of this Chapter or
failure to comply with any of its
requirements
$500.00 plus costs and
expenses per day
5-7-11-A
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 6 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
1-17-7: ZONING (TITLE 6)
ZONING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
ZONING REGS
A person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with, or resists the
enforcement of the provisions of
this Zoning Code
$25.00 per violation
per day
$500.00 per violation
per day
6-1-5-A
GARAGE SALES
Any person who violates any
provision of this Article
$25.00 per violation
per day
$100.00 per violation
per day
6-3-15-E
PERSONAL WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES
Failure to remedy all of the cited
non-conformaties
$500.00 per violation
per day
6-16-5-C
ZONING REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
MICRO WIND ENERGY
SYSTEMS
Failure to remedy nonconformities
$500.00 per violation
per day
6-17-4D
1-17-8: SUBDIVISION AND LAND MANAGEMENT (TITLE 7)
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
CONSERVANCY AREA
MONUMENTS
Penalty for removing, tampering
with in any way, damaging or
destroying conservancy area.
$500.00 plus costs and
expenses
7-1-5A
SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT
General Penalty Fine
$25.00 per day
$500.00 per day
7-1-9
1-17-9: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY (TITLE 8)
PUBLIC WAYS & PROPERTY
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
BURNING WOOD IN PARKS
Anyone found in violation of the
prohibition
$50.00 per offense
$500.00 per offense
8-1-5G
VIOLATION OF PARK RULES
Each person in violation of this
Ordinance or park rules as posted
in the parks
$50.00 per offense
per person per day
$500.00 per offense
per person per day
8-1-5-K
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 7 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
PUBLIC WAYS & PROPERTY MINIMUM FINE MAXIMUM FINE CODE SECTION
ANIMALS IN PARKS
Any person bringing a pet or
animal, including dogs, into any of
the village parks, park facilities,
Natural Areas, or Nature Preserves
$50.00 per offense
per person per day
$500.00 per offense
per person per day
8-1-5-L
WATER AND SEWER
REQUIRED CONNECTIONS
General Penalty Fine
$500.00 per violation
per day
8-2-3-4G
WATER RESTRICTIONS
General Penalty Fine
$25.00 first offense
$50.00/ subsequent
offenses
8-2-7
ILLEGAL CROSS
CONNECTION
Any person Violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter
$50.00 per day
$500.00 per day
8-2B-19-F
REFUSE COLLECTION AND
WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Any hauler who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter
$500.00
$1,500.00
8-4
CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC
UTILITIES IN RIGHT-OFWAY
Any person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter
$50.00 per day per
offense
$500.00 per day per
offense
8-6-22
ILLICIT STORM WATER
DISCHARGE
$750.00 per day
8-7-14
1-17-10: POLICE REGULATIONS (TITLE 9)
POLICE REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
BURGLAR & HOLDUP
ALARMS
Any person or business who
violates any provisions of Chapter
1 of Title 9
$25.00 per violation
per day
$750.00 per violation
per day
9-1-3; 9-1-4; 9-1-5;
& 9-1-6
BURGLAR & HOLDUP
ALARMS/ FALSE ALARMS
Any person or business who
violates the provisions of this
Section
Per Alarm in a
calendar year:
1-3 No charge
4-6 $25.00 ea.
7-9 $50.00 ea.
10-12 $75.00 ea.
13+ $100.00 ea.
$100.00 per alarm for
13 or more alarms in a
calendar year
9-1-7
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 8 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
1-17-11: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC (TITLE 10)
MOTOR VEHICLE AND
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
VIOLATIONS OF THE
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
Every violation of Title 10 based
on a violation of the Illinois
Vehicle Code shall be subject to all
of the penalty provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, except that
the minimum penalty shall be
imposed regardless of whether or
not a person receives a disposition
Court Supervision for the violation
$25.00
As provided for in the
Illinois Vehicle Code
Title 10-1-1
ALL OTHER VIOLATIONS OF
TITLE 10 EXCEPT
"PARKING"; "DEPOSITING
SNOW OR ICE UPON PUBLIC
ROADWAYS"; AND
"ABANDONED VEHICLES"
$25.00
As provided for in the
Illinois Vehicle Code
10-1-3; 10-1-4;
10-1-7; 10-1-8;
MOTOR VEHICLE AND
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
ANY PARKING VIOLATION;
EXCEPT HANDICAP,
RECREATIONAL AND
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
PARKING
Any person who violates any
parking restriction(s) of this
Section
$25.00
$50.00 if paid after
thirty (30) days of the
issuance of the notice
of violation.
10-1-5 (A)
UNAUTHORIZED USE OF
PARKING SPACES
RESERVED FOR PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES
Any person who violates the
provisions of this Section
$250.00
$500.00 if paid after
thirty (30) days of the
issuance of the notice
of violation.
Title 10-1-5 (E)
RECREATIONAL AND
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
PARKING
Any person who violates the
provisions of this Section. Each
day constitutes a separate and
distinct violation.
$25.00
$50.00 if paid after
thirty (30) days of the
issuance of the notice
of violation.
10-1-5 (B, C & D)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 9 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
DEPOSIT OF SNOW OR ICE
UPON PUBLIC ROADWAYS
Any person who deposits snow or
ice upon any Village-owned street
or public way
$50.00
First Offense: $50.00
Second Offense:
$100.00
Third or more
Offenses: $200.00
10-1-6
ABANDONED/INOPERABLE
VEHICLES
Any person or business violating
any of the provisions of this
Section
$50.00 per violation
per day
$750.00 per violation
per day
10-1-9
CERTIFICATES OF SAFETY
Any person or business violating
any of the provisions of this
Section
$250.00 per
violation per day
$750.00 per violation
per day
10-1-11
1-17-12: MISDEMEANORS (TITLE 11)
MISDEMEANORS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
VIOLATIONS OF TITLE 11 All
other violations of Title 11 not
specifically addressed below
$50.00
$750.00
11-1; 11-2; 11-3;
11-4; 11-5; 11-6;
11-7; 11-9; & 11-11; & 11-
12 (Amd. Ord. 16-3404-
131, eff. 07/01/16)
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY Any
person violating any provision of
this Section
$250.00
$1,000.00
11-8-1 to 11-8-8
PUBLIC NUISANCE
ASSEMBLAGES
Any person violating any provision
of this Section
$250.00
$1,000.00
11-10-1-2
OBSTRUCTING
IDENTIFICATION
$750.00
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class A
Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-4-1
ILLEGAL CONTROL OF
CANNABIS
$500.00
Any penalties as
prescribed in the
Illinois Criminal Code
for the Class of
Misdemeanor Violated
11-10-6
SALE OR DELIVERY OF
SYNTHETIC
CANNABANOIDS OR
STIMULANTS
$500
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class B
misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-6-5(b)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 10 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
MISDEMEANORS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
POSSESSION OR USE OF
SYNTHETIC
CANNABANOIDS OR
STIMULANTS
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class C
misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-6-5(c) and (d)
MANUFACTURE OF
SYNTHETIC
CANNABANOIDS OR
STIMULANTS
$750
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class B
misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-6-5(e)
UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Any person violating any provision
of this Section
$750.00
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class A
Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-13-2
SALE OR DELIVERY OF
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA -
PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section
$500.00 for each
item sold or delivered
$750 for each item
sold or delivered by
persons 18 years of
age or older to a
person under the age
of 18 years
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class
B Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class
A Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-13-3
UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF
FRAUDULENT, FICTITIOUS
OR ALTERED
IDENTIFICATION CARD
$750.00
Any penalties as
prescribed for a Class A
Misdemeanor in the
Illinois Criminal Code
11-10-15
PARENTAL
RESPONSIBILITY
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section for each
offense committed
$250.00
$1,000.00
11-12-2 to
11-12-2-4
CURFEW / TRUANCY
PROHIBITED
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section for each
offense committed
$50.00
$500.00
11-12-3 to
11-12-3-2
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR –
UNDER AGE 21
Any person violating any of the
provisions of these Sections for
each offense committed (Amd.
Ord. 15-3355-82, Eff. 3/23/15)
$500
$1,000
$1,000
$2,000
11-12-4-2(A) 1-8
11-12-4-2 (A) 9-11
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 11 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
MISDEMEANORS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
CANNABIS – UNDER AGE 21
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section for each
offense committed
$500.00 for the first
offense in any 12
month period
$1,000.00 for a
second or subsequent
offense in any 12
month period
Any penalties as
prescribed in the
Illinois Criminal Code
for the Class of
Misdemeanor Violated.
11-12-7
KEEPING OR HARBORING
ANIMALS; NUMBER
RESTRICTED
Any person violating the
provisions of this Section
$25.00 for the first
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 for a second
or subsequent
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 per violation
per day
11-13-4
ANIMALS ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY
Any person violating the
provisions of this Section
$100.00 for the first
offense in a calendar
year
$150.00 for a second
or subsequent
offense in a calendar
year
$150.00 per violation
11-13-5
FAILURE TO OBTAIN
RABIES VACCINATION
Any person violating the
provisions of this Section
$25.00 for the first
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 for a second
or subsequent
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 per violation
per day
11-13A-2
DOGS AND CATS RUNNING
AT LARGE
Any person violating the
provisions of this Section
$25.00 for the first
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 for a second
or subsequent
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 per violation
11-13A-3
DISTURBING THE QUIET;
NUISANCE
Any person violating the
provisions of this Section
$25.00 for the first
offense in a calendar
year
$50.00 for a second or
subsequent offense in a
calendar year $50.00
per violation
11-13A-4B
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 17: COMPREHENSIVE FINE/PENALTY SCHEDULE
Page 12 of 12
Revised 12/09/2019
1-17-13: SIGN CONTROL (TITLE 12)
SIGN REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
SIGN PERMIT
Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Title
$25.00 per violation
per day
$750.00 per violation
per day
12-4-1K
1-17-14: TREE PRESERVATION (TITLE 13)
TREE PRESERVATION
MINIMUM FINE
MAXIMUM FINE
CODE SECTION
TREE PRESERVATION
General Penalty Fine
$500.00 per tree
$1,500.00 per tree
13-1-13
LANDSCAPING
General Penalty Fine
$500.00 per week
13-2-7
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-1: BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/14/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Board Established; Membership
2-1-2: Powers and Duties
2-1-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP: There is here by and herewith
established a Board of Local improvements for the Village composed of the
Mayor and two (2) members of the Board of Trustees of the Village who
shall be appointed by the corporate authorities of the Village by ordinance.
The Board of Local improvements shall meet upon the call of its Chair and
twenty four (24) hours' notice of such meeting or call shall be given each
member, except that a meeting may be held when all members are present
without notice.
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES: The Board of Local improvements shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by the Statutes of the State of Illinois. 1 (Ord. 41)
165 ILCS 5/9-2-7
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-2: PLAN COMMISSION
Revised 06/20/13 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose and Establishment
2-2-2: Membership; Terms
2-2-3: Organization and Procedures
2-2-4: Powers and Duties
2-2-5: Land Subdivision or Resubdivision
2-2-6: Improvements
2-2-7: Expenditures
2-2-8: Transfer of Power
2-2-8: TRANSFER OF POWER: All matters presently pending before the Plan
Commission of the Village of Lincolnshire and all functions of that Plan
Commission shall be transferred, devolved, considered, and where
appropriate, heard, by and before the Mayor and Village Trustees asmembers
of the Village Corporate Authority or as assigned, referred and delegated in the
future by the Mayor and Village Trustees to a committee of the Village Board,
the Village Board acting as a committee of the whole or one or more hearing
officers appointed by the mayor, whose appointment is confirmed by the
Trustees. After the effective date of this Ordinance, all references in the
Municipal Code of the Village of Lincolnshire to the Plan Commission shall be
read as though the words AMayor and Village Trustees@ appeared in the stead
of Plan Commission.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-3: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Intent and Purpose
2-3-2: Board Membership
2-3-3: Administrative Duties
2-3-4: Standards for Review
2-3-5: Reports and Recommendations
2-3-6: Appeals
2-3-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE: The Architectural Review Board (ARB) is hereby created
to promote and maintain the high quality character of the development of the
Village; to preserve and protect the public health, safety, comfort and welfare by
enhancing the value of real estate within the Village; and maintain and protect
Village real estate from impairment or destruction of value through quality
appearance analysis. The ARB shall encourage and promote attractiveness and
compatibility of new buildings and developments, promote the reasonable, orderly,
and effective display of signs, and avoid excessive uniformity or dissimilarity,
inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings
and use of materials. The ARB shall review all proposed business, commercial,
industrial, and multiple-family dwelling buildings and developments, and all
proposed planned unit developments and proposed uses of open space and public
lands, including schools, libraries, fire stations, parks and other public uses of
whatever nature.
2-3-2: BOARD MEMBERSHIP:
A. Membership Criteria: The Architectural Review Board shall consist of six (6) full
members and two alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of the Village
and shall serve without pay. The six (6) full members shall attend and participate in
all meetings of the ARB and shall vote on all matters coming before it. The
alternate members shall attend and participate in all meetings of the ARB, but shall
only vote in the event one or more full members are absent at the time any vote is
taken. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the advice and
consent of the Village Board of Trustees, based upon their particular training or
experience in art, architecture, community planning, land development, landscape
architecture, construction or other relevant professions or trades. One full member
shall be appointed chairman by the Mayor.
B. Membership Terms: All full members appointed to the ARB, shall serve for a term
of three (3) years. The alternate members shall be appointed for a term of one year.
C. Vacancy: If a vacancy shall occur in any of the full membership, the alternate
members shall be appointed to fill such vacancy. Additional vacancies in the full
and alternate membership shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments and for the period remaining in the term of the member being filled at
the time of replacement.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-3: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 2
D. Quorum: All meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman or three (3)
members. Four (4) members of the ARB shall constitute a quorum. Any action
must receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at a meeting.
E. Removal: The Mayor shall have the authority to remove any member of the ARB if it
is determined the best interests of the Village require removal. The Mayor shall
report his or her reasons for the removal to the Village Board of Trustees within
thirty (30) calendar days prior to removal, which must receive a favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all elected members of the Village Board of Trustees and shall be
entered upon the record of the corporate authorities. If the Mayor fails to report his
or her reasons for the removal within thirty (30) calendar days or is overruled by the
Village Board of Trustees, the member term shall remain. No member shall be
removed a second time for the exact same factual occurrence.
F. Secretary: A representative of the Department of Community and Economic
Development shall serve as secretary. The ARB shall keep minutes of its meetings,
including a record showing the vote of each member upon every question. The
ARB secretary shall be the custodian of all such minutes and all reports,
recommendations, documents, exhibits and other material pertaining to the conduct
of the affairs of the Board.
G. Conflict of Interest: No elected or appointed official or public employee, or family
member of an elected or appointed official or public employee, or paid consultant of
the Village shall appear on behalf of or represent any person or organization at any
proceeding before the ARB or the Village Board, except on behalf of himself or a
member of his/her household, or on behalf of an eleemosynary organization, when
zoning, permits or the expenditure of Village funds are not an issue.
2-3-3: ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES: The Architectural Review Board shall be an advisory
body of the Village government, and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consult with and advise, the Village Board of Trustees, regarding all matters
within their above-stated jurisdiction and expertise.
B. Review and make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees regarding all
new construction of buildings and development within the Village, excluding singlefamily
residential, relative to exterior architectural design, arrangement, height and
appearance, color and materials of the exterior construction, landscaping, entrance
ways, lighting, off-street parking facilities, and similar matters, including aesthetic
factors.
C. Review all applications for a variance to Title 12 Sign Control, and report findings
and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees in the manner prescribed in
Section 12-17-1 of this Code.
D. Approve or disapprove applications for minor amendments to special uses, as
defined in Section 6-14-11(F)(2) and to Planned Unit Developments, as defined in
Section 6-14-12(H)(2).
E. Approve or disapprove revisions to existing site development plan(s), including
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-3: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 3
Minor Amendments to Special Use and Planned Unit Developments (PUD),
regarding exterior architectural design, arrangement, building massing and scale,
height and appearance, color and texture of exterior materials, landscaping,
lighting, signage, and similar elements.
F. To make recommendations regarding advisable amendments to existing codes,
ordinances and regulations of the Village.
G. Adopt, amend or repeal its own procedural regulations from time to time, provided
the same are not inconsistent with law or this Chapter.
2-3-4: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW: The Architectural Review Board shall commence
review of any application for the construction of any new or modification to any
existing building or development, excluding single-family residential, within sixty
(60) days from which a complete application has been referred to it. The ARB
review shall give consideration to the following:
A. The architectural value and significance of the structure or site to the proposed use.
B. The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the proposed structure to
the existing structures and to the surrounding area.
C. The compatibility of exterior architectural design with the arrangement, texture and
materials to be used on the structure.
D. Appropriateness of landscaping and orientation of building to the site, in relation to
other property in the surrounding area.
E. Excessive similarity to any other structure existing or proposed structure included in
the same site/development or facing upon the same or intersecting street in respect
to one or more of the following features of exterior design and appearance:
1. Apparently identical front or side elevations.
2. Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors, windows, porticos
or other openings or breaks in the elevation facing the street, including reverse
arrangement.
3. Other significant identical features of design, such as, but not limited to,
material, roof line and height or other design elements; provided that a finding
of excessive similarity shall state not only that such excessive similarity exists,
but that it is of such a nature as to be reasonably expected to provoke one or
more of the harmful effects sought to be avoided hereunder.
F. Inappropriate relation to the established character of other structures in the
immediate neighboring area in respect to significant design features, such as
material or quality of architectural design, provided that a finding of
inappropriateness shall state not only that such inappropriateness exists, but that it
is of such a nature as to be reasonably expected to provoke one or more of the
harmful effects sought to be avoided hereunder.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-3: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
Revised 12/10/2018 Page 4
G. Such other factors, including aesthetic factors, as the Board deems appropriate.
2-3-5: REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: The Architectural Review Board shall
convene a public meeting/hearing to review and consider any application identified
in Section 2-3-3 herein, within sixty (60) days from which a complete application
has been referred to it. The ARB shall submit to the Village Board of Trustees
written findings and/or recommendations within sixty (60) days from the vote, in
relation to the items set forth in Section 2-3-4 of this Chapter.
The Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the recommendation of the ARB within
not more than sixty (60) days from the last date the ARB votes on an application. The
failure of the ARB to forward its recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees
within the time period provided herein, or as extended with the agreement of the
applicant, shall result in the recommendation on the application or request being
deemed approved, and the Village Board of Trustees shall consider the
recommendation accordingly. Without further public hearing, the Village Board of
Trustees shall approve, deny the application, or refer it back to the ARB for further
consideration. An application which fails to receive an approval recommendation of the
ARB must include written findings based upon the items set forth in Section 2-3-4 of
this Chapter and must receive a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the elected
members of the Village Board of Trustees to be approved. An application which
receives the approval recommendation of the ARB may be denied by a majority vote of
the Village Board of Trustees.
In no case shall a building permit be issued where the permit plans are not in strict
compliance with the conditions for final approval. Any building permit issued in
violation of this Section shall be null and void.
2-3-6: APPEALS: Any person aggrieved by action taken under the regulations of this Chapter
may appeal any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the ARB.
Within thirty (30) days from the determination made by the ARB, an application for
appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward such appeal to
the Village Board of Trustees for its consideration. Any applicant seeking an appeal
will also be provided an opportunity to present oral comments directly to the Village
Board of Trustees.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-4: PARK BOARD
Revised 07/14/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
PARK BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Established
2-4-2: Membership; Terms of Office
2-4-3: Procedures
2-4-4: Powers and Duties
2-4-5: Salaries of Employees
2-4-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED: The corporate authorities of the Village hereby
establish a recreation system and hereby establish a Village Park Board
which shall be a department of the government of the Village and assist the
corporate authorities in maintaining and operating such recreation system.
(1971 Code, 40-1-1)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE: The Village Park Board shall consist
of seven (7) members and one alternate member who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Village Board. The Mayor shall
designate one of the members chairman of the Park Board subject to the
approval of the Village Board. The member of the Village Board that has
responsibility over parks shall be an ex officio member of said Park Board
without the power to vote. The one alternate member shall attend and
participate in all meetings of the Board, but shall only vote in the event one
or more of the full members is absent at the time a vote is taken. All
members of the Park Board and the Park Board alternate shall be residents
of the Village.
The appointed citizen members shall serve for a period of three (3) years.
An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one year. If a vacancy
shall occur in the full membership, the alternate member shall be appointed
to fill such vacancy. Vacancies in full and alternate membership shall be
filled in the same manner as original appointments. The Village Park Board
shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 91-1210-23)
2-4-3: PROCEDURES: Following their appointment, the members of the Village
Park Board shall meet and adopt, change or alter, rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with Village ordinances and Illinois
State laws. The Board shall keep written records of its proceedings which
shall be open at all times to public inspection. The Board shall file an annual
report with the Village Board setting forth its past-year activities and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-4: PARK BOARD
Revised 07/14/1999 Page 2
recommendations for future action by the Village Park Board. (1971 Code,
40-1-4)
2-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES: The Village Park Board shall have the following
powers and duties subject to the approval of the Village Board:
A. To provide and supervise the care and maintenance of all Village property
designated for park or recreational use.
B. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time plans for
specific improvements of the park and recreational facilities.
C. To establish such rules and regulations that are deemed necessary in order
to provide for the health and safety of the residents using the park. (1971
Code, 40-1-5)
D. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time plans,
projects and schedules regarding recreational and park-related programs
and activities.(amd. Ord. 93-1312-42 eff 12/6/93)
E. To manage and administer all plans, programs, projects and activities
delegated to it by the Village Board, as authorized and directed by the
Village Board. (amd. Ord. 93-1312-42 eff 12/6/93)
2-4-5: SALARIES OF EMPLOYEES: The Park Board may, only with the review
and approval of the Village Board, employ necessary help whose salaries,
wages and other necessary expenses shall be established by the Village
Board and provided for by adequate appropriation made by the Village
Board from the public funds. (1971 Code, 40-1-6)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-5: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE BOARD
Deleted 01/23/2017 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE BOARD
Chapter 5 of Title 2 of the Village of Lincolnshire
Village Code concerning Emergency Telephone Board
has been deleted in its entirety with Ordinance
#17-3430-158
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-6: ZONING BOARD
Revised 6/24/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
ZONING BOARD
SECTION:
2-6-1: Intent and Purpose
2-6-2: Board Membership
2-6-3: Administrative Duties
2-6-4: Rules and Procedures
2-6-5: Reports and Recommendations
2-6-6: Appeals
2-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE: The Zoning Board is hereby created with the purpose of
preserving, protecting and maintaining the public health, safety, welfare and
comfort by encouraging the most appropriate use of land within the Village, and to
advise the Corporate Authorities on matters referred to it by the Village Board of
Trustees.
2-6-2: BOARD MEMBERSHIP
A. Membership Criteria: The Zoning Board shall consist of six (6) regular members
and one (1) alternate member, all of whom shall be residents of the Village and
shall serve without pay. The six (6) full members shall attend and participate in all
meetings of the Zoning Board and shall vote on all matters coming before the
Zoning Board. The one alternate member shall attend and participate in all
meetings of the Zoning Board, but shall only vote in the event one or more full
members are absent at the time any vote is taken. All members shall be appointed
by the Mayor subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees,
based upon their particular education, training, experience, judgment or other
relevant professions or trades. One full member shall be appointed chairman by
the Mayor.
B. Membership Terms: All full members of the Zoning Board shall hold office for the
term of three (3) years. The alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one
(1) year.
C. Vacancy: If a vacancy shall occur in any of the full membership, the alternate
member shall be appointed to fill such vacancy. Additional vacancies in the full and
alternate membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments and for the period remaining in the term of the member being filled at
the time of replacement.
D. Quorum: All meetings of the Zoning Board shall be held at the call from the
Chairman or three (3) members of the Zoning Board. Four (4) members of the
Zoning Board shall constitute a quorum. Any action must receive the approval vote
of four (4) members present at the meeting. Failure to obtain four (4) affirmative
votes shall be deemed disapproval of the action under consideration.
E. Removal: The Mayor shall have the authority to remove any member of the Zoning
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-6: ZONING BOARD
Revised 6/24/19 Page 2
Board if it is determined the best interests of the Village require removal. The
Mayor shall report his or her reasons for the removal to the Village Board of
Trustees within thirty (30) calendar days prior to removal, which must receive a
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all elected members of the Village Board of
Trustees and shall be entered upon the record of the corporate authorities. If the
Mayor fails to report his or her reasons for the removal within thirty (30) calendar
days or is overruled by the Village Board of Trustees, the member term shall
remain. No member shall be removed a second time for the exact same factual
occurrence.
F. Secretary: A representative of the Community & Economic Development
Department shall serve as secretary. The Zoning Board shall keep minutes of its
meetings, including a record showing the vote of each member upon every
question. The Zoning Board secretary shall be the custodian of all such minutes
and all reports, recommendations, documents, exhibits, and other material
pertaining to the conduct of the affairs of the Zoning Board.
G. Conflict of Interest: No elected or appointed official or public employee, or family
member of an elected or appointed official or public employee, or paid consultant
of the Village shall appear on behalf of or represent any person or organization at
any proceeding before the Zoning Board or the Village Board, except on behalf of
himself or a member of his/her household, or on behalf of a charitable
organization, when zoning, permits or the expenditure of Village funds are not an
issue.
2-6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES: The Zoning Board shall be an advisory body of the
Village government, and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Review all appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by the Zoning Administrator under this Title, and recommend action to the Village
Board of Trustees.
B. Review all applications for text and map amendments to Title 6 of this Code, report
findings and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
C. Review all applications for a special use permit, excluding Planned Unit
Developments (PUD), and report findings and recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees.
D. Review all applications for a variance from Title 6 of this Code, and report findings
and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
E. Receive from the Zoning Administrator and/or the Village Board of Trustees
recommendations and inquiries related to the effectiveness of Title 6 and report
conclusions and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
F. Receive from the Village Board of Trustees any matters not listed above, which
has been referred to it, and report conclusions and recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees.
G. Approve or disapprove applications for Minor Amendments to special uses,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 2-6: ZONING BOARD
Revised 6/24/19 Page 3
excluding Planned Unit Developments (PUD), as defined in Section 6-14-11(F)(2)
of this Code.
H. To prepare and recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees a Comprehensive
Plan and an Official Map, and all powers and duties incidental and related thereto,
or to recommend changes from time to time, for the present and future
development or redevelopment of the Village, all as more expressly described in
Article 11, Division 12 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4, et seq.
2-6-4: RULES AND PROCEDURES: The Zoning Board shall have the power to adopt,
amend or repeal its own procedural rules from time to time, provided the same are
not inconsistent with law, including this Chapter.
2-6-5: REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: The Zoning Board shall convene a public
hearing to review and consider any application identified in Section 2-6-3 herein,
within sixty (60) days from which a complete application has been referred to it.
Written findings and/or recommendations of the Zoning Board shall be submitted to
the Village Board of Trustees within sixty (60) days from the vote, addressing the
factors set forth in Chapter 14 of Title 6.
The Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the written findings and
recommendation of the Zoning Board within not more than sixty (60) days from the
last date the Zoning Board votes on an application. The failure of the Zoning Board
to forward its written findings and recommendations to the Village Board of
Trustees within the time period provided herein, or as extended with the agreement
of the applicant, shall result in the recommendation on the application or request
being deemed approved, and the Village Board of Trustees shall consider the
recommendation accordingly. Without further public hearing, the Village Board of
Trustees shall approve, deny, or refer the application back to the Zoning Board for
further consideration. An application which fails to receive an approval
recommendation of the Zoning Board must include written findings based upon the
items set forth in Chapter 14 of Title 6 and must receive a favorable vote of twothirds
(2/3) of all the elected members of the Village Board of Trustees to be
approved. An application which receives the approval recommendation of the
Zoning Board may be denied by a majority vote of the Village Board of Trustees.
In no case shall a building permit be issued where the permit plans are not in strict
compliance with the conditions for final zoning approval. Any building permit issued
in violation of this Section shall be null and void.
2-6-6: APPEALS: Any person aggrieved by action taken under the regulations of Title 6
may appeal any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Board. Within thirty (30) days from the determination made by the Zoning Board,
an application for appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall
forward such appeal to the Village Board of Trustees for its consideration. Any
applicant seeking an appeal will also be provided an opportunity to present oral
comments directly to the Village Board of Trustees.
1
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBLITY FOR BENEFITS
UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
SECTION:
2-7-1: Purpose
2-7-2: Administrative Composition
2-7-3: Procedure
2-7-1: PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method
of determining the eligibility of applicants for the benefits enumerated under the
Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.) (“PSEBA”). All
benefits provided applicants pursuant to PSEBA will be consistent with PSEBA.
2-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION
A. Appointment of a PSEBA Claims Administrator: The Finance Director is hereby
appointed as PSEBA Claims Administrator, who shall be responsible for
scheduling and making all necessary arrangements for the holding of hearings
under this Administrative Procedure. The duties of the PSEBA Claims
Administrator include, but are not limited to:
1. Receiving and filing applications for PSEBA benefits;
2. Receiving and filing all documents required by this Chapter to accompany
such claims;
3. Reviewing applications for completeness and returning incomplete
applications to the applicant;
4. Upon receipt of a complete application, scheduling hearings in accordance
with the availability of the applicant, his or her counsel, counsel for the
Village, and the Hearing Officer; and posting and serving a Notice of Hearing
in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1;
5. At the direction of the Hearing Officer, posting and serving additional notices
of hearing in the event that any hearing date should be continued to a later
date;
6. Arranging for a court reporter to prepare a transcription of the hearing;
7. Receiving, filing and serving the parties with the determination of the Hearing
Officer and any order, ruling, or intermediate or supplemental determination of
the Hearing Officer;
2
8. Responding to requests for information or subpoenas relating to an
application for PSEBA benefits or a hearing thereon; and
9. Preparation of the record of any application and hearing thereon for purposes
of judicial review.
B. Appointment of a Hearing Officer: The Mayor, with the consent of the Village
Board, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of Hearing
Officer for the purpose of holding hearings and making determinations
concerning the eligibility for persons claiming benefits under PSEBA. In making
such selection, the Mayor shall consider:
1. The candidate’s ability to perform the duties set forth herein;
2. The background and experience of the candidate;
3. The qualifications of the candidate, including but not limited to, the
requirement that the candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years, with a knowledge of and
experience in labor and employment law, general civil procedure, rules of
evidence, and administrative practice.
C. Power of the Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers
granted to him or her under applicable state statutes and the common law
relative to the conduct of administrative hearings, including the power to:
1. Preside over all Village of Lincolnshire hearings involving PSEBA;
2. Administer oaths;
3. Hear testimony, and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility
for benefits under PSEBA upon an applicant for such benefits;
4. Issue subpoenas and orders to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers and documents upon the request of one or
more of the parties to a hearing or their representatives;
5. Rule upon objections concerning the admissibility of evidence;
6. Preserve and authenticate the record of any hearing and all exhibits that are
introduced into evidence at the hearing;
7. Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing;
8. If the determination is that the applicant is eligible for PSEBA benefits, issue a
finding as to the extent of the reduction, if any, of PSEBA benefits resulting
from the existence of health insurance benefits payable from any other
source.
2-7-3: PROCEDURE
3
A. Application for PSEBA Benefits: A PSEBA benefit application form prepared by
the Village shall be the standard form required for PSEBA benefit applicants to
use in requesting benefits under PSEBA. The form shall be completed and
executed by the requesting applicant and delivered to the PSEBA Claims
Administrator. Information required by the form shall include:
1. The full particulars of the employee’s claim for benefits, including the date,
time, place, and nature of the injury giving rise to the claim for benefits,
2. The names of any witnesses to the injury and the circumstances under which
it occurred, together with any other factual circumstances surrounding the
incident(s) alleged to have occasioned the injury;
3. The names, ages, and relationship to the applicant of legal dependents for
whom PSEBA benefits may be claimed; and
4. Information relating to the existence of health insurance benefits payable from
any other source, which information must be current as of the date of
application.
The application also must be accompanied by:
1. The written decision of the Village of Lincolnshire Police Pension Board
determining or declaring the injury to have been incurred in the applicant’s
line of duty as a public safety employee of the Village of Lincolnshire;
2. A signed release authorizing the collection and production by voluntary
agreement or subpoena, of information, including protected health
information, relating to the injury and the incident giving rise to the injury; and
3. If the applicant is seeking reimbursement for health insurance premium
payments or out-of-pocket payments for PSEBA-related health insurance
coverage or medical expenses, copies of all payment records or receipts for
payments made by the applicant.
B. Application Review: The PSEBA Claims Administrator shall review the
application for completeness. If incomplete, the PSBA Claims Administrator shall
return the application to the applicant for completion in accordance with the
requirements of Section 2-7-2. If complete, the PSBA Claims Administrator shall
forward the completed application to the Hearing Officer and, after determining
the availability of the parties, shall give notice concerning the holding of a hearing
on the application. No hearing on the application shall be held and no award of
PSEBA benefits may be awarded until the application is complete.
4
C. Administrative Hearing: The conduct of the administrative hearing shall be as
follows:
1. Upon receipt of a completed application, the PSEBA Claims Administrator
shall arrange for the posting and serving of a Notice of Hearing in accordance
with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1, et seq., notifying the parties
and the public of the date, time, and place of a hearing to be held on the
application.
2. The parties to the hearing, who may be represented by counsel, shall be the
applicant and the Village of Lincolnshire. Both the applicant and the Village of
Lincolnshire are necessary parties to the hearing.
3. Upon motion by a party, or on the Hearing Officer’s own determination after
consultation with the parties, the initial hearing date or any subsequent date
for the hearing may be reset by the Hearing Officer to mutually convenient
dates and times.
4. Hearings shall be held on the date and time and at the place specified in the
Notice of Hearing, as originally set or reset and posted and served in
accordance with law;
5. All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter whose presence at
the hearing has been arranged by the PSEBA Claims Administrator at the
direction of the Hearing Officer, and a transcript of all proceedings shall be
made and preserved.
6. The applicant and the Village may examine and cross-examine witnesses,
introduce exhibits, and request orders or subpoenas compelling the
appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents. A
failure of a party or non-party to respond to discovery orders issued by the
Hearing Officer shall not be cause for unreasonable delay but shall be
evaluated by the Hearing Officer in assessing the weight of the evidence
comprising the record of the hearing.
7. It shall be the applicant’s obligation at the hearing to present in evidence any
and all documents, including medical records, which were presented to the
Village of Lincolnshire Police Pension Board that considered the applicant’s
claim for a duty-related pension. All other medical records, health insurance
records (including records relating to health insurance or self-insurance
5
coverage of the applicant as a dependent), employment records, military
records, accident reports, witness statements, injury reports (including any or
all injury reports prepared or submitted by the applicant, whether or not in
conjunction with the injury giving rise to the claim for PSEBA benefits), police
reports, workers’ compensation claims, reports and records, and records
establishing dependency status (including marriage and birth certificates) that
are relevant to the applicant’s claim for PSEBA benefits shall be admissible at
the hearing and shall be obtainable by any party requesting such records in
pre-hearing discovery, subject to the requirements of applicable law.
8. The strict rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing. The Hearing
Officer may consider such evidence that a prudent person would reasonably
rely upon in the course of managing his or her own affairs.
9. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the parties may make closing arguments on
the record or, if either party so requests, may submit post-hearing briefs in
support of their positions, which briefs may contain appropriate citations to
legal authority.
10. The determination by the Hearing Officer as to whether the applicant is
eligible for benefits under PSEBA shall be in writing, shall include findings of
fact and conclusions of law, and shall be consistent with PSEBA. If the
Hearing Officer determines that the applicant is eligible for benefits under
PSEBA, the determination shall include a finding as to the extent of the
reduction, if any, of PSEBA benefits resulting from the existence of health
insurance benefits payable from any other source.
11.Such determination shall constitute a final determination for the purpose of
appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.
4833-6960-8275, v. 2
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
TAXES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Retailer's Occupation Tax
3-1-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-1-3: Utilities Tax
3-1-3-1: Definitions
3-1-3-2: Tax Imposed
3-1-3-2-1: Electricity Consumption Tax
3-1-3-2-2: Municipal Gas Use Tax
3-1-3-3: Interstate Commerce Exemption
3-1-3-4: Tax Additional to Other Payments
3-1-3-5: Reports Required
3-1-3-6: Erroneous Payments
3-1-3-7: Recovery; Limited Actions
3-1-4: Hotel and Motel Room Tax
3-1-4-1: Definitions
3-1-4-2: Tax Imposed; Payment and Collection of Tax
3-1-4-3: Administration and Enforcement
3-1-4-4: Suit for Collection; Revocation of License
3-1-4-5: Interest and Penalties
3-1-4-6: Interstate Commerce Exception
3-1-4-7: Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
3-1-4-8: Penalty for Violation
3-1-5: Admissions Tax
3-1-5-1: Definitions
3-1-5-2: Tax Imposed
3-1-5-3: Payment and Collection of Tax
3-1-5-4: Administration and Enforcement
3-1-5-5: Suit for Collection; Revocation of License
3-1-5-6: Interest and Penalties
3-1-5-7: Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
3-1-5-8: Penalty for Violation
3-1-6: Real Estate (Including Beneficial Interests Therein) Transfer Tax
3-1-6-1: Definitions
3-1-6-2: Tax Imposed
3-1-6-3: Exempted Transactions
3-1-6-4: Revenue Stamps Required
3-1-6-5: Statement of Consideration, Filing
3-1-6-6: Transfers in Trust
3-1-6-7: Enforcement
3-1-6-8: Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
3-1-6-9: Penalty for Violation
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 2
3-1-7: Use Tax
3-1-8: Municipal Replacement Vehicle Tax
3-1-9: Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility
3-1-9-1: Scope
3-1-9-2: Definitions
3-1-9-3: Notices
3-1-9-4: Late Payments
3-1-9-5: Payment
3-1-9-6: Certain Credits and Refunds
3-1-9-7: Audit Procedure
3-1-9-8: Appeal
3-1-9-9: Hearing
3-1-9-10: Interest and Penalties
3-1-9-11: Abatement
3-1-9-12: Installment Contracts
3-1-9-13: Statute of Limitations
3-1-9-14: Voluntary Disclosure
3-1-9-15: Liens
3-1-9-16: Application
3-1-9-17: Severability
3-1-10: Home Rule Municipal Retailer=s Occupation Tax
3-1-11: Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-1-12: Home Rule Sales Tax - Annual Review
3-1-13: Food and Beverage Tax
3-1-13-1: Definitions
3-1-13-2: Imposition of Tax; Collection of Tax
3-1-13-3: Exemptions
3-1-13-4: Administration and Enforcement
3-1-13-5: Suit for Revocation; Revocation of License
3-1-13-6: Interest and Penalties
3-1-13-7: Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
3-1-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this Village at the
rate as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter
15 of Title 1 of this Code, business, in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12 eff.
4/13/98)
B. Accounting: Every such person engaged in such business in the Village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by Section three of "An Act in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 3
Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchase for Use or Consumption" approved
June 28, 1933, as amended.
C. Payment: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
calendar month. (Ord. 69-211-12)
D. Exemption Not Applicable: That the exemption set forth in 35 ILCS 120/1d
shall not apply to the retailer's occupation tax herein imposed. (Ord. 82-698-
5)
3-1-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the
business of making sales of services in this Village at the rate as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
Title 1 of this Code, the cost price of all tangible personal property
transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal
Code.(Amd. Ord. 98-15550-12 eff. 4/13/98)
B. Accounting: Every supplier and serviceman required to account for
Municipal Service Occupation Tax for the benefit of this municipality shall
file, on or before the first day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by section 9 of the "Service Occupation
Tax Act", as amended.1
C. Payment: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed during the
preceding calendar month. (Ord. 69-212-13)
D. That exemption (e) of section 439.102 of chapter 120 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes shall not apply to the Service Occupation Tax herein imposed.
(Ord. 82-698-5)
3-1-3: UTILITIES TAX:
3-1-3-1: DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply:
135 ILCS 305/1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 4
GROSS RECEIPTS - The consideration received for the distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity
supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expense whatsoever. Gross Receipts shall not include receipts received
from the Village of Lincolnshire for the sale to said Village of any of the utility
products or service mentioned above.
PERSON - Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITY - A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT - The Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS
5/1-101 et seq.).
PURCHASER - Any Person who uses or consumes electricity or gas
purchased in a Purchase at Retail.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL - Sale of gas or electricity by a retailer to a Person
for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term
Aretailer@ means any Person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
TAX COLLECTOR - The person delivering electricity or gas to the
Purchaser.
3-1-3-2: TAX IMPOSED: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within
the corporate limits of the Village and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Amd. Ord. 09-3116-39, eff. 12/14/09)
3-1-3-2.1: ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION TAX (Ord.98-1592-54, eff. 8/24/98)(Amd.
Ord. 09-3116-39, eff. 12/14/09)
A. Tax Imposed.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 5
1. Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-12) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon
the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at
the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
a. For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.536 cents per kilowatt-hour;
b. For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.366 cents per kilowatt-hour;
c. For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.325 cents per kilowatt-hour;
d. For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.321 cents per kilowatt-hour;
e. For the first 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.319 cents per kilowatt-hour;
f. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
g. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.250 cents per kilowatt-hour;
h. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.200 cents per kilowatt-hour;
i. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.150 cents per kilowatt-hour;
j. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.100 cents per kilowatt-hour.
2. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the Village, the State of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the State.
3. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity as follows:
a. By residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after September 1, 1998;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 6
b. By non-residential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery of services in accordance with Section
16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104) or the first bill
issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever
issuance occurs sooner.
B. Collection of Tax:
1. Subject to the provisions of Subparagraph D regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Section 3-1-3-2.1 shall
be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in the State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This
tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers
the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and
in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this Section 3-1-3-2.1, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further,
that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall
be obligated to remit such tax.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their
expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon
request. For purposes of this Section 3-1-3-2.1, any partial payment of a
billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to
be for the delivery of electricity.
C. Tax Remittance and Return:
1. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis, file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village. The return and accompanying remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected.
2. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 7
or is excused from collecting the tax under this Section 3-1-3-2.1, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Village and pay the
tax directly to the Village on or before the last day of the month following
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
D. Resales:
1. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be considered
to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the
Village and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
2. If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not
liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity
and shall furnish such additional information as the Village may
reasonably require.
3. Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
4. The Village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this Section 3-1-3-2.1 for electricity
used or consumed by the person, or if the number (1) was obtained
through misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the
person has discontinued making resales.
a. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this
Article XVI directly to the Village pursuant to subsection 2 on the
amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect and remit the tax pursuant to Section 3-1-3-2.1.
b. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this
section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on
any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that
the person reports to the Village the total amount of electricity
delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Village
may reasonably require.
E. Books and Records.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 8
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this Section 3-1-3-2.1, shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records
denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability under this Section 3-1-3-2.1. The books and records shall be
subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of
the day.
3-1-3-2.2: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
A. Short Title:
The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the AMunicipal Gas Use
Tax@ and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of
Lincolnshire, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
B. Tax Imposed:
1. Except as otherwise provided by Section, a tax is imposed on the privilege
of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a Purchase at
Retail at the rate as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set
forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
2. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the
Purchaser, and nothing in Section shall be construed to impose a tax on the
occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.
3. The Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to
the Purchaser=s premises, to the Public Utility designated to collect the tax
pursuant to subsection D of this Section on or before the payment due
date of the Public Utility=s bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the
Director of Financial Systems on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the Purchaser if
no Public Utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to
subsection D or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a Public Utility
so designated.
4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person,
business or activity which, under the Constitutions of the United States or
State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village.
5. A Person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax
imposed by this Section with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 9
directly to the Director of Financial Systems on or before the fifteenth day of
the second month following the month in which the gas is used or
consumed.
6. The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the Purchaser is billed
by a Public Utility on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
7. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a Retail
Purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section if the gross
receipts from the Sale at Retail of such gas to the Retail Purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to
the Village=s municipal gas utility tax, as amended from time to time,
Section 3-1-3-2, authorized pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
C. Collection of tax by Public Utility.
The Village Manager and Director of Financial Systems are each authorized
to enter into one or more contracts for collection of the tax imposed by this
Section with any Public Utility delivering gas to any Purchaser in the Village.
The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following
provisions:
1. Public Utility will collect the tax from Purchasers as an independent
contractor;
2. The Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the Director of Financial
Systems no more often than once each month;
3. The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service
fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the
Director of Financial Systems;
4. The Public Utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any tax
unable to be collected from a Purchaser, provided the Public Utility
applies the same diligence toward collecting the tax as it applies to
collecting its own charges and fees; and
5. Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 10
D. Books and records.
Every taxpayer and Public Utility shall keep accurate books and records,
including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under Section. Subject to applicable privacy laws, all
such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject
to and available for inspection by the Village. (Amd. Ord. 09-3116-39, eff.
12/14/09)
3-1-3-3: INTERSTATE COMMERCE EXEMPTION: No tax is imposed by this
Section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise
to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this State or
any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or
engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this Section for such transactions as are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. (1971 Code, '60-3-3)
3-1-3-4: TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHER PAYMENTS: Such tax shall be in addition
to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this
Municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets,
alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein,
thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the
operation of the taxpayer's business. (1971 Code, '60-3-4)
3-1-3-5: REPORTS REQUIRED: On or before the 15th day of each month, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Manager for the previous month
stating:
1. Taxpayer=s name;
2. Taxpayer=s principal place of business;
3. Taxpayer=s gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 11
Authorities may require.
The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay
to the Village Manager or his designee, the amount of tax imposed.(Ord. 01-
1746-04, eff. 2/12/01)
3-1-3-6: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether
as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such -I amount shall
be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from
the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts
erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. (1971 Code, '60-3-6)
3-1-3-7: RECOVERY; LIMITED ACTIONS: No action to recover any amount of tax
due under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than
three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (1971 Code, 60-3-7)
3-1-4: HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM TAX:
3-1-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONSIDERATION - The total amount which a person is required to pay for
the privilege of renting, leasing or letting a hotel or motel room, exclusive of
charges for meals, beverages and other services which are available to
members of the public who are not renting a hotel or motel room. (Ord. 11-
3219-41)
HOTEL and MOTEL - Includes every building or structure kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where
lodging, or lodging and food, or suites, or other accommodations are offered
for a consideration to transient guests, in which ten (10) or more rooms, or
suites, or other accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and
food, for such guests.(Amd. Ord. 05-1982-46, eff. 7/25/05)
OWNER - Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a hotel or motel room or receiving the Consideration for the
rental of such hotel or motel room. (Ord. 11-3219-41)
PERSON - Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 12
Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause Prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or
part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
(Ord. 75-382-12)
3-1-4-2: TAX IMPOSED; PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting a
hotel or motel room within the Village of Lincolnshire a tax, at the rate
described in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Title 1, Chapter 15 of this
Code, on the Consideration paid for each such hotel or motel room rented
for every twenty-four (24) hour period or any fraction thereof for which
additional consideration is paid; provided, however, that the tax shall not be
levied and imposed upon any person who works and lives in the same hotel
or motel; and further provided, that the tax shall not be levied upon
directors, officers, agents or employees of the owner or operator of the hotel
or motel when renting or using said rooms for, or in connection with, the
transaction of business for such hotel or motel.
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be borne
by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room
and pays consideration in exchange for receiving such privilege, said
person hereinafter referred to as Arenter.@
C. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges. It shall be the duty of the Owner to secure said tax from the renter
of the hotel or motel room and to pay over to the Village Treasurer said tax
under procedures prescribed by the Village Treasurer, or as otherwise
provided in this ordinance.
D. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this ordinance shall secure
said tax from the renter at the time he collects the Consideration for the
hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice, receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the Consideration given to the renter at the time of
payment the amount due under the tax provided in this ordinance shall be
stated separately on said documents. The person who collects the tax shall
hold it as trustee for and on behalf of the Village. (Amd. Ord. 11-3219-41,
eff. 11/28/11)
3-1-4-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. The Village Treasurer is hereby designated as the administration and
enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 13
shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Treasurer to collect all
amounts due the Village from the Owners responsible for collecting and
remitting the tax to the Village. A sworn monthly hotel and motel occupancy
tax return, on a calendar month basis, shall be filed by each Owner with the
Village Treasurer, on forms prescribed by him, showing all Consideration
paid in exchange for the privilege of renting, leasing or letting of hotel or
motel rooms during the preceding month. Said returns are to be filed within
ten (10) days after the end of the month covered by said return, with the tax
herein imposed due and owing as of the first day of the month following the
month covered by said return. Each return shall be accompanied by
payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by
the return; provided, however, that the Owner may retain an amount of
money equal to two and one-half percent (2 1/2%) of the tax due as
compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of such
tax.
B. During the normal business working hours, the Village Treasurer, or any
person certified by him as his deputy or representative, may enter the
premises of any Owner for the purposes of inspection and examination of its
books and records for the proper administration of this Section, and for the
enforcement of the collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for
any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer or his
duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his duties
hereunder. It shall be the duty of every Owner to keep accurate and
complete books and records, containing all information necessary for the
collection of the tax herein imposed, to which the Village Treasurer or his
duly authorized deputy or representative shall at all such times have full
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing: (a) the number of
hotel or motel rooms for which Consideration was received during such
twenty four (24) hour period, (b) the Consideration collected in exchange for
granting a person the privilege of renting, leasing or letting each hotel or
motel room; and (c) the actual hotel or motel room tax receipts collected for
the date in question. (Amd. Ord. 11-3219-41, eff. 11/28/11)
3-1-4-4: SUIT FOR COLLECTION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE: Whenever any
person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or when any Owner shall
fail to collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who has the ultimate
liability for payment of the same, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of
the Village Manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. If the Mayor, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that
any Owner has willfully evaded his responsibility to collect the tax imposed
by this Section, he may suspend or revoke all Village licenses, included but
not limited to any liquor license issued under this Code, held by such
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 14
person.
Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be
held not less than five (5) days after notice is given of the time and place
thereof, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Pending
notice, hearing and finding, any license of which such person may be
possessed may be temporarily suspended by the Mayor. Any suspension or
conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil
liability for nonpayment of the tax due. (Amd. Ord. 11-3219-41, eff.
11/28/11)
3-1-4-5: INTEREST AND PENALTIES: In the event of failure by any Owner to
collect and pay to the Village Treasurer the tax required hereunder within
ten (10) days after the same shall be due, such tax shall be considered
delinquent and be subject to the accrual of interest and assessment of
penalties as provided for in this Chapter. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff.
10/8/07) (Amd. Ord. 11-3219-41, eff. 11/28/11)
3-1-4-6: INTERSTATE COMMERCE EXCEPTION: No tax is imposed by this
Section with respect to any transaction to the extent to which such business
may not, under the Constitution of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof. (Amd. Ord. 11-
3219-41, eff. 11/28/11)
3-1-4-7: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX: All proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this Section, including interest and penalties,
shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
3-1-4-8: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION: In addition, any person found guilty in a court
of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the fine
set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-
1. (Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
3-1-5: ADMISSIONS TAX:
3-1-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT - Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular
performance or show, motion picture theater, flower, poultry or animal show,
circus, rodeo, athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition open and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 15
available for public entertainment, including without being limited to, skating,
dancing, swimming, riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, and any other
exhibition, performance or entertainment open to the public and shown,
exhibited or staged in the Village.
PERSON - Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or
otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the
owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof. (Ord. 75-383-13)
3-1-5-2: TAX IMPOSED: A Village amusement tax is hereby levied and imposed
upon the patrons of any amusement within the Village. The tax shall be
equal to the following percentage of the receipts from admission fees or
other charges (sales price of each ticket), exclusive of Federal and State
taxes, to witness, view or participate in the amusement. The ultimate
liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the presenter of the
amusement, but the incidence of the tax may be passed on to the ticket
user or purchaser. This tax shall be in addition to any other taxes.
The tax for Non-Motion Picture Theater Events and Motion Picture Theater
Events is as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
This tax shall not apply to or be imposed upon those witnessing, viewing, or
participating in any amusement, the proceeds of which inure exclusively to
the benefit of religious, charitable or education institutions or organizations,
or not-for-profit entities duly qualified under the laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 92-1246-24)(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12 eff. 4/13/98)(Amd. Ord. 98-1567-
29, eff. 6/8/98)(Ord. Amd. 98-1614-76, eff. 12/14/98)
3-1-5-3: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX: The owner, manager, licensee or
operator of each amusement shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to
collect the tax from each ticket user or purchaser. Every person required to
collect the tax levied by this Section shall secure said tax from the ticket
user or purchaser at the time that he collects the price or charge for the
ticket of admission. The amount of the tax shall be shown separately on
each ticket of admission; provided, however, that such shall not be required
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 16
on tickets of admission printed prior to the effective date of the tax herein
imposed. The tax shall be paid to the person required to collect it as trustee
for and on behalf of the Village.
3-1-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: The Village Manager or his
designated agent is designated as the administration and enforcement
officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the
responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or his designated agent to
collect all amounts due the Village from the owners, managers, licensees
and operators of amusements in the Village. A sworn monthly amusement
admission tax return, on a calendar month basis, shall be filed by each
owner, manager, licensee or operator of each amusement in the Village with
the Village Manager or his designated agent, on forms prescribed by him,
showing the gross receipts from the amusement and the number of
admission tickets sold and issued. Said returns are to be filed within ten (10)
days after the end of the month covered by said return, with the tax herein
imposed due and owing as of the first day of the month following the month
covered by said return.
Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due
and owing for the month covered by the return, provided, however, that the
person making said return may retain an amount of money equal to two and
one-half percent (2 1/2%) of the tax due as compensation for services
rendered in the collection and payment of such tax.
The Village Manager or his designated agent, may enter the premises of
any amusement for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books
and records for the proper administration of this Section, and for the
enforcement of the collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for
any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Manager or his
designated agent in the discharge of his duties hereunder. It shall be the
duty of every owner, manager, licensee or operator to keep accurate and
complete books and records, containing all information necessary for the
collection of the tax herein imposed, to which the Village Manager or his
designated agent shall at all times have full access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing; (a) the number of tickets of admission issued
during the twenty four (24) hour period, and (b) the actual amusement tax
receipts collected for the date in question.
3-1-5-5: SUIT FOR COLLECTION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE: Whenever any
person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided,or when any owner,
manager, licensee or operator of a hotel or motel in the Village shall fail to
collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who has the ultimate liability
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 17
for payment of the same, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the
Village Manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. If the Mayor, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that
any amusement owner, manager, licensee or operator has wilfully evaded
his responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this Section, he may suspend
or revoke all Village licenses, included but not limited to any liquor license
issued under this Code, held by such person. Said person shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be held not less than five (5)
days after notice is given of the time and place thereof, addressed to him at
his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any
license of which such person may be possessed may be temporarily
suspended by the Mayor. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such
hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the
tax due.
3-1-5-6: INTEREST AND PENALTIES: In the event of failure by any amusement
owner, manager, licensee or operator to collect and pay to the Village
Treasurer the tax required hereunder within ten (10) days after the same
shall be due, such tax shall be considered delinquent and be subject to the
accrual of interest and assessment of penalties as provided for in this
Chapter. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff. 10/8/07)
3-1-5-7: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX: All proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this Section, including interest and penalties,
shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
3-1-5-8: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION: In addition, any person found guilty in a court
of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the fine
set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-
1. (Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
3-1-6: REAL ESTATE (Including Beneficial Interests Therein) TRANSFER
TAX:
3-1-6-1: DEFINITIONS: (Amd. Ord. 97-1533-57, eff. 10/13/97)
PERSON - Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership,
joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, domestic
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 18
or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit,
or otherwise. Whenever the term Aperson@ is used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the
owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
RECORDATION - The recording of documents transferring applicable
interests with the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois.
VALUE - The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer
covered hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage or lien or liens
assumed by the grantee or purchaser or any mortgage or lien or liens which
the real estate is taken subject.
3-1-6-2: TAX IMPOSED: A tax is hereby imposed on the privilege of transferring
certain interests in real estate in the Village. For purposes of this tax,
transfer shall include the execution and delivery of the following:
1. Deed;
2. Assignment of Title or other beneficial interest;
3. A lease or similar contract for a term of more than thirty-five (35) years;
4. Article of Agreement to Convey Deed, or similar document, upon the
future payment of money.
This tax shall apply to all such transfers of interests in property that is
located within the Village and shall include, but not be limited to the
following circumstances:
1. The transfer purports to vest either a beneficial interest in or legal title to
the real estate;
2. The interest transferred is only the possession or use of the real estate
so long as consideration is paid for the possession or use.
3. Even if the consideration is to be paid in the future, or the actual transfer
is to be made in the future as under Articles of Agreement.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 3-1-6-3, the tax shall be at the rate
as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 19
of Title 1 of this Code, as consideration paid for the transfer. If the real
estate is transferred subject to a mortgage or similar lien or an existing
mortgage is to be assumed by the transferee, the outstanding balance of
the mortgage shall be added to any other consideration paid for the real
estate interest. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of this tax
shall be borne by the transferee. This tax shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. (Ord. And. 97-1533-57, eff. 10/13/97)(Ord. Amd. 98-1550-12,
eff. 4/13/98)
3-1-6-3: LEASEHOLD INTERESTS. Leasehold interests shall be taxed as follows:
1. Upon the execution of a lease, the tax shall be paid on the present value
of the net lease amount, excluding tax and utility payments, that is
payable over the term of the Lease. Present value shall be figured using
the interest rate paid on U.S. Treasury bills on the date of execution of
the lease.
2. If the entire lease amount is paid in a lump sum, then the tax shall be
figured on the lump sum.
3. If the transaction involves the transfer of an existing leasehold interest,
then the tax shall be figured on the value of the consideration paid for
the transfer.
3-1-6-4: EXEMPTED TRANSACTIONS: The following transactions shall be exempt
from the provisions of the tax imposed in Section 3-1-6-2 hereof; provided,
however, that each such transaction is accompanied by a statement or
certificate setting forth the facts upon which the exemption is based:
A. Conveyances representing real estate transfers made before September 20,
1975, but recorded after that date.
B. Conveyances of property acquired by any governmental body or
conveyances of property between government bodies, or by or from any
corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and
operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes.
C. Conveyances which solely secure a debt or other obligation and do not
purport to make any present transfer of any interest.
D. Conveyances, which, without additional consideration, confirm, correct,
modify, or supplement a conveyance previously recorded.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 20
E. Conveyances where the actual consideration is less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
F. Tax Conveyances.
G. Conveyances of release of property which is security for a debt or other
obligation.
H. Conveyances of partition.
I. Leasehold interests of a lessee occupying the premises as a residence.
J. Any leasehold interest the term of which is less than thirty-five (35) years.
3-1-6-5: STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION, FILING:
A. File With Village Treasurer: A signed copy of the statement of consideration
filed pursuant to section 3 of the Real Estate Transfer Act of the State of
Illinois shall be filed with the Village Treasurer by the grantee of any deed or
assignment of beneficial interest within ten (1O) days after delivery of the
deed or assignment of beneficial interest, or at the time of payment of the
tax herein levied or imposed, whichever first occurs.
It shall be the duty of any licensed real estate agent acting as broker or
agent for the sale of any real estate in the Village to file within ten (10) days
after the delivery of the deed or the assignment of beneficial interest a
signed copy of said statement of consideration, as provided in section 3 of
the Real Estate Transfer Act of the State of Illinois1 with the Village
Treasurer. All information contained in statements filed under this Section is
confidential.
B. Certificate of Payment, Water and Sewer Charges: Upon application, the
Public Works Department shall issue a certificate of payment to the Finance
Department which shall certify that all water and sewer charges have been
paid in full. (Ord. 84-803-17)
C. Certificate as to Code Violations: Upon application, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a certificate as to whether the property in question
has any code violations. If a code violation exists, the transfer tax stamps
shall not be issued for the property until the violation(s) have been remedied
and the Building Commissioner issues a certificate showing no outstanding
135 ILCS 305/1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 21
code violations. (Ord. 88-971-03)
3-1-6-6: TRANSFERS IN TRUST: No trustee of real estate shall accept an
assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the Village without
first obtaining a statement of consideration from the assignor and assignee
and unless revenue stamps in the required amount, as set forth in Section
3-1-6-2, have been affixed to the assignment.
3-1-6-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Lien Created: In the event a deed is filed for recordation conveying real
estate within the corporate limits of the Village without the revenue stamps
provided by this Section, a lien is declared against said real estate
conveyed in the amount of the tax. The fact that the deed does not contain
a Lincolnshire revenue stamp in an amount equal to three hundred percent
(300%) of the amount of the State transfer tax shall constitute constructive
notice of the lien. In addition, the Village Clerk may record a lien for the
nonpayment of the tax provided for herein. The lien may be enforced by
proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics liens. Suit
to foreclose this lien must be commenced within three (3) years after the
date of recording the deed. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing
the Village from bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed in this
Section from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the
same, including interest and penalties as herein below provided. (Amd.
Ord. 07-3004-32, eff. 10/8/07).
B. Suit for Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein
provided, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Manager,
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax,
including interest and penalties as herein below provided, on behalf of the
Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Interest and Penalties: In the event of failure by any person to collect and
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax required hereunder when the same shall
be due, such tax shall be considered delinquent and be subject to the
accrual of interest and assessment of penalties as provided for in this
Chapter. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff. 10/8/07)
3-1-6-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX: All proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this Section, including interest and penalties,
shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited to the general fund of the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 22
3-1-6-9: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION: In addition, any person found guilty in a court
of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the fine
set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-
1. (Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
3-1-7: USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in
the Village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased
outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with
an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined
in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955.(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12, eff.
4/13/98)
B. Payment: Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue
for all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 74-362-
38)
3-1-8: MUNICIPAL REPLACEMENT VEHICLE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon each vehicle, as defined in
section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,1 purchased in this Village by or on
behalf of an insurance company, to replace a vehicle to an insured person
in settlement of a total loss claim. The tax shall be as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
per vehicle purchased.
1625 ILCS
B. File Report: Every such insurance company that purchases a replacement
vehicle, as defined herein, shall complete and file with the Illinois
Department of Revenue a replacement vehicle certificate (Form RVT-7).
C. Payment: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 84-788-
02)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 23
3-1-9: LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITY
3-1-9-1: SCOPE: The provisions of this Section 9 shall apply to the Village's
procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
3-1-9-2: DEFINITIONS: Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
ACT - ALocal Government Taxpayers= Bill of Rights Act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES - Village's Mayor and Board of Trustees.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX - Each tax imposed by
the Village that is collected or administered by the Village and not an
agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed
upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the
Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR - Village's Finance Director is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator=s stead.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms
of this Section 9 to give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
Section 9 or the Act.
VILLAGE - Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
NOTICE - Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE - Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes
any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER - Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 24
3-1-9-3: NOTICES: Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the
local tax administrator as follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons
concerned at the persons= last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery.
3-1-9-4: LATE PAYMENT: Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required
to be made to the Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered
late unless it is
A. Physically received by the Village on or before the due date, or
B. Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the
Village, with adequate postage prepaid.
3-1-9-5: PAYMENT: Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order:
A. First, to the tax due for the applicable period;
B. Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and
C. Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.
3-1-9-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed
and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer
paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or
less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 25
amounts directly to the Village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer=s recalculation, accompanied by an amended
or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the
amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no
refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the Village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall
either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part,
a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear simple interest at the rate set forth in Section 3-1-
9-10 from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a
refund check or the grant of a credit. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff.
10/8/07)
3-1-9-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE: Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this Section 9.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 26
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the
auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date
and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within
thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted.
The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than
thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and
the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved
in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer=s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise
to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
Village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books
and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator=s determination of the best estimate of the
taxpayer=s tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed
and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the
Village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 27
governmental entity imposing such tax.
3-1-9-8: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the
local tax administrator's issuance of a determination of tax liability pursuant
to the Act. The notice shall include the following information:
1. the reason for the assessment;
2. the amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. the obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection
process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a
determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a
written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's
request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed
with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written
notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice
to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer
requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day
period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due
and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of
the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the
tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written
protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written
protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety
(90) days after the expiration of the forty-five day period.
3-1-9-9:HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and
petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 28
conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony
and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment.
The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The
taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
3-1-9-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES: In the event a determination has been made
that a tax is due and owing, through the application of any ordinance, audit,
assessment or any bill or invoice sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame so
indicated in that ordinance, audit, assessment, bill or invoice (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32,
eff. 10/8/07).
A. Interest. Simple interest shall accrue daily on a late payment, underpayment, or
nonpayment of the tax, at a rate equal to one percent (1%) per annum, based on
a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.. (Amd. Ord. 07-3004-32, eff.
10/8/07).
B. Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five
percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall
be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall
be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late
filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance.
3-1-9-11: ABATEMENT: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or
abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax
administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a
filing.
3-1-9-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS: The Village may enter into an installment
contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 29
The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless
the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local
tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have
fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the
delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in
restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment
contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.
3-1-9-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS: The Village, through the local tax administrator,
shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving
notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the Village, and the tax paid was
less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years
maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable
period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable
period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the
taxpayer.
3-1-9-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE: For any locally imposed and administered tax
for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or
assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along
with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the
application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A
taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any
additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was
filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax
due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the
underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment
of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator.
However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 30
interest previously paid under this Section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a
final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or
the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
3-1-9-15: LIENS: The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in
full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator
shall:
A. timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
B. correct the taxpayer=s credit record; and
C. correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
3-1-9-16: APPLICATION: This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered
to supplement all of the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance
is in conflict with or inconsistent with this Section 9, this Section 9 shall be controlling.
3-1-9-17: SEVERABILITY: If any section, paragraph or provision of this Section 9 shall
be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability
of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions
of this Section 9. (Ord. 00-1741-49, eff. 12/11/00)
3-1-10: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER=S OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed. On and after July 1, 2017, a tax is imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item
of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this State's
government, at retail in the Village at the rate of 1.00% of the gross receipts from
these sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect.
This tax shall not be imposed on sales of food for human consumption that is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages,
soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 17-
3437-165, eff. 7/1/17)
B. Title 3, Chapter 1 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Lincolnshire is hereby
amended by replacing Section 3-1-11 as set forth below: (Ord. 17-3737-165, eff.
7/1/17)
C. The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 31
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 10-3164-41, eff.
9/27/10)
3-1-11: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed. On and after July 1, 2017, a tax is imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of in the business of making sales of service at the
rate of 1.00% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service while this ordinance is in effect.
This tax shall not be imposed on sales of food for human consumption that is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages,
soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 17-
3737-165, eff. 7/1/17)
B. The tax described in paragraph A shall not be construed to be imposed upon the
privilege of engaging in any business which under the Constitution of the United
States may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village.
C. The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 10-3164-41, eff.
9/27/10)
3-1-12: HOME RULE SALES TAX - ANNUAL REVIEW: For the purpose of
determining whether to continue to levy the taxes described in Sections 3-1-10 and 3-1
11, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall annually review and evaluate (i) the revenue
derived from the taxes levied by this Ordinance, (ii) the general fund reserves, (iii) the
capital improvements schedule and preliminary budget forecasts for the forthcoming
year, and (iv) all other revenue sources available to the Village. Such evaluation shall
occur each year between August 1 and September 15. (Ord. 10-3164-41, eff. 9/27/10)
3-1-13: FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX: (Effective 11/01/2017 –Ordinance #17-3752-180)
3-1-13-1: DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Section, whenever any of the following
words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them
in this Section:
A. Alcoholic Liquor- Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being. “Alcoholic Liquor” does not include any
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 32
liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (.5%) of alcohol by volume or less,
or to liquids or solids containing in excess of one-half of one percent (.5%) of alcohol
by volume if dispensed by a licensed pharmacy pursuant to a medical prescription.
B. Food- Any and all solid, semi-solid, liquid, powder, or other item used or intended to
be used for internal human consumption, whether simple, compound, or mixed.
“Food” includes all nonalcoholic beverages.
C. Owner- Any person or entity of any kind that has any ownership in, or is conducting
the business or operation of, a prepared food and beverage facility, including,
without any limitation (a) any person, (b) any firm, partnership, association,
company, joint venture, corporation, club, organization, or other entity of any kind,
and (c) any receiver, executor, trustee, conservator, or other representative
appointed by law or by order of any court. The term “owner” includes one owner or
multiple owners.
D. Prepared for Immediate Consumption- Food or alcoholic liquor prepared for or
made readily available for immediate consumption within or upon the premises
where it is sold or where such items may be purchased for consumption off the
premises where it is sold, such as where such items are made available for carryout,
drive-through, delivery, or similar service.
E. Prepared Food and Beverage Facility- Any person or establishment which sells
food or alcoholic liquor at retail for immediate consumption, whether or not such
food or alcoholic liquor sales are conducted along with any other use(s) in a
common premises or business establishment. A “prepared food and beverage
facility” does not include coin operated automatic food item dispensing machines.
F. Purchase at Retail- To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter, or in any other nature,
and not for resale.
G. Purchase Price. The net amount paid by a person for the privilege of purchasing at
retail any food or alcoholic liquor prepared for immediate consumption from a
prepared food and beverage facility, exclusive of any applicable taxes.
3-1-13-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX; COLLECTION OF TAX
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase at retail of food and alcoholic
liquor prepared for immediate consumption at any prepared food and beverage
facility within the Village of Lincolnshire a tax at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
purchase price of such food or alcoholic liquor. The liability for payment of the tax
shall be borne by the purchaser.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 33
B. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of purchasing at retail food or alcoholic
liquor for immediate consumption from a prepared food and beverage facility and
pays consideration in exchange for receiving such privilege.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner of each prepared food and beverage facility within
the Village of Lincolnshire to collect and account for said tax from each purchaser of
food or alcoholic liquor for immediate consumption at the time that the
consideration for such purchase is paid, and to pay over to the Village said tax under
procedures prescribed by the Village Finance Director, or as otherwise provided in
this ordinance.
3-1-13-3: EXEMPTIONS
A. The privilege of engaging in the purchase at retail of food and alcoholic liquor
prepared for immediate consumption from a prepared food and beverage facility
owned by and operated solely by employees or volunteers of governmental bodies
and not-for-profit entities shall be exempt from the assessment of the tax herein
described.
B. For a prepared food and beverage facility to be exempt from the obligation to collect,
report and remit the food and beverage tax to the Village, such facility must apply for
an exemption certificate by submitting a request in writing to the Finance Director
and such other information reasonably required by the Finance Director to determine
whether the purchase at retail of food and alcoholic liquor prepared for immediate
consumption from the applicant is exempt under 3-1-13-3(A).
C. An exemption certificate shall be valid for one (1) year and must be renewed
annually.
3-1-13-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The Village Finance Director is hereby designated as the administration and
enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the
responsibility and duty of the Village Finance Director to collect all amounts due the
Village from the owners of each prepared food and beverage facility responsible for
collecting and remitting the tax to the Village. A sworn monthly food and beverage
tax return, on a calendar month basis, shall be filed by each owner of a prepared
food and beverage facility with the Village Finance Director, on forms prescribed by
him, showing all consideration paid in exchange for food and alcoholic beverages
prepared for immediate consumption during the applicable month. The tax herein
imposed shall be due and owing as of the first day of the second month following the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 34
month covered by said return (i.e. January taxes are due by March 1). Each return
shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the
month covered by the return; provided, however, that the owner may retain an
amount of money equal to two and one-half percent (2 1/2%) of the tax due as
compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of such tax.
B. The Village Finance Director is authorized to conduct audits of prepared food and
beverage establishments required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this
Section as provided in Section 3-1-9-7 of this Code.
C. The Finance Director is authorized to issue reasonable rules and opinions regarding
the interpretation and administration of this tax to ensure the proper application and
enforcement thereof.
3-1-13-5: SUIT FOR REVOCATION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE
A. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or when any
owner of a prepared food and beverage facility shall fail to collect the tax hereby
imposed from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the
Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Manager, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
B. If the Mayor, after a hearing, shall find that any owner of a prepared food and
beverage facility has willfully evaded their responsibility to collect the tax imposed by
this Section, the Mayor may suspend or revoke all Village licenses, included but not
limited to any liquor license issued under this Code, held by such owner. Said owner
shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be held not less than
seven (7) days after notice is given of the time and place thereof, addressed to him
at his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license
of which such person may be possessed may be temporarily suspended by the
Mayor. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or
discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due. In the event of a conflict
between the hearing procedures described in this Section and the Liquor Control
Code, Title 3, Chapter 3 of the Village Code, the procedure granting the licensee
greater due process shall prevail.
3-1-13-6: INTEREST AND PENALTIES
A. In the event of failure by any owner of a prepared food and beverage facility to
collect and pay to the Village the tax required hereunder within ten (10) days after
the same shall be due, such tax shall be considered delinquent and be subject to the
accrual of interest and assessment of penalties as provided for in Section 3-1-9-10
of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-1: TAXES
Revised 09/11/2017 Page 35
B. In addition, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing
the enforcement of any provision of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule in Title 1, Chapter
17 of this Code.
3-1-13-7: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Section, including interest
and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-2: GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
Page 1
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Application for Licenses
3-2-2: Investigation and Inspection of Applicant
3-2-3: Issuance and Term of Licenses
3-2-4: Compliance with Village and State Laws
3-2-5: Suspension and Revocation of Licenses
3-2-6: License Fees
3-2-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSES: Before any license as required by this Code
shall be issued, the person desiring such license shall make application to the
Village Clerk upon forms provided by the Village. Such application shall be
accompanied by the license fee as required by this Code and no license shall
be issued without payment of the required fee. (1971 Code, 23-1)
3-2-2: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION OF APPLICANT:
A. Upon receipt of any application for license, where this Code necessitates an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of such license, the Village
Clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer or agent formaking such
investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The officer
or agent charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall
make a report thereon to the Village Clerk within ten (10) days after receiving
the application or a copy thereof. (1971 Code, 23-2-1)
B. Whenever inspection of the premises to be used in the operation of a
business, trade or occupation for which a license has been applied for is
required by this Code, and whenever an analysis of any commodity ormaterial
to be used for or in connection with the operation of a business, trade or
occupation for which a license has been applied for is required by this Code, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to admit thereto for the purpose of making
such inspection any officer or agent of the Village who is authorized or directed
tomake such inspection at any reasonable time admission is requested and to
give any authorized officer or agent of the Village requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
request. Failure of an applicant to permit such inspection or analysis shall
constitute grounds for denying the license applied for. (1971 Code, 23-2-2)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-2: GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
Page 2
3-2-3: ISSUANCE AND TERM OF LICENSES: Upon receipt of an application for
license filed in proper form with the required fee, and upon approval of the
officer or agent charged with making an inspection or investigation when this
Code necessitates an inspection or investigation, the Village Clerk shall issue
the license applied for. Each license issued shall bear the signature of the
Village Mayor and the Clerk of the Village, or such officer duly authorized to
sign in their stead. (1971 Code, 23-3, 23-4)
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, all licenses required by this
Code shall expire on December 31 next after issuance unless sooner revoked
as provided in Section 3-2-5 of this Chapter. (1971 Code, 23-6)
3-2-4: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE AND STATE LAWS: No license shall be
issued for the conduct of any business, trade or occupation or the
performance of any act which would involve violation of this Code or any
other codes or ordinances of the Village or any laws of the State of Illinois.
(1971 Code, '23-5)
3-2-5: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Except where provision for suspension or revocation of any license required by
this Code is specifically set forth in the Chapter governing the business or
activity so licensed, the terms of this Section shall govern suspension or
revocation of such licenses. (1971 Code, '23-7-1)
B. When the Village finds that a licensee is in violation of any applicable
requirement of this Code, it shall so notify the licensee and may allow a
reasonable time for the correction of the violation. The Village may make a
second inspection after a lapse of whatever time is deemed necessary for the
correction of the violation and, if upon the second inspection, it is found that
the licensee is violating the same provision of this Code, his license may be
suspended or revoked by the Mayor. (1971 Code, 23-7-2)
C. After receipt from the Village of a notice of violation, but before the allotted
time has elapsed for compliance, the licensee may file exceptions to the
inspection report, or ask for an extension of time allowed for compliance, at the
Village offices. (1971 Code, 23-7-3)
D. Any license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the Mayor upon the
violations by the older of any of the provisions of this Code where the
continuation of the activity or business licensed shall be a serious menace or
where the granting of time for correction of the violation would be contrary to
the intent of this Code. (1971 Code, '23-7-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-2: GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
Page 3
E. Upon suspension or revocation of the license, it shall be removed from the
possession of the licensee and delivered to the Village Clerk. (1971 Code,
'23-7-5)
F. The holdermay, at any time,make application for a restoration of a suspended
license.Within twenty four (24) hours after receipt by the Village Clerk of such
application, accompanied by a statement signed by the licensee to the effect
that the provision or provisions previously violated have been complied with, a
reinspection shall be made such as will insure that the applicant is complying
with the requirements of this Code. When the reinspection indicates full
compliance, the license shall be restored. (1971 Code, '23-7-6)
3-2-6: LICENSE FEES: The fees for licenses required under the provisions of this
Code shall be as set out in the respective parts of this Code. In the case of any
annual license, however, if said license fee is not purchased by March 1 of the
current license year, or within sixty (60) days after a new business becomes
subject to a license, said fees shall be increased by ten percent (10%), and
further provided that in the case of any annual license, if said license fee is not
purchased by May 1 of the current license year, or within one hundred twenty
(120) days after a new business becomes subject to a license, said fees shall
be increased by twenty five percent (25%) of the original fee. (1371 Code, 23-
8)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 1
TITLE 3: Business and License Regulations
CHAPTER 3: Liquor Control
Sections:
3-3-1: Interpretation
3-3-1-1: Construction
3-3-1-2: Definitions
3-3-2: Classification of Licenses
3-3-2-1: Liquor License Classes
3-3-2-2: Liquor License Class Requirements
3-3-2-3: License Fees and Number
3-3-3: Administration
3-3-3-1: Liquor Commissioner
3-3-3-2: Powers of Liquor Commissioner
3-3-3-3: Inspections
3-3-3-4: Suspension and Revocation Procedures
3-3-4: License Requirements
3-3-4-1: License Required
3-3-4-2: Application for License
3-3-4-3: Ineligible Applicants
3-3-4-4: Dram Shop Insurance Requirements
3-3-4-5: Issuance of License
3-3-4-6: Renewal Privileges
3-3-4-7: Transfer of License
3-3-4-8: Change of Location, Upgrading of License, Sale of Business
3-3-4-9: Change of Personnel
3-3-4-10: Cessation of Business
3-3-4-11: Licensing of Premises for Which License is Revoked
3-3-5: Employee Requirements
3-3-5-1: Employment of Minors
3-3-5-2: Training
3-3-6: Restrictions and Conditions of License
3-3-6-1: Display of License
3-3-6-2: Books and Records Maintained
3-3-6-3: Hours of Sale
3-3-6-4: Location Restrictions
3-3-6-5: Clear View of Inside of Premises
3-3-6-6: Warning to Minors
3-3-6-7: Schedule of Prices of Alcoholic Drinks
3-3-6-8: Health and Sanitary Requirements
3-3-6-9: Sealing and Removal of Open Wine Bottles from a Restaurant
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 2
3-3-7: Prohibited Acts, Conditions
3-3-7-1: Sales to Unfit Persons
3-3-7-2: Minors
3-3-7-3: Misrepresentation of Alcoholic Beverages or Containers
3-3-7-4: Prohibited Entertainment
3-3-7-5: General Prohibitions
3-3-7-6: Acts of Agent or Employees
3-3-7-7: Permitted Happy Hours
3-3-8: Applicability and Penalty Provisions
3-3-1: INTERPRETATION
3-3-1-1: Construction
This Chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety, and welfare of the
people of Lincolnshire may thereby be protected, and, to the end that temperance in the
consumption of alcoholic liquors may be encouraged and fostered by judicious and careful
regulation and control of the sale and distribution of alcoholic liquors.
3-3-1-2: Definitions
All words and phrases used in this Chapter, which are defined in the Illinois Liquor Control Act
Illinois Compiled Statues, Chapter 235, entitled “An act relating to alcoholic liquors” enacted
January 31, 1934, and in effect July 1, 1934, shall have the same meanings herein as they have
in said Act, except for the following words and phrases which shall be defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in
the manufacture of the denatured alcohol produced in
accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing
one-half of one percent, or less, of alcohol by volume. All
alcoholic liquor must conform to the standards set forth in the
Illinois Liquor Control Act.
BEER A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops
in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout,
lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors,
kept, used and maintained by its members through the
payment of annual dues, and owing, hiring or leasing a building
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 3
or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use
and accommodation of its members and their guests and
provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room
space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving
food and meals for its members and their guests; provided,
such club files with the local Liquor Commissioner at the time
of its application for a license under this Chapter two (2) copies
of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly
files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional
member, his name and address; and, provided further, that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members
of their annual meeting and that no member or any officer,
agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly
receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any
profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club
or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed
and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its
board of directors or other governing body out of the general
revenue of the club.
DINING AREA The seating area where patrons or customers are to be seated
at tables or a counter primarily for service of meals.
HOTEL or MOTEL Every building or other structure kept, used maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where
sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which
twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for sleeping
accommodations of such guests where alcoholic liquor may be
served and/or stored in separate liquor service or lounge areas
which are adjacent to food service areas, where live
entertainment may be provide in connection with said service
or meals and/or alcoholic liquor. The sleeping
accommodations, dining rooms and liquor service area shall be
in the same building or buildings, and such building or
buildings, structure or structures shall be provided with
adequate and sanitary dining room and kitchen equipment and
capacity.
LEGAL AGE The minimum age designated by law of a person to whom it is
lawful to sell, give, or deliver and/or possess particular type of
alcoholic liquor.
LICENSEE Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or club holding a
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 4
license under the provisions of this Chapter.
LOUNGE AREA The seating or standing area where patrons or customers are
to be served primarily alcoholic liquor.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE Any receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic
liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
PATRON BAR The bar area where patrons or customers will be seated on
stools or standing immediately adjacent to the bar primarily for
the service of alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served, without
sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and
kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for
its guests.
SALE Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner, or by any
means whatsoever including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by
and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts
or certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or
employee. The term “sale” includes any transfer of alcoholic
liquor from a foreign importer’s license to an importing
distributor’s license even if both licenses are held by the same
person.
SELL AT RETAIL and SALE
AT RETAIL
Refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form. (Ord. 86-868-05)
SERVICE BAR A fixed facility or area where alcoholic beverages and supplies
are stored and displayed solely for the licensee’s employees to
mix and serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated or
standing in a lounge or dining area. (Ord. 87-946-32)
TO SELL Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
VILLAGE As used in this Chapter shall be taken to mean and include all
territory within the geographical limits of the Village of
Lincolnshire, State of Illinois which is presently incorporated in
the Village of Lincolnshire, and that territory which may from
time to time be annexed to the Village of Lincolnshire.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 5
WINE Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
nature contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar,
including such beverages when fortified by the addition of
alcohol or spirits as above defined. (Ord. 86-868-05)
3-3-2: Classification of Licenses:
3-3-2-1: Liquor License Classes
Retail liquor licenses shall be divided into the following classes:
Class A (Not-for-profit clubs and organizations)
Issued only to such civic, benevolent, fraternal, patriotic, social, recreational, or
other organizations that qualify as a not-for-profit corporation under the General
Corporations Not-for-Profit Act of the State of Illinois, and shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor by the drink only and for consumption on the premises only; (Ord.
86-868-05)
Class B (Restaurant – full liquor)
Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the sale of food
and service of food, for consumption on the premises only
Class C (Restaurant – beer and wine only)
Issued to authorize the sale of beer and wine only in conjunction with the sale of
food only. No bar shall be permitted.
Class D (Hotel-motel)
Issued to authorize the sale, consumption, or delivery of alcoholic liquor to patrons,
of a hotel or motel defined as and consisting of: guests, overnight guests, invitees
of those guests and invitees of the hotel or motel, so long as those patrons are
using the dining, banquet or conference facilities of the hotel or motel in
conjunction with the offering, service or sale of food. Issued to authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises by hotel patrons or within
common areas of the hotel designated for consumption of food/beverages, or for
“room service”.
Class E (Bar or lounge – hotel/motel only)
Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at a bar or lounge located in a hotel
or motel only.
Class F (Golf courses and private clubs for profit)
Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at golf courses at the club house or
from carts on the course. Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at private
clubs to members and guests of the members only.
Class G (One day license)
Issued for twenty-four (24) hours, and shall only permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
by the drink and for consumption on the premises. (Ord. 86-868-05)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 6
All applications for a one-day Class G liquor license must be submitted at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of issuance of such license. No person, firm,
corporation, partnership, club, or association shall be entitled to the issuance of
more than three (3) one-day Class G liquor licenses within a period of twelve (12)
months. No more than six (6) one-day Class G liquor licenses shall be issued
within a period of twelve (12) months for the same location or premises. (Ord. 88-
1016-48)
Class H (Package liquor)
Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the original package and only
for consumption off the premises.
Class I (Package beer and wine only)
Issued to authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only, in their original packages
only, and only for consumption off the premises.
Class J (Catering)
Issued to authorize license holders operating within the village limits to cater food
and alcoholic beverages off site. “Off Site” catering means the preparation of food
at one location for service at another.
Class K (Brew Pub – full liquor)
Issued to authorize the licensee to manufacture beer only on the premises
specified in the license, to make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises to
importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption,
to store the beer upon the premises, and to sell and offer for sale at retail.
Issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the sale of food
only.
Class L (Salon/Day Spas)
Issued to authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the
specified premises, as a secondary and accessory use to a principal salon/day spa
business, as such business is defined in Title 6 of the Village Code.
Customers and patrons shall: (a) not be served alcoholic beverages except for the
period of time during which the customer receives salon/day spa services from the
license holder; and (b) not be served more than three (3) alcoholic beverages
during such period of time.
No live entertainment of any nature shall be permitted on the specified premises.
No sign or any other external indicia shall be permitted on the specified premises
or surrounding property that indicates that alcoholic liquor is available for retail sale
at the specified premises.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 7
Hours for the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be in accordance
with section 3-3-3-1 of the Code, but in no case shall the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquor take place outside the normal business hours of the salon/day spa.
(Ord. 14-3311-37)
Class M (Movie Theaters)
Issued to authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the
licensed premises as a secondary and accessory use to a principal movie theater
business.
Service of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to a designated lobby bar area.
Service of alcoholic beverages may be made only to persons purchasing a movie
ticket and wearing a tamper-resistant wristband approved by the Village. The
wristband shall be valid only for the date on which it is obtained from the movie
theater. A wristband may only be issued by theater personnel who meet the
requirements of Section 3-3-6 of this Chapter.
Alcoholic beverages may be consumed in the movie theater auditoriums, but may
not be delivered or served in any movie theater auditorium.
The containers in which alcoholic beverages are served must be of a different
color, size, and design than those in which non-alcoholic beverages are served.
No more than one alcoholic beverage may be delivered to a customer in any one
trip to the bar, and no customer shall be served more than three (3) alcoholic
beverages on any day. The number of alcoholic beverages served to a customer
each day shall be recorded on that customer’s wristband.
There may be no service of alcoholic beverages unless the movie theater is
actually open for the showing of movies. Under no circumstances may alcoholic
beverages be served more than one hour prior to the advertised showing time of
the first movie to be shown on any day, except for private rentals and events. (Ord.
14-3336-63)
Class N (Banquets)
Issued to authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises only in connection with a private function, in association with a
rental or 3rd party contract, not open to the general public.
All new liquor licenses issued and all liquor licenses renewed after the effective date of this
amendment shall be in compliance with the above classes and shall accurately reflect the nature
of the licensee’s actual business. (Ord. 86-868-05)
The number of licenses authorized herein for each class shall remain at the number set forth in
this Chapter; provided, however, that any license in said classes which is forfeited, revoked, or
not issued shall automatically reduce the number of authorized licenses of the particular class by
the total number of forfeited, revoked, or non-issued licenses in the particular class. In addition,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 8
the local Liquor Commissioner shall notify in writing the Village Clerk and Board of Trustees of
any revocation or non-issuance of any authorized license within ten (10) days of such occurrence.
(Ord. 86-868-05; Ord. 89-1069-36; Ord. 89-1107-74; Ord. 15-3363-90)
3-3-2-2: Liquor License Class Requirements:
Restaurant Requirements
The total square footage of the patron bar(s)/service bar(s), measured corner to
corner, must be no greater than fifteen percent (15%) of the total square footage of
the dining area(s).
The total seating at the patron bar(s) must be less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
total seating in the dining area(s).
The total seating in the lounge area(s) must be less than thirty-three percent (33%)
of the seating in the dining area(s).
The total square footage of the lounge area(s) (not including the total square
footage of the patron bar(s)/service (bar(s)) must be less than thirty-three percent
(33%) of the total square footage of the patron bar(s)/lounge area(s) and dining
area(s) combined.
Hotel/Motel Restaurant Requirements
The total square footage of the patron bar(s)/service bar(s), measured corner to
corner, must be less than ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of the
dining area(s).
The total seating in the patron bar(s) must be less than ten percent (10%) of the
total seating in the dining area(s).
The total square footage of the lounge area(s), not including the square footage of
the patron bar(s)/service bar(s), must be less than thirty-three percent (33%) of the
total square footage of the patron bar(s)//lounge area(s) combined.
Hotel/Motel Bar or Lounge Requirements
The total square footage of the patron bar(s)/service bar(s), measured corner to
corner, may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square footage of the
patron bar(s)/service bar(s) and lounge area(s) combined.
The seating at the patron bar (bar stools) may not exceed thirty-three percent
(33%) of the total seating in the lounge area(s). (Ord. 87-946-32)
Brew Pub Requirements
The total square footage of the patron bar(s)/service bar(s), measured corner to
corner, must be no greater than fifteen percent (15%) of the total square footage of
the dining area(s).
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 9
The total seating at the patron bar(s) must be less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
total seating in the dining area(s).
The total seating in the lounge area(s) must be less than fifty percent (50%) of the
seating in the dining area(s). The total square footage of the lounge area(s) (not
including the total square footage of the patron bar(s)/service bar(s)) must be less
than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total square footage of the patron
bar(s)/service bar(s) lounge area(s) and dining area(s) combined. (Ord. 96-1423-
07)
3-3-2-3: License Fees and Number:
The number of liquor licenses authorized to be issued in the Village shall be limited to the number
below. No new or additional liquor licenses may be issued in the Village unless and until the
Mayor and Board of Trustees adopts an ordinance increasing the number of one or more of the
following classes. Fees for each license may be found as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. (Ord. 88-1026-58, Ord. 98-1550-12)
Class Description Number of Liquor
Licenses Authorized to
be Issued in the Village
of Lincolnshire
A Not-for-profit clubs and organizations 1
B Restaurant – full liquor 13
C Restaurant – beer and wine only 0
D Hotel/motel 4
E Bar or lounge – hotel/motel only 2
F Golf courses and private clubs for profit 2
G One day license Unlimited
H Package liquor 2
I Package beer and wine only 4
J Catering 1
K Brew pub – full liquor 1
L Salon/Day Spas 1
M Movie Theaters 1
N Banquets 3
Ord. 86-880-17; Ord. 87-962-48; Ord. 89-1054-21; Ord. 89-1069-36; Ord. 89-1081-48; Ord. 89-
1086-53; Ord. 89-1107-74; Ord. 89-1113-80; Ord. 94-1348-32, 08/08/94; Ord. 96-1423-07,
02/12/96; Ord. 96-1424-08, 02/12/96; Ord. 96-1425-09, 02/12/96; Ord. 96-1429-13, 03/11/96;
Ord. 96-1458-42, 09/09/96; Ord. 98-1550-12, 04/13/96; Ord. 98-1604-66, 10/12/98; Ord. 00-1709-
17, 05/08/00; Ord. 00-1742-50, 12/11/00; Ord. 01-1767-25, 06/11/01; Ord. 01-1784-42, 10/08/01;
Ord. 01-1790-48, 12/10/01; Ord. 02-1792-02, 02/11/02; Ord. 02-1814-24, 08/12/02; Ord. 03-1836-
13, 04/14/13, Ord. 03-1834-14, 04/14/03; Ord. 03-1845-22, 05/12/03; Ord. 03-1854-31, 07/14/03;
Ord. 04-1915-31, 08/23/04; Ord. 05-1946-10, 02/14/05; Ord. 05-1949-13, 02/14/05; Ord. 05-1950-
14, 02/28/05, Ord. 05-1951-15, 02/28/05; Ord. 05-1952-16, 02-28-05; Ord. 05-1961-25, 03/28/05;
Ord. 05-1962-27, 04/11/05; Ord. 05-1966-30, 04/25/05; Ord. 05-1968-33, 05/23/05; Ord. 05-1975-
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 10
39, 06/13/05; Ord. 05/1991/55, 09/12/05; Ord. 05-2005-69, 11/14/05; Ord. 05-2006-70, 11/28/05;
Ord. 06-2016-07; Ord. 06-2018-09, Ord. 06-2019-10, 02/27/06; Ord. 06-2033-25, 05/08/06; Ord.
06-2045-37, 07/10/06; Ord. 06-2962-54, 11/13/06; Ord. 06-2965-57, 11/27/06; Ord. 07-2975-03,
02/20/07; Ord. 07-3003-31, 09/24/07; Ord. 08/3027/10, 02/25/08; Ord. 08-3055-38; Ord. 08-3056-
39, 08/25/08; Ord. 10-3129-06, 03/08/10; Ord. 10-3169-46, 11/08/10; Ord. 11-3179-01, 01/10/11;
Ord. 11-3211-33, 08/29/11; Ord. 12-3234-04, 01-23-12; Ord. 12-3247-17, 05/29/12; Ord. 13-
3287-13, 05/13/13; Ord. 13-3289-15, 08/28/13; Ord. 14-3315-41, 02-24-14; Ord. 14-3324-50,
03/10/14; Ord. 14-3330-57, 06-23-14; Ord. 15-3348-75, 01/25/16; Ord. 15-3349-76, 01/26/15;
Ord. 15-3363-90, 04/27/15, Ord. 15-3367-94, 05/11/15; Ord. 15-3368-95, 05/26/15; Ord. 15-3371-
98, 07/13/15; Ord. 15-3380-107, 11/23/15; Ord. 16-3397-124, 02/22/16, Ord. 16-3410-137,
07/25/2016; Ord. 16-3413-140, 08/22/2016; Ord. 17-3429-157, 01/09/2017; Ord. 17-3433-161 &
17-3434-162, 02/27/2017; Ord. 17-3740-168, 03/20/17; Ord. 17-3741-169, 04/12/17; Ord. 18-
3779-207, 08/06/18; Ord. 18-3791-221, 11/26/18
3-3-3: ADMINISTRATION:
3-3-3-1: Liquor Commissioner:
The Mayor of the Village shall be the Liquor Commissioner and shall be charged with the
administration of the appropriate provisions of this Chapter and other ordinances of the Village
relating to alcoholic liquors.
3-3-3-2: Powers of Liquor Commissioner:
The Mayor, as local Liquor Commissioner, shall be charged with the administration within the
Village of the appropriate provisions of this Chapter, of such ordinances and resolutions relating
to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the Village Board from time to time, and of such other
legislation, including applicable administrative regulations and State or Federal laws which may
become applicable within the village with respect to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons to assist in the exercise of the powers and the
performance of Liquor Commissioner duties. The Liquor Commissioner shall also have the
following powers, functions and duties with respect to the licenses granted hereunder:
A. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause, all
licenses issued under this Chapter in the manner and under the procedures
provided hereinafter. (Ord. 74-348-24)
In lieu of suspension or revocations, the Liquor Commissioner may instead levy a
fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1
on the licensee for such violations. The proceeds from such fines shall be paid into
the general corporate fund of the Municipal Treasury. (Ord. 86-868-05; Ord. 10-
3131-08, 03/22/10)
B. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed under this Chapter in order to determine whether any of the
provisions of State or Federal laws or of this Chapter or other ordinances or codes
of the Village or any rules or regulations adopted by the Liquor Commissioner or
the State Commission have been or are being violated and at such time to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 11
examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
C. To receive complaints from any citizen within the Village that any of the provisions
of State or Federal laws or of this Chapter or other codes or ordinances of the
Village or any rules or regulations adopted in connection with the control of the
sale of alcoholic liquors have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in the manner provided below.
D. If the Liquor Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, the Liquor Commissioner may, upon issuance of a written order stating
the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be hard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed
premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
E. To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a license to an applicant he
has determined to be ineligible therefore. (Ord. 74-348-24)
F. To require that all licensed premises be maintained and operated in a sanitary
condition, and in compliance with all applicable rules or regulations of the Health
Department of the County of Lake, State of Illinois, and in compliance with all
building and zoning regulations of the Village.
G. To require that any licensee secure and file with his office a certificate of approval
showing compliance with all applicable rules or regulations of the Health
Department of the county of Lake, State of Illinois, and a certificate of approval
from the Community Development Department of the Village, showing compliance
with all applicable rules and regulations of the Community Development
Department of the Village.
H. To serve notice of hearing upon any licensee to consider suspension or revocation
of a license under circumstances which involve repeated reports of law
enforcement officers of violations of the law upon the premises (real estate)
adjacent to, and surrounding the structure in which alcoholic liquors are served
pursuant to a license issued in compliance with this Chapter and where said
violations are in relation to the use of offensive language, loud music, affrays,
assaults, or other breaches of the peace amounting to nuisance.
I. The Liquor Commissioner shall have the right hereunder to examine, or cause to
be examined, under oath, any applicant for a license, or for a renewal thereof, or,
any licensee upon whom a notice of revocation or suspension has been served,
and, to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such
applicant or licensee. The Liquor Commissioner, in conducting such examination,
may hear testimony and receive proof for his information in the performance of his
duties, and in connection with such examination may issue subpoenas which shall
be effective in any part of the State. In conducting such examinations, the Liquor
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 12
Commissioner may authorize a designee.
J. The Liquor Commissioner of the Village shall recommend to the Board of Trustees
such further regulations and restrictions regarding the issuance of, and operations
under local licenses, not inconsistent with law, as the public good and convenience
may require. (Ord. 86-868-05)
3-3-3-3: Inspections:
It shall be the duty of the Liquor Commissioner or an authorized agent(s) to inspect and examine
the premises wherein retail liquor business is carried on, for the purpose of ascertaining whether
or not all codes, ordinances and regulations of the Village or other governmental bodies having
jurisdiction thereof, relative to the carrying on of such business are being complied with at such
premises. It shall be the duty of every such person licensed under the provisions of this Chapter
to permit such inspection to be made and to exhibit the premises to such persons making such
inspection and failure to so permit shall be sufficient cause to revoke or suspend the license for
any such person.
3-3-3-4: Suspension and Revocation Procedures:
The Liquor Commissioner shall have the right to proceed by citation and notice of hearing to
require any licensee under this Chapter to appear at a time and place specified in said notice to
show cause why the license issued under this Chapter to said licensee by the Liquor
Commissioner should not be suspended or revoked for violations of the provisions of this
Chapter, rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto or other applicable law.
A. All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint in writing, shall state
the particular provision, rule or regulation alleged to be violated and the facts in
detail upon which such allegation is based and shall be signed by the Liquor
Commissioner.
B. The licensee against whom complaint has been filed shall be entitled to be served
with a copy of the complaint or citation and shall be given notice of the time and
place set for the hearing of said complaint. (Ord. 74-348-24)
C. Said citation and notice of hearing shall be served on the licensee named therein
pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes,
Chapter 235, § 5/1. (Ord. 86-868-05)
D. Said licensee named in said citation and notice of hearing shall appear at the time
and place designated in said citation and notice of hearing and at such hearing
shall have all protections and rights allowed under law from time to time.
Different or additional procedures from those provided by this Section may be
established from time to time governing citations and hearings provided for herein
upon being instituted by the Liquor Commissioner, or the corporate authorities of
the Village, and approved by the corporate authorities of the Village. (Ord. 74-348-
24)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 13
3-3-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
3-3-4-1: License Required:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, manufacture, bottle, blend, possess on the premises, or
offer for sale in the Village any alcoholic liquor without having obtained a retail
liquor license, or in violation of the terms of such license.
B. It shall be unlawful for patrons of licensed restaurants, patron bars, or lounges to
bring upon such licensed premises alcoholic beverages to be served or consumed
by said patrons.
C. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of
alcoholic liquor at any place other than the place specifically described in the
license obtained by the establishment.
D. It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this Chapter to operate a liquor business
without having obtained a liquor license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission. (Ord. 86-868-05)
3-3-4-2: Applications for License:
A. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Liquor Commissioner in writing
and completed in its entirety (including any other requested documents) under
oath, and signed by the applicant. If said application is made on behalf of a club or
corporation, then the same shall be signed by a duly authorized agent; if made on
behalf of a partnership, then the same shall be signed by the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof.
B. All liquor license applications and applicants applying for liquor licenses in the
Village of Lincolnshire will demonstrate and comply with the requirements outlined
in the Liquor Contract Act of 1934 under section 235 ILCS 5/6-2 titled, “Issuance of
license to certain persons prohibited.”
C. Any misrepresentation, omission or false statement on an application for a liquor
license, or in regard to any information requested during the application process,
shall constitute grounds for the denial of a liquor license or rejection of the
application. If such misrepresentation, omission or false statement, as mentioned
above, is discovered after a liquor license has been granted, said
misrepresentation, omission or false statement shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of said liquor license. (1984 Code)
D. Before any action is taken upon any initial application as provided in this Chapter,
the applicant shall pay to the Village the sum as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code, no part of which shall
be refundable, to cover the Village’s costs in reviewing and investigating such
applicant. Provided, however, that in the event the new license is created by the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 14
Board of Trustees and the Liquor Commissioner grants the applicant a license the
initial application fee, as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth
in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code shall be credited toward said license fee.
E. The applicant for a liquor license under the provisions of this Chapter must pay the
balance of the license fee for such license within fourteen (14) days from the
adoption of the ordinance creating the appropriate license and authorizing its
issuance to the applicant. In the event any applicant fails to pay the license fee
within said fourteen (14) day period, such license shall be forfeited and the number
of authorized licenses of the particular class involved is automatically reduced by
one.
F. Each such license shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance date, and
renewals thereof shall be paid on or before May 1 of each ensuing year.
1. The fee to be paid shall be reduced by half for the cost of the initial license only for
licenses issued during the period November 1 to April 30. The fee for any
additional licenses issued to the same premises shall be the entire amount as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1
of this Code.
2. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the payment of only a single license
fee (including additional amounts for separate bars) and the granting of a single
license for any building or buildings under a single ownership where the real
parties seeking the permission to sell alcoholic liquors are separate corporate
entities who are not parents, subsidiaries, or affiliates of the owner of such building
or buildings. (Ord. 86-8880-17; Ord. 98-1550-12, 04/13/98)
G. No person shall be allowed to file an application for the issuance of a new liquor
license more than once during any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 86-868-05)
3-3-4-3: Ineligible Applicants:
No license shall be issued to persons who do not meet the requirements set forth in the Illinois
Complied Statutes Chapter 235, Section 5/6-2 titled, “Issuance of licenses to certain persons
prohibited.”
3-3-4-4: Dram Shop Insurance Requirements:
No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant furnishes evidence satisfactory to
the Liquor Commissioner that the applicant maintains dram shop insurance which complies with
this Chapter. This includes a copy of the policy or policies that such applicant is covered by a
policy of dram shop insurance written by a responsible insurance company authorized and
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois insuring such applicant against liability for any injury
or death or loss of support which such applicant may incur under the provisions of Chapter 235, §
5/6-21, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Said limits for insurance coverage are subject to change
whenever the maximum liability provisions in the aforementioned Chapter 235 of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes are changed, it being required that insurance coverage be maintained in the
same amount as the maximum liability stated in said Chapter 235. (Ord. 98-1549-11)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 15
3-3-4-5: Issuance of License:
All applications for licenses shall be kept on file in the office of the Liquor Commissioner, and fees
for all licenses shall be paid to the Village Clerk or designee who shall certify to the Liquor
Commissioner the names and addresses of all licensees paying fees to him together with the
class of license for which payment is made and thereupon said Liquor Commissioner shall issue
the license provided for in this Chapter to all applicants who have complied with all the
requirements of this Chapter.
Provided, however, no license shall be issued to any person ineligible to receive the same under
the laws of the State of Illinois or the provisions of this Chapter, as from time to time amended.
(Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-4-6: Renewal Privileges:
Any licensee may renew a license at the expiration thereof provided the licensee is qualified to
receive a license, and the business, club, or organization is in good standing at the time of
renewal, and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose.
The renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in
any case prevent the Board of Trustees from increasing or decreasing the number of licenses to
be issued within the Village.
3-3-4-7: Transfer and License:
A. A retail liquor license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for a period not to
exceed one year after issuance (unless sooner forfeited, revoked, or terminated
as herein provided) and shall not constitute property; nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
B. Such license shall cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee, and shall
not descend by the laws of the state of intestate succession. However the
executor or administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee
of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor under the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, may exercise
the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such descendant, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such
license, but in no event for a period longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. The executor or administrator of the
estate or a business representative of any deceased owner, partner or
shareholder owning five percent or more of a licensed business shall immediately
notify in writing the liquor and license commission of such death, and indicate
what changes in ownership and/or management will result from the death.
C. When the licensee is a corporation, the license shall terminate whenever fifty
percent (50%) or more of the ownership interest therein changes from that shown
on the original license application. In such event, the corporation, through its
officers, must make application for the issuance of a new license as provided
herein. Provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 16
where the transfer of an ownership interest is made to an owner shown on the
original license application who owned fifty percent (50%) or more of the ownership
interest of such corporation at the time the original license application was filed
with the Village.
D. When the licensee is a partnership or corporation, no change in ownership from
that shown on the original application involving the withdrawal of any partner or
shareholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
such corporation shall be made without reporting such change in ownership in
writing to the local Liquor Commissioner within ten (10) days of any such change in
ownership. Any such change in ownership made without complying with the terms
hereof shall constitute grounds for suspension of the liquor license issued to such
partnership or corporation. (Ord. 86-868-05)
3-3-4-8: Change of Location, Upgrading of License, Sale of Business:
A. A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed
at no additional fee provided a written request is completed, there is no change in
ownership, and the request is approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. A licensee, where no change in ownership is involved, may apply for an upgrade of
his liquor license and, if approved by the Board of Trustees, shall pay to the Village
the difference between the new license and the fee for the initial license. If the
change in liquor license classification results in a lower fee, the licensee shall not
be entitled to a refund of the difference.
C. When a licensee is selling or has sold the premises for which the license was
issued, and the buyer applies for a liquor license from the Village, if the Mayor and
Board of Trustees find that said application conforms to the requirements of local
and State law, they may authorize the reissuance of the current license to such
buyer, upon the buyer’s payment to the Village as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
3-3-4-9: Change in Personnel:
A. Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding directly or
beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest, or
managers of establishments licensed under this Chapter, shall be reported in
writing to the Liquor Commissioner within ten (10) days of the change. A change in
on-site manager requires completion of a new manager/agent form, and that
person must also submit to a fingerprint background check. All new personnel shall
meet all the standards of this Chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor
license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Liquor
Commissioner.
B. When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership
occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible to hold a liquor
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 17
license, said license shall terminate.
C. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in
officers, directors, shareholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock or
managers resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by one who is
not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
D. When a license has been issued to an individual, who becomes or is no longer
eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
3-3-4-10: Cessation of Business:
Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his place of business for a period of more than
thirty (30) successive days shall be subject to having his license declared forfeited and lapsed by
order of the Liquor Commissioner. If any licensee desires to close the business or place of
business for more than thirty (30) successive days, he shall so notify the Liquor Commissioner in
writing, including the reasons therefor and requesting an extension, and the Liquor Commissioner
may grant such an extension on a showing of good cause. (Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-4-11: Licensing of Premises for which License is Revoked:
When any license hereunder shall have been revoked for any cause at the discretion of the Liquor
Commissioner, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for
the conduct of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises in such revoked license. (Ord. 74-348-
24)
3-3-5: EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS:
3-3-5-1: Employment of Minors:
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or agent to employ any persons
under seventeen (17) years of age in the licensed premises where alcoholic
beverages are drawn, poured, missed, served, or consumed; provided, however,
the employment of minors between the age of fourteen (14) and seventeen (17) to
perform bus-boy, wait staff and kitchen duties, not otherwise prohibited, when in
connection with the service of meals at any private club, fraternal organization or
veteran’s organization shall be permitted.
B. It shall be unlawful to employ any persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years
for the purpose of drawing, pouring, or mixing any alcoholic liquor. However, a
person less than twenty-one (21) years of age, but at least eighteen (18) years of
age, may be employed as a waiter or waitress and may serve or deliver alcoholic
liquor when in the presence of or under the direct supervision and control of the
owner or manager/agent who is of at least twenty-one (21) years of age. Class H
and I license holders must employ a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older
for the purpose of selling package liquor. (Ord. 05-2005-69)
3-3-5-2: Training:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 18
A. A licensee must only employ persons for the purpose of selling, serving, drawing,
pouring or mixing any alcoholic liquor, or checking evidence of age for the
purchase of alcoholic beverages, who have completed a state-certified beverage
alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program within 90
days of commencing employment.
B. Prior to completing a BASSET program, all new employees shall work under the
supervision of an employee who has completed the BASSET program.
C. The original or renewal license application shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of BASSET training for the manager of the licensee.
D. The licensee shall be required to maintain records demonstrating proof of
completion of BASSET training for each applicable employee for the term of their
employment and a period of one year thereafter, in a manner that will allow
inspection, upon demand, by any authorized representative of both state and local
liquor control authorities.
E. It shall be unlawful for any employee of a licensee, to sell, serve, draw, pour or mix
any alcoholic liquor, or check evidence of age for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages, unless such employee either has completed the BASSET program or is
working under the supervision of an employee who has completed the BASSET
program.
F. A BASSET program must comply with and be no less comprehensive than the
requirements outlined in 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500. (Ord. 15-3363-90, Amd. Ord. 16-
3405-132, eff. 07/01/2016)
3-3-6: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
3-3-6-1: Display of License:
Every licensee shall cause his Village liquor license and State of Illinois liquor license to be
displayed in a prominent place in the licensed premises where it may be viewed by the general
public. In the event that the licensee shall hold more than one liquor license issued to his
business, the State license shall be displayed adjacent to the primary liquor license issued to
each Village licensed liquor establishment.
3-3-6-2: Books and Records Maintained:
It shall be the duty of all licensees hereunder to keep books and records of the licensed business
at the licensed premises at all times for the purpose of investigation and control.
A. For such licensees who are maintaining records on the cash basis, the following
books and records shall be kept at the licensed premises at all times:
1. A record of cash receipts from all sources. This record must be kept in
accordance with the rules and procedural requirements of the Illinois
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 19
Department of Revenue.
2. A record of all cash disbursements for payment of merchandise purchases.
This record must be documented by paid invoices or receipts.
3. A record of all cash disbursements for operating expenses (including rent,
salaries, light, power and heat, payroll, and other taxes) and all other
expenses. This record shall show to whom payment was made and for
what purpose.
4. Monthly or quarterly statements must be available for inspection disclosing
cash receipts, cash disbursements for merchandise purchases and cash
disbursements for operating expenses, and all other expenses, which will
reflect the licensee’s gross profit, net profit or net loss, and the person or
persons sharing directly or indirectly in the said net profit or loss. Where
physical inventories are not taken quarterly, it will be permissible to
determine gross profit on the basis of deducting purchases from sales.
5. A record must also be maintained of cash on hand and cash in the bank.
Bank statement and canceled checks must also be on file.
B. For such licensees who maintain records on an accrual basis, their method of
record keeping must be one conforming to the rules and regulations of the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The records of such licensees shall be documented in the
same manner as those of licensees on a cash basis, and, in addition, they shall
maintain records supporting entries made for accruals of income and expenses.
(Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-6-3: Hours of Sale:
Except as hereinafter provided, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold, given away or offered for sale or
consumed on the licensed premises: (Ord. 13-3294-20, 07/22/13)
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale alcoholic liquor in the original package for
consumption off the premises between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and
seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. on each day of the week.
B. No person shall sell or offer for sale alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00)
A.M. on each day of the week.
C. No person shall keep open for business or admit the public to any premises on
which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such
alcoholic liquor is prohibited; provided, however, the establishment may be kept
open during such hours but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the
public or the membership during such hours.
3-3-6-4: Location Restrictions:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 20
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor on any premises:
A. In violation of the zoning or building ordinances of this Village,
B. Within one hundred feet (100’) of any church, school other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children. Such proximity prohibition shall not apply to renewal of a
license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet
(100’) of any church or school where such church or school has been established
within such one hundred feet (100’) since the issuance of the original license; nor
the hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants,
food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on in such place of business. The distance of one hundred feet
(100’) shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship
services or educational programs and not to property boundaries, but in other
cases it shall be measured property line to property line. The Liquor Commissioner
may grant exemptions from the setback requirements as described in 235 ILCS
5/6-11 (a-5).
3-3-6-5: Clear View of Inside of Premises:
A clear view of the inside of the licensed premises shall be provided as follows:
A. In premises in which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises is
licensed, other than in restaurants, hotels, motels or clubs, no screen, blind,
curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or on the door of
such licensed premises, nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view
into the interior of such licensed premises from street, road or sidewalk at all times,
and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights
or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall
prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises. The entire space used by
the public must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of
such premises, and the entire space used by the public must be so located that
there shall be a full view of the same from the street, road or sidewalk.
B. All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be
continually lighted during business hours so that all parts of the interior of the
premises shall be clearly visible.
C. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by him willfully suffered to
be obscured or obstructed, such license may be revoked in the manner herein
provided.
D. In order to enforce the provisions of this Section, the Liquor Commissioner shall
have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings, and photographs
showing the clearance of the view as above required.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 21
3-3-6-6: Warning to Minors:
All liquor license holders shall display, at all times in a prominent place, a printed card obtained
from the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, which shall read “Be prepared to show PROOF OF
AGE.” It is the responsibility of the entity to update the year on the printed card as necessary.
3-3-6-7: Schedule of Prices of Alcoholic Drinks:
All liquor license holders shall maintain a schedule of the prices that they charge for all alcoholic
drinks to be served and consumed on the licensed premises. This schedule shall be current and
made available upon demand by any duly authorized representative of the Village or by any
patron. (89-1105-72)
3-3-6-8: HEALTH AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
A. It shall be the duty of every person licensed to carry on a business under the
provisions of this Chapter to at all times keep the premises, where such business
is carried on, clean and in proper sanitary conditions in full compliance with all
applicable rules or regulations of the Health Department of the County of Lake,
State of Illinois, and in full compliance with the Lincolnshire Village Code and the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food
for human consumption, and it shall be unlawful to do otherwise. (Ord. 86-868-05)
B. In addition to the above, it shall be the duty of each licensee dispensing draught
beer to have coils and other equipment used in drawing draught beer cleaned at
least once every week in some manner or means, either chemical or mechanical.
The use of steam or hot water alone is not permissible. A record shall be kept of
the dates when the required cleaning was done. This record must be signed by the
person who actually performed the work of cleaning. (Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-6-9: Sealing and Removal of Open Wine Bottles from a Restaurant
At a patron’s request, a licensee may seal a partially consumed bottle of wine in a transparent,
one-time use, tamper-proof bag for removal from the licenses premises.
3-3-7: PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS:
3-3-7-1: Sales to Unfit Persons:
No licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent, manager, or employee shall
sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person who is noticeably intoxicated or otherwise
impaired or exhibiting disorderly behavior. Intoxicated, impaired, or disorderly persons shall not
be allowed to congregate on the licensed premises after such condition is known to the person
selling or serving alcohol.
3-3-7-2: Minors:
No licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent, manager, or employee shall sell,
give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 22
3-3-7-3: Misrepresentation of Alcoholic Beverages or Containers:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, dispense, pour or mix, or have in his
possession on such licensed premises:
A. Any original package of alcoholic liquor which contains any kind or quality of
alcoholic liquor other than that which has been sealed and labeled by the
manufacturer of such alcoholic liquor.
B. Any original package of alcoholic liquor to which there has been added any water
or other substance.
C. Any bottles, casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor which contains
any deleterious, contaminated, filthy, putrid substance or insects.
D. Any alcoholic liquor which is represented, by label or otherwise, to be of given
brand name when same is not of such brand.
E. Any alcoholic liquor which is represented to be of certain ingredients when it does
not in fact contain all such ingredients in the quantities represented.
F. All glasses or other receptacles used for the selling, dispensing, pouring, or mixing
of alcoholic drinks for consumption on the premises shall be of at least one ounce
in capacity, and the same must indicate clearly by a line or otherwise the point at
which such one ounce is reached or determined. (Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-7-4: Prohibited Entertainment:
It shall be unlawful to permit the following conduct on licensed premises:
A. Performances of:
a. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse or otherwise sexual in nature.
b. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, or genitals.
c. The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, or genitals.
B. Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes to public
view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, or genitals.
C. It is unlawful for any licensee to conduct or to permit on the licensed premises any
lingerie or fashion show or exhibit of any contest, show, or exhibit involving the
removal, alteration, or wetting of any clothing.
D. Gambling shall be prohibited except by a local not-for-profit organization holding a
valid state gambling license for special events upon the approval of the Liquor
Commissioner.
E. It is unlawful for any licensee to conduct or to permit on the licensed premises any
contest, exhibition, demonstration, competition, activity, or amusement that poses
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 23
a threat to the health or safety of the participants or any other person, including
without limitation, wrestling or boxing matches, arm wrestling, throwing, rolling, or
otherwise propelling objects or any person, activities involving animals, and
activities involving running, jumping, or leaping.
Movie theaters holding a liquor license shall be allowed to show motion pictures or films depicting
the aforementioned entertainment as long as the motion pictures or films have been classified by
the Motion Picture Industry.
3-3-7-5: General Prohibitions:
It shall be unlawful:
A. For any person to sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, or possess any alcoholic
liquor for beverage purposes, except as specifically provided in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, Chapter 235 (Liquor Control Act), and the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 86-868-05)
B. For a licensee, his agent or employees, to allow, permit, or suffer to remain on his
premises any person who shall solicit for themselves or for others for prostitution,
or solicit any patron to purchase alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 87-960-46)
C. For any person to drink any alcoholic liquor in any public street, public parkway,
public driveway, or public parking lot in the Village.
D. For any licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent, manager, or
employee to operate the licensed premises other than in compliance with all
applicable statutes and ordinances.
E. For any licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent, manager, or
employee to operate the licensed premises so as to allow assaults, fights, and
disorderly conduct to occur on or about the licensed premises. (Ord. 87-960-46)
3-3-7-6: Acts of Agent or Employee:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee, if said act
is committed or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee
shall be deemed and held to be an act of such employer of licensee and said employer or
licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
mitted by him personally. (Ord. 74-348-24)
3-3-7-7: Permitted Happy Hours:
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate a happy hour which does not
comply with Section 6-28.5 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934. (Ordinance 17-3740-
168, 03/20/17)
3-3-8: APPLICABILITY AND PENALTY PROVISIONS:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3
LIQUOR CONTROL
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL
Revised 10/15/19 Page 24
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or person in
charge of any place within the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold from the
restrictions and requirements of any other Chapters of this Code or other
ordinances of the Village or of the statutes of the State or of the United Sates
government. (Ord. 74-348-24)
B. Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the fine set
forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 1 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Scope
3-4-2: License Required; Application and Fee
3-4-3: Inspections
3-4-4: Street Shows Regulated
3-4-5: Conditions and Requirements of License
3-4-6: Responsibility for Compliance
3-4-7: Obscene Shows Prohibited
3-4-8: Riots
3-4-1: SCOPE
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and
amusements in the Village, including, but not limited, to exhibitions and carnivals, athletic
exhibitions, motion pictures and public dances. (1971 Code, 5-1-1)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE
A. It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any such amusement which is open to the public for
admittance for which a fee is charged without first having obtained a license therefor, except that
no license shall be required for any athletic exhibition or public dance given under the auspices of
any educational, religious, not-for-profit or charitable organization. Such license shall specifically
state that it is issued subject to the provisions of Section 3-4-3 of this Chapter. (1971 Code, 5-1-2)
B. All applications for such licenses issued under this Chapter shall be made in writing to the Village
Clerk in the form and manner provided in Chapter 1 of this Title, and shall include a clause
whereby the applicant specifically agrees to abide by and be bound by Section 3-4-3 of this
Chapter, upon his receiving the license. Such applications shall also include such information as
may be required by that section of this Chapter governing the specific amusement to be licensed.
(1971 Code, 5-1-3)
C. The fee for such licenses shall be as provided in the specific Articles of this Chapter, except that
no fee for such license shall be charged for amusements given under the auspices of any
educational, religious, not for profit or charitable organization. (1971 Code, 5-1-4)
3-4-3: INSPECTIONS
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that every amusement is inspected to insure that
the conducting of such amusement shall not endanger the health and safety of the persons
attending such amusement, and to insure conformity with the provisions of all applicable Village
codes and ordinances concerning amusements.
If, upon making such inspection, the Chief of Police shall determine that the conducting of such
amusement endangers the health and safety of the persons attending same, he shall so inform the
person or persons in charge of conducting the amusement whose duty it shall be to take such
action as is necessary to immediately remedy the condition or conditions responsible for such
danger. In the event such person or persons in charge refuse or are unable to immediately remedy
such dangerous condition or conditions they shall, upon order of the Police Chief, forthwith cease
the operation or conducting of such amusement until the dangerous condition or conditions is
remedied. If the person or persons in charge of the amusement shall refuse such order, the Chief
of Police is authorized to take such action as is necessary to cause the cessation of the conducting
of such amusement. (1971 Code, 5-1-7)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 2 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
3-4-4: STREET SHOWS REGULATED
No license shall be granted for any amusement to be given on any public street or public way in
such place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public
place, except on order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. (1971 Code, 5-1-5)
3-4-5: CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSE
A. Order, Crowding:
1. The audience of any amusement must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be
unlawful for any person in attendance to create a disturbance in the audience.
2. It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement so as to
create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risk. (1971 Code, 5-1-6)
B. Smoking Prohibited: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2040-32, EFF. 6/26/06
C. Exit Lights: It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as
an assembly hall with accommodations for fifty (50) persons or more in which theatricals, shows,
amusements, lectures and other entertainment is offered, operated or presented to provide and
place a sign on which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high, over every
door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom and a light shall be
provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning during
the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. (1971
Code, 5-1-14)
D. Premises: It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any amusement licensed in this
Chapter unless the premises in which such amusement is operated or permitted to be operated,
conforms with all the provisions or requirements of the
Village relating to public buildings and public gatherings. (1971 Code, 5-1-15)
3-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE
The licensee, or in his absence, the manager or other representative in control of any room, building
or other place to which the public is admitted and in which such amusement is operated or
conducted, shall be responsible for full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, all other
applicable Village codes and ordinances before the public shall be admitted to such amusement.
(1971 Code, 5-1-16)
3-4-7: OBSCENE SHOWS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any obscene show,
theatrical play, motion picture, exhibit or other form of public amusement or show. (1971 Code, 5-
1-8)
A. Definition: For the purposes of this Chapter, a thing is obscene if, considered as a whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or
excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond the customary candor in description or representation
of such matters. (1971 Code, 5-1-9)
B. Interpretation: For the purposes of this Chapter, obscenity shall be judged with reference to
ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children and other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or circumstances of its
dissemination to be specifically designed for or directed to such an audience.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 3 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
Where circumstances of production, presentation, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect
to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter is utterly without
redeeming social importance. (1971 Code, 5-1-10)
3-4-8: RIOTS
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. (1971 Code, 5-1-11)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 4 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE A: EXHIBITIONS AND CARNIVAL
SECTION:
3-4A-1: Definitions
3-4A-2: Application for License, Fees
3-4A-3: Insurance Requirements
3-4A-4: Conditions of License
3-4A-1: DEFINITIONS
CARNIVAL Includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct
of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and side shows. A carnival shall not
include gambling devices, games of chance, lotteries, punch boards or other
activities in violation of this Code or the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
EXHIBITION Includes circuses, menageries, carnivals, side shows and other similar
amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for which an
admission fee is charged. (1971 Code, '5-2-1)
3-4A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, FEES
Application for such licenses shall state specifically the nature of the activity to be licensed and
the location thereof. The license fee for said exhibitions and carnivals shall be as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code (1971 Code, ''5-2-
2, 23-8)(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12, eff. 4/13/98)
3-4A-3: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
No license shall be issued for conducting an exhibit or carnival until the applicant therefor has
placed on file with the Village Clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there
is in effect public liability insurance covering damages arising out of the use and operation of any
and all devices and facilities operated in connection with said exhibition or carnival in the
minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each person and three million dollars
($3,000.000.00) each accident. (1971 Code, 5-2-4)
3-4A-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE
In addition to other requirements, as set forth herein, the applicant shall furnish suitable evidence
of his intention and ability to comply with the following conditions of license:
A. Duration of Operation: No carnival or exhibit shall operate in the Village for a period exceeding
seven (7) days on any site during any twelve (12) month period.
B. Hours of Operation: Hours of operation may be established by the Village as a condition of license
taking into consideration the nature of the activity, site area, proximity to other uses, nuisance
factors, policing problems and other such factors as may be pertinent.
C. Maintenance of Premises: The operator and sponsor of the carnival or exhibition shall be wholly
responsible for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean, free of trash, papers and other
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 5 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
debris. Trash containers, in adequate number shall be placed in convenient locations for the use
of the public.
D. Noise; Lights: Special conditions may be established to reduce noise level or to reduce the glare
of lights on to the public streets or on to areas adjacent to the site.
E. Zone District: Amusements, exhibitions and carnivals shall not be permitted in any area unless
specifically allowed under the applicable provisions of the Village Zoning Code1.
F. Public Safety: No ride shall be placed into operation for public use until the same has been
inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards by the Director of Building and
Zoning and such other officers or employees of the Village having competent jurisdiction.
Adequate safeguards shall be placed to protect both operators and the general public from
inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electric switches and
other possible or potential hazards.
G. Concessions and Food Dispensing Facilities: All concessions and food dispensing facilities shall
be maintained in a safe, clean condition at all times and be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this Code and the County. (1971 Code, 5-2-3)
1See Title 6 of this Village Code.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 6 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE B: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
SECTION:
3-4B-1: License Fees
3-4B-2: Admission of Policemen
3-4B-1: LICENSE FEES
The annual license fees for athletic events shall be as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. (Amd. Ord.98-1550-12, eff. 4/13/98)
3-4B-2: ADMISSION OF POLICEMEN
For the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, a sufficient number of policemen of the
Village shall be admitted to all athletic exhibitions free of charge. (1971 Code, 5-3-1)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 7 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE C: MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS
SECTION:
3-4C-1: Application for License, Fees
3-4C-2: Building Requirements
3-4C-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, FEES
Applications for motion picture and theatrical licenses shall state the place of the intended
performance and the seating capacity thereof. The annual license fees for such licenses shall be as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code (Amd.
Ord. 98-1550-12, eff. 4/13/98)
3-4C-2: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
A. General: It shall be unlawful to present any motion picture in any building or structure which does
not contain the number of exits required by the applicable Village codes or State Statutes
concerning buildings or places intended for motion picture performances or in premises which
do not comply with the provisions of this Code relating to public gatherings or in premises in
which the electric wiring does not fully comply with the applicable Village codes. All places used
for such motion pictures or theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance
and for as long a time as the audience remains therein. (1971 Code, 5-4-3)
B. Exits: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits
leading from the room or enclosure in which a motion picture performance or theatrical is being
given or in which an audience for such performance is gathered. (1971 Code, 5-4-4)
C. Scenery: It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than nonflammable scenery,
or such as shall have been rendered nonflammable by the application of fire-preventive coatings.
(1971 Code, 5-4-2)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 8 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE D: PUBLIC DANCES
SECTION:
3-4D-1: Definition
3-4D-2: Application for License, Fees
3-4D-3: Premises Requirements
3-4D-1: DEFINITION
For the purpose of this Article a public dance is defined as any dance open to the public for
admittance regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for admission thereto. (1971 Code, 5-5-1)
3-4D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, FEES
Applications shall specify the location of the proposed dance or dances and the approximate number
of persons expected to be in attendance. For each dance for which an admission fee is charged, there
shall be levied a license fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter
15 of Title 1 of this Code. (1971 Code, 5-5-2,23-8)(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12, eff. 4/13/98)
3-4D-3: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS
It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance or operate a dance hall in any hall or place which is
not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits; and no hall or building which is not provided with
at least two (2) exits of four feet (4') in width, shall be used for such purposes. (1971 Code, 5-5-3)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 9 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE E: AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION
3-4E-1: Definitions
3-4E-2: License Required
3-4E-3: Application for License
3-4E-4: Investigation of Applicant
3-4E-5: Number and Register of Licenses
3-4E-6: Personal Nature of Licenses
3-4E-7: Individual Decals Required
3-4E-8: Responsibility for Compliance, Floor Plan Required
3-4E-9: Fees; Display of Decal
3-4E-10: Restrictions on Operations
3-4E-1: DEFINITIONS
AUTOMATIC
AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any machine which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, plate, disc or token
may be operated generally by the public for use as a game, entertainment
or amusement whether or not registering a score. It shall include, but not
be limited to, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, pool
tables and air hockey, movie and video games, booths or stands, games
played with any number of balls, spheres or electrically operated devices
upon a table or board having holes, pockets, cups or electrically activated
devices that are activated by said balls, spheres or electrical contacts,
electrical impulse and/or cathode tube games, and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name by which they may be
indicated.
Automatic Amusement Devices shall not include “Video Gaming
Terminals” as such term is defined in the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1, et seq.
PERSON Shall include any person, firm, corporation or association having
ownership, possession and/or control of any Automatic Amusement
Device.
VIDEO GAMING
TERMINAL
Shall have the meaning ascribed to such term as defined in the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq.
3-4E-2: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall make available for use by the public any Automatic Amusement Devices
without first obtaining an amusement device license from the Village. Application for such a
license shall be made to the Police Department upon forms supplied by the Village in compliance
with Section 3-4E-3. An amusement device license may be issued upon satisfying the eligibility
requirements described in this Article and upon payment of the required application fee for an
Automatic Amusement Device License and Device Decal as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 10 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
3-4E-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
A. General Information: An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under
oath:
1. The identity of the person or organization filing the application;
2. For non-individual applicants, the applicant shall identify and list the following
information for any person who exercises managing control of the applicant:
a. Name, including all aliases and former legal names,
b. Residential address,
c. Current residential telephone number, and
d. Date of birth.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the owner or supplier of the device(s) for
which the applicant is seeking a decal;
4. Whether the applicant or any person required to be described on the application has ever
been found guilty of a gambling offense or of any violation of any State Statute or local
ordinance related to taxes or the commission of any act of moral turpitude, and if so, the
precise nature of the offense, the date of the conviction and the court where it was
adjudicated, and the status of any post-conviction requirements (e.g. restitution,
probation, etc.).
5. The address of the building where the machine(s) will be located, the type of business
conducted there and the name of the business (if different from item (3)).
6. Description of the machine(s) for which the applicant is seeking a decal, including
mechanical features, name and address of manufacturer, and serial number.
7. The name, address and telephone number of the landlord if the premises are leased.
8. Whether the applicant has ever had a similar license revoked or suspended by any other
municipality and, if so, a summary of the circumstances related to such revocation or
suspension.
B. Applicant Other Than an Individual: If said application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed by at least two (2) members of
such partnership or the president and secretary of such corporation. Applications made on
behalf of limited liability companies shall be signed by either the Manager or two members.
C. Application Fee Requirement: Before any action is taken upon any application as provided in
this Section, the applicant shall pay to the Village the required application fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code, no part of which
shall be refundable, to cover the Village's costs in reviewing and investigating such applicant.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 11 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
D. Issuance Prohibited: No license shall be issued to any applicant, if the person (1) is under twenty
one (21) years of age; (2) is not a citizen of the United States; (3) has been found guilty of any
gambling offense, felony or crime of moral turpitude or any State Statute or local ordinance
related to taxes; (4) is not of good character or reputation, or (5) the use of the premises where
the Automatic Amusement Device is proposed to be located would violate the applicable zoning
designation.
3-4E-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT
Each application for a license hereunder shall be referred to the Chief of Police for investigation
and verification of the stated facts. The Chief of Police shall determine whether the applicant or
any person required to be described on the application has been found guilty of a gambling offense
or any State Statute or local ordinance related to taxes or the commission of any act of moral
turpitude in either the State or Federal court. The Chief of Police shall also determine whether the
applicant, or any person who exercises managing control of the applicant, has employed coercive
or illegal measures to promote the use of his Automated Amusement Devices or Video Gaming
Terminals. The Chief of Police shall further determine whether the applicant, or any person who
exercises managing control of the applicant, are persons of good moral character. If the Chief of
Police shall determine that the applicant, any person who exercises managing control of the
applicant, or any of them, have in fact been found guilty or have engaged in such coercive or illegal
measures or otherwise are not persons of good character and fitness, then the license shall not be
issued and the Chief shall describe the reasons for the denial in writing within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the application. If the Chief of Police investigation fails to discover any disqualifying
factors as described in this Article, the Chief of Police shall issue the license. Any applicant for
whom the Chief of Police refuses to issue or renew a license for the reasons herein described,
within ten (10) days of receipt of the denial may appeal the decision to the Village Board, who may
review the Chief of Police’s determination after consideration of all relevant facts and
circumstances. The Village Board’s decision shall be made within thirty (30) days after the filing
a written notice of appeal and shall be final.
3-4E-5: NUMBER AND REGISTER OF LICENSES
The number of licenses issued and the identity of every licensee shall be kept by the Police
Department.
3-4E-6: PERSONAL NATURE OF LICENSES
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless
sooner revoked as in this Article provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject
to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by
the laws of the testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death or dissolution of
the licensee.
3-4E-7: INDIVIDUAL DECALS REQUIRED
No person shall keep, install, maintain or permit any Automatic Amusement Device in any
building or place within the Village for use by anyone other than the licensee without first having
obtained a decal for each Automatic Amusement Device.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 12 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
3-4E-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE, FLOOR PLAN REQUIRED
Responsibility for compliance with the regulations pertaining to Automatic Amusement
Devices shall rest with the owner and lessee of the premises where such devices are located.
Each application for a decal must be accompanied by a copy of Automatic Amusement Device
License, or an application therefor, and an accurate floor plan showing the exact location of
each machine, provided each premises may show all proposed locations for Automatic
Amusement Devices on the same floor plan. Automatic Amusement Devices may not be located
at any other location within the licensed premises except as shown on the floor plan. Any
licensed Automatic Amusement Device moved and located contrary to said floor plan shall
result in the automatic revocation of the decal for that machine. Licensed Automatic
Amusement Devices may be replaced from time to time so long as their location remains as
shown on the floor plan and provided that the Chief of Police of the Village is notified of such
change and the applicant pays the Automatic Amusement Device transfer fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code to cancel the
decal on the replaced Device and adheres the new decal to the new or replacement Device.
3-4E-9: FEES; DISPLAY OF DECAL
Before being granted a decal, every applicant shall pay the annual fee for each calendar year as
prescribed in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
A. Each decal shall be valid from May 1 to April 30 each year and these fees for each decal shall not
be prorated for partial years.
B. All fees shall be paid to the Police Department which shall issue as evidence of the payment
thereof for each device an adhesive decal to be placed on each device. Such decal shall bear the
words, "Village of Lincolnshire" and the date it shall become void. The decal shall be placed on
the device in a location where it is viewable by the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to
mutilate a decal during the year for which it is issued.
C. Each decal shall be issued only for a particular Automatic Amusement Device and may not be
transferred or used in any other way whatsoever including as the required decal of any other
Device whether or not the other Device is new or a replacement for the original machine. Each
and every machine must have such a decal issued for its particular use after the payment of the
required fee. It is the intent of this ordinance for each decal to correspond to a distinct serial
number.
3-4E-10: RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS
Unless otherwise specified by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, premises eligible for Automatic
Amusement Devices and the location, number and manner of operating Automatic
Amusement Devices shall be as determined by the Village according to the standards set forth
in this Section.
A. Only taverns, hotels, restaurants or movie theaters shall be eligible to keep Automatic
Amusement Devices.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 13 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
B. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices
whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or is
in any way contrary to law. No gambling or individual wager on any Automatic Amusement
Device shall be permitted.
C. The operation of Video Gaming Terminals is prohibited. This ordinance is intended to represent
the Village’s election to prohibit video gaming in the manner described in Section 27 of the
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/27.
D. The Licensee may not promise to deliver or deliver any award, prize or cash equivalent to any
person in exchange for the person’s performance on any Automatic Amusement Device unless:
(1) the amount of the award is fixed in advance and a schedule of prizes is available in writing;
(2) the amount of the award bears no relationship to the person’s skill or performance on the
Device; and (3) there is no cost to participate in the contest or compete for the award.
E. No Automatic Amusement Device shall be operated unless the reward for skill in the operation
thereof, if any, is plainly posted upon such machine or the opportunity for a reward for skill in
the operation thereof is the same for each individual player. Examples of permitted rewards
include free plays or recognition on a leader board operated by the owner of the premises.
F. No Automatic Amusement Device shall be placed in any required exit path of travel.
G. No Automatic Amusement Device on the premises of a retail alcoholic liquor licensee shall be
used by anyone under twenty one (21) years of age unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
H. No one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to play any Automatic Amusement
Device before ten o’clock (10:00) A.M., or after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M., unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian.
I. No premises shall have more than eight (8) Automatic Amusement Devices unless the premises
is (i) a hotel or theater complex and has a designated and physically segregated "game room",
or (ii) a tavern. For qualifying hotels, theater complexes and taverns, the number of Automatic
Amusement Devices shall be limited so that (i) ingress and egress to the licensed premises shall
not be impaired, and (ii) the aggregate power supply required for such Devices does not exceed
the electrical rating permitted for the circuit serving such premises. An applicant for a decal
shall certify compliance with this provision on the floor plan accompanying the application for
decals. At all times when Automatic Amusement Devices are being operated in the licensed
premises no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows
or upon the doors which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such premises.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 14 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE F: FIREWORKS DISPLAYS
SECTION:
3-4F-1: Definitions
3-4F-2: License Required
3-4F-3: License; Application
3-4F-4: License; Display
3-4F-5: Consumer Fireworks
3-4F-6: Indoor Fireworks Use Prohibited
3-4F-7: Violations; Penalty
3-4F-1: DEFINITIONS
1.3G FIREWORKS Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and classified as
fireworks UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 by the United States Department of
Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
CONSUMER
FIREWORKS
Those fireworks that must comply with the construction, chemical
composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Products Safety
Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and 1507, and classified as
fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States Department of
Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
"Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke
devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms";
sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive
compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot
come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol
paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths grains of
explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS 1.3G or special effects fireworks.
FACILITY An area being used for the conducting of a pyrotechnic display, but does not
include residential premises except for the portion of any residential premises
that is actually used in the conduct of a pyrotechnic display.
FLAME EFFECT The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases, liquids, or
special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual, or audible effect
before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether admission is
charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association 160
guidelines.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC
OPERATOR
An individual with overall responsibility for the safety, setup, and discharge
of a pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to the Pyrotechnic
Operator Licensing Act.
PERSON An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, or commercial entity.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 15 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of consumer fireworks, display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
PYROTECHNIC
DISTRIBUTOR
Any person or group of persons who distributes display fireworks for sale in
the State of Illinois or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic display service
in the State of Illinois or provides only pyrotechnic services.
SPECIAL EFFECTS
FIREWORKS
Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by professionals in the performing
arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical, or other productions that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical compositions and construction,
but are not intended for consumer use and are not labeled as such or
identified as "intended for indoor use". "Special effects fireworks" are
classified as fireworks UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States Department
of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
3-4F-2: LICENSE REQUIRED
A. Prohibition: No person may provide a Pyrotechnic Display without a license issued by the Village
Manager. Every Pyrotechnic Display performed on separate dates or at separate Facilities must
be issued a separate and distinct license.
B. Pyrotechnic Distributor: No person may operate as a Pyrotechnic Distributor within the Village
without first obtaining a Pyrotechnic Distributor=s License from the Office of the State Fire
Marshall.
C. Lead Pyrotechnic Operator: No person may act as the Lead Pyrotechnic Operator for a
Pyrotechnic Display within the Village without first obtaining a Lead Pyrotechnic Operator=s
License from the Office of the State Fire Marshall.
D. Eligibility: No person except the Village or its designee is eligible for a license to provide a
Pyrotechnic Display. (Amd. Ord. 10-3166-43, eff. 9/27/10)
3-4F-3: LICENSE; APPLICATION
A. General Information. An applicant for a Village license to perform a Pyrotechnic Display must
submit a written application to the Village Manager containing not less than the following:
1. Name of the Pyrotechnic Distributor.
2. Name of the Lead Pyrotechnic Operator for the Pyrotechnic Display for which the
application has been submitted.
3. Copies of the applicable Pyrotechnic Distributor and Lead Pyrotechnic Operator licenses
issued by the Office of the State Fire Marshall.
4. The Facility where the Pyrotechnic Display is proposed to be provided.
5. Evidence of the types and amounts of insurance required by the Pyrotechnic Distributor
and Operator Licensing Act.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 16 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
B. Timing. All applications to perform a Pyrotechnic Display must be submitted to the Village
Manager not less than 10 days prior to the date proposed for the Pyrotechnic Display.
C. Cosignature. Any license issued by the Village Manager shall not be effective unless and until it
is co-signed by an authorized officer of the Lincolnshire-Riverwoods Fire Protection District. Any
license which does not receive the countersignature by an authorized officer of the Lincolnshire-
Riverwoods Fire Protection District within 7 days from the date of issuance shall be null and void.
D. Expiration. All licenses issued shall expire 30 days from the date of issuance unless an earlier
date is expressly indicated on the license.
E. License Fee. All applicants for a Pyrotechnic Display license shall pay to the Village an application
fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code,
no part of which shall be refundable, to cover the Village's costs in reviewing and investigating
such applicant.
3-4F-4: LICENSE; DISPLAY
All licenses issued by the Village Manager must be made conveniently available for review and
inspection upon demand by any authorized officer of the Village, including the Village Manager,
his designee or any police officer.
3-4F-5: CONSUMER FIREWORKS
Nothing herein shall be construed to provide for a license for the private outdoor use of Consumer
Fireworks by the Owner of the premises where the Consumer Fireworks are used. The private
outdoor use of Consumer Fireworks is prohibited. (Amd. Ord. 10-3166-43, eff. 9/27/10)
3-4F-6: INDOOR FIREWORKS USE PROHIBITED
No person may perform any Pyrotechnic Display or use any Consumer Fireworks inside any
enclosed or substantially enclosed area within the Village.
3-4F-7: VIOLATION, PENALTIES
Any person who is found to have violated the Provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor and subject to a fine in Accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule
set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code (Ord. 06-2042-34, eff. 6/26/06)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 17 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE G: RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-4G-1: Definitions
3-4G-2: License
3-4G-4: Limitations
3-4G-5: Fees
3-4G-6: Approval
3-4G-7: Conduct of Raffles
3-4G-8: Records
3-4G-9: Raffles Manager; Bond
3-4G-10: Penalties
3-4G-1: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them
below. All terms not expressly defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS15/0.01, et seq.
BUSINESS A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have
joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
CHARITABLE An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite
number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must
also confer some benefit to the public.
EDUCATIONAL An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic
instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and
institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity
with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
FRATERNAL An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of
which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance
to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by
carrying for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government.
KEY LOCATION The location where the winning chances in the raffle are determined.
LABOR An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS The term Net Proceeds shall mean the gross receipts from the conduct of
raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, Village license fees, and
other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NON-PROFIT An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit
basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result of the operation.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 18 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
RAFFLE The term Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b) of
the "Criminal Code of 1961", conducted by an organization licensed under this
Chapter in which:
1. They player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is
to be designated the winning chance; and
2. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on
the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except
that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
publicly exhibited sporting contest.
"Raffle" does not include any game designed to simulate: (1) gambling games
as defined in the Riverboat Gambling Act, (2) any casino game approved for
play by the Illinois Gaming Board, (3) any games provided by a video gaming
terminal, as defined in the Video Gaming Act, or (4) a savings promotion raffle
authorized under Section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the
Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B
of the National Bank Act, or Section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan Act.
RELIGIOUS Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of
religious worship.
VETERANS An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially
all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or widowers of
veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its
members and to provide public benefit.
3-4G-2: LICENSE
A. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances for which
the key location is within the Village without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to
this Chapter.
B. APPLICATIONS. The license and application for license must specify the time period during
which raffles or chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and
the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. All organizations applying
for a License issued under this Chapter shall be required to demonstrate that the raffle manager
designated by the organization has posted a fidelity bond, as required by law, or to attest that the
organization has elected to waive the requirement for the raffle manager to post a fidelity bond.
C. SWORN STATEMENT. The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the
not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer
and the secretary of the organization.
D. VALIDITY OF LICENSE. Each such license shall be valid for only one raffle or for a specific
number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one (1) year; further
such license may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police in the event of violation of the
terms of this Chapter or any applicable State law.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 19 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
E. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational, or veterans’ organizations which operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of 5 years immediately before making application
for a raffle license and which have had during that entire 5-year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit fundraising organization that the Chief of
Police determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of
an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
F. ELIGIBILITY. The following are ineligible for any license under this Chapter:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony unless Village of Lincolnshire staff, upon
review of considerations set forth by state law finds evidence of rehabilitation and other
mitigating factors (230 ILCS 15/3.1 et seq.);
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in (1), (2), or (3) has a proprietary,
equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2) or (3) is an officer, director, or
employee, whether compensated or not; and
6. Any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2), or (3) is to participate in the
management or operation of a raffle as defined in this Chapter.
G. If the Village refuses to issue a license to an applicant, then the applicant shall be notified of the
denial in writing with the following included in the notice of denial:
1. A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
2. A list of the convictions that the Village has determined will impair the applicant’s ability
to engage in the position for which a license is sought;
3. A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for the refusal to issue a license;
and
4. A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant may reapply for a license,
whichever is applicable.
3-4G-4: LIMITATIONS
A. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle
under this Chapter is limited to $1,000,000. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by
a licensee in a single raffle is limited to $1,000,000. The maximum price which may be charged
for each raffle chance issued or sold is limited to $1,000, and the maximum number of days during
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 20 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
which chances may be issued or sold is limited to 364 days.
B. The sale of chances, and any person engaged in the sale of chances, within the Village for any raffle
licensed under this Chapter must comply with the Title 3, Chapter 5, regulating the conduct of
peddlers and solicitors.
C. No person may engage in the sale of raffle chances within the Village unless the Raffle for which
chances are being sold has been licensed in any jurisdiction in this State in accordance with the
Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/1, et seq.
3-4G-5: FEES
Fees for such a license to conduct a raffle shall be as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code; provided that fees shall be waived for
qualifying organizations falling in one of the following categories:
A. Having a membership of which 55% or more reside within the corporate limits of the Village;
B. Having a charter or other official recognition by a parent, state or national organization that
designates it a Lincolnshire chapter; or
C. Having a principal or sole place of business located in corporate limits of the Village; or
D. Being an organization supporting exclusively a local unit of government which provides services
to residents of the Village.
3-4G-6: APPROVAL
The Village of Lincolnshire shall, within thirty (30) days, evaluate and either approve or
disapprove of said application. The Chief of Police or designee shall issue the license provided
that the applicant is eligible for a license and meets the requirements of the Chapter.
3-4G-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
A. USE OF PROCEEDS. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the
lawful purposes of the licensee.
B. PARTICIPATION IN MANAGEMENT. A licensee may contract with third parties who, acting at
the direction of and under the supervision of the licensee, provide bona fide services to the
licensee in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay reasonable compensation for
such services. Such services include the following: (a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b)
legal, (c) procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the
raffle, (d) rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented, (e) accounting, auditing
and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting, (g) mailing and delivery, (h) banking and payment
processing, and (i) other services relating to the operation of the raffle..
C. REMUNERATION. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle except for reasonable compensation paid to a raffle
manager which provides bona fide services to the licensee in connection with the operation of a
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 3: BUSINESS & LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Page 21 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
raffle. No remuneration may be measured by a percentage or share of the aggregate value of the
chances sold.
D. LOCATIONS. Winning raffle chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the
license.
E. AGE OF PARTICIPANTS. No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles without written permission from a parent or guardian. A person under the age of 18
years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
F. EXEMPTION. A license need not be issued to any bona fide religious charitable, labor, fraternal,
educational, civic, or veterans= organization that conducts a raffle or lottery at a meeting or
function held by that organization in which chances are sold only to members of said organization
and their guests and invitees in attendance at said meeting or function and when the winning
chance is chosen during the same function or event at which the chances are sold.
3-4G-8: RECORDS
A. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep such Records and shall handle the receipts
from the operation of such raffles as required in accordance with State law. The Village waives
receipt of any records kept and maintained by the licensee, provided that acceptance of a license
by the applicant represents the licensee’s agreement to provide any records related to the conduct
of the raffle within five (5) days of receiving a written demand therefore from the Chief of Police,
or his designee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the licensee shall report promptly to the Village
a summary report describing the gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the raffle, and
the distribution of net proceeds.
B. No later than May 1 of each year, the Chief of Police must prepare, publicly announce, and publish
a report of summary statistical information relating to new and renewal license applications
during the preceding calendar year. The report shall contain the data required by State law.
3-4G-9: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle
manager designated by the organization in its application. The manager shall give a fidelity bond
as required by applicable state statute or attest that the organization has elected, in the manner
provided by law, to waive the requirement for the raffle manager designated by the organization
to post a fidelity bond.
3-4G-10: PENALTIES
Any person found to have conducted any raffle in violation of this Chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provided in Title 1, Chapter 17, of the Village Code, the Comprehensive Fine Schedule.
(Amd Ord. 10-3140-17, eff. 5/10/10)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-5- 1: Definitions
3-5- 2: Licensing of Peddling and Commercial Solicitors
3-5- 3: Application for License
3-5- 4: Issuance and Revocation of Licenses
3-5- 5: License Fees
3-5- 6: Regulation of Solicitors for Funds
3-5- 7: Policy on Soliciting and Peddling
3-5- 8: Restrictions Applicable to All Soliciting and Peddling
3-5- 9: Place of Conducting Business
3-5-10: Revocation of Licenses
3-5-11: Penalties
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. Regarding Peddlers:
PEDDLER A person who engages in peddling, including persons
required to be licensed pursuant to An Act to License
and Regulate the Business of Transient Merchants and
to Provide Penalties for the Violation of the Act.1
PEDDLING The door-to-door sale or offering for sale of property, for
immediate delivery from other than a fixed place of
business on private property, including the sale of
charitable or religious books or pamphlets. Peddling
shall not include the sale of goods by charitable
organizations for charitable purposes on not to exceed
one day in any calendar year, or the sale of goods by
persons as part of fund raising activities for local
schools or youth organizations.
1225 ILCS 460/1
B. Soliciting or Solicitation:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
COMMERCIAL
SOLICITING The door-to-door selling or offering for sale of property
or services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration, for future
delivery from other than a fixed place of business on
private property, including the sale of foods and
refreshments from a vehicle, except fund soliciting.
Commercial soliciting shall not include the sale of goods
by persons conducting fund raising activities for local
schools or youth organizations where the goods will be
delivered at a future date.
FUND SOLICITING Soliciting of funds not involving the sale of property,
including solicitation where pamphlets are given to a
donor of funds but not including the sale of books or
pamphlets.
OTHER SOLICITING Shall include soliciting support for political, charitable,
religious, or other causes not involving the solicitation of
funds.
C. Residence: Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within
any type of building or structure and the yard or grounds upon which such
structure is located.
3-5-2: LICENSING OF PEDDLING AND COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS: It shall
be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of Peddling or
Commercial Soliciting in the Village without first having a license as herein
provided.
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. The application for a license shall be made under oath upon a form provided
by the Chief of Police. Each original application shall be completed by the
applicant in full and shall set forth:
1. The applicant's name, address and zip code, social security number, date
of birth, sex, and a physical description of the applicant;
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, corporation,
association or organization whom the applicant is employed by or
represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
3. A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the
soliciting in which solicitor applicants will engage or the wares peddlers will
sell or take orders for;
4. The period of time for which the license is applied for;
5. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for license
under this Chapter;
6. Whether a license issued to the applicant under this Chapter, or its
predecessor, has ever been revoked;
7. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, its predecessor, or the ordinance of any other
Illinois municipality, or any Illinois Statute, regulating soliciting;
8. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or Federal
laws of the United States;
9. Evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for the organization
represented;
10.The number and description of vehicles used.
B. All applicants for a license under this Chapter shall attach to their application
two (2) color photographs of the person in whose name the license is to be
issued. All such photographs shall be a head and shoulders shot and shall
measure one inch (1") wide by one and one-half inches (1-1/2") high.
C. The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office an accurate
record of every application received and acted upon together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto and all licenses issued under the
provisions of this Chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for
licenses shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed, and every license
issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon
which it was issued.
D. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state
or Federal laws of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the
application; or has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter; or whose license issued hereunder has previously been revoked, as
herein provided.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 4
3-5-4: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES: The Chief of Police, upon
receipt of a properly completed application, but in no event later than five (5)
working days after the receipt of the application, shall either issue a license, or
notify the applicant in writing that the application has been denied because of
the applicant's failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
3-5-5: LICENSE FEES: The license fee for peddlers and commercial solicitors shall
be as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15
of Title 1 of this Code, each license to be valid for no more than one year from
the date of issuance.
3-5-6: REGULATION OF SOLICITORS FOR FUNDS: Solicitors for funds must
comply with the "Solicitation for Charity Act", 225 ILCS 460 et. al., and must
register with the Chief of Police at least five (5) working days prior to soliciting
funds. The applicant in registering must furnish all the information required in
the application for license provided in Section 3-5-3 of this Chapter and
evidence of compliance with said State law, but no license fee or license shall
be required. Solicitors for funds for organizations that have had a fixed place of
operation in Lincolnshire for over two (2) years shall be exempt from
registering under this Chapter, provided said organization has on file in the
Village at a place accessible to the Chief of Police, a list of names and
addresses of its solicitors available for inspection; and provided that said
organization is in compliance with the Act to Regulate Solicitors referred to
herein above.
3-5-7: POLICY ON SOLICITING AND PEDDLING: It is hereby declared to be the
policy of the corporate authorities of the Village that the occupant or occupants
of the residences in the Village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors and/or peddlers shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective
residences. If no determination is made, as is provided in Section 3-5-8
hereof, then, in that event, the solicitation and/or peddling is permitted.
3-5-8: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person:
1. To continue to engage in solicitation or peddling upon any premises or in
any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon after
having been requested by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such
premises or residence.
2. To engage in peddling or solicitation upon any premises or residence
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 5
located thereon if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation
or peddling by means of a notice, prominently displayed upon which is
printed the legend:
"ONLY SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS REGISTERED
IN LINCOLNSHIRE INVITED"
or
"NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS"
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a dwelling house, apartment or
other place of residence shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation or
peddling if there is exhibited, on or near themain entrance to the premises or
on or near the main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least
three inches (3") by four inches (4") in size and with letter at least threeeighths
inch (3/8") in height, which bears the above legend. Signs complying
with the foregoing requirements shall be made available at cost at the office
of the Village Clerk to persons requesting the same.
3. Who engages in solicitation or peddling to use any plan, scheme or ruse to
make any statement which indicates or implies that the purpose of such
person's solicitation is other than to obtain orders for or to make sales of
goods or services.
4. Who engages in peddling or soliciting to misrepresent the right of a buyer
to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
5. Who engages in peddling or soliciting to cheat, deceive, or fraudulently
misrepresent, whether through himself or through an employee, while
acting as a peddler or solicitor in the Village, or to barter, sell or peddle any
goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in his application
for a license.
6. To solicit or peddle in any public right-of-way, nor otherwise interfere with
vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way. (Amd.
Ord. 08-3037-20, eff. 5/27/08)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether registered under this Chapter or
not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-5: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 6
and engage in soliciting or peddling, as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday or at any
time on a Sunday or a State or national holiday, except in the case of a
solicitation by a charitable or nonprofit organization which may not engage in
soliciting prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Monday through Friday and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Saturday or at any
time on a Sunday or a State or national holiday.
C. The license shall be displayed conspicuously on the outer garment of a
registered peddler or solicitor at all times when the person is engaged in
soliciting or peddling in the Village of Lincolnshire.
3-5-9: PLACE OF CONDUCTING BUSINESS: No peddler or solicitormay peddle or
solicit on public property in one place for longer than one-half (1/2) hour. After
the expiration of one-half (1/2) hour, hemustmove to a different location which
is at least six hundred sixty feet (660') away.
3-5-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSES: Any license or registration under this Chapter
may be revoked by the Village Manager and the cash deposit revoked
because of any violation of any provisions of this Chapter or of any other
ordinance of the Village, or of any State or Federal law, but not before the
licensee or registrant has been given at least ten (10) days’ notice of hearing
on the violations and revocation of the license. At said hearing the licensee
and his attorneymay present and submit evidence and witnesses in licensee's
defense.
3-5-11: PENALTIES: Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code
described in 17-1. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose; Findings
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Permits Required
3-6-4: Application and Issuance of Permits
3-6-5: Rules of Operation
3-6-6: Violation; Revocation of Permits
3-6-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS: It is hereby found and determined that it is necessary
and in the best interest of the public to regulate the storage, operation, delivery
and dispensing of volatile Class I, II and III liquids at service stations who
provide a "self-service dispensing" feature and also that certain fire prevention
measures are necessary to prevent fire and protect the public using the selfservice
provisions.
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS: The terms specified in this Section shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this paragraph:
APPROVED SELF- Any device for the dispensing of Class I, II
SERVICE DISPENSING or III liquids into the fuel tanks of motor
DEVICES vehicles.
ATTENDANT The owner or any person who is
employed by an owner of a service
station to dispense motor fuel at such
service station.
CLASS I, II or III Those liquids so designated by the State
LIQUIDS of Illinois.
OWNER Any individual(s) or legal entity holding
title, lease, license or any interest in a
service station or self-service station. The
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 2
legal name, residence, address and
county of any individuals who are owners
shall be filed with the Village Manager.
SELF-SERVICE That portion of property of a service
STATION station where flammable and combustible
liquids used as motor fuels are stored
and subsequently dispensed from fixed
approved dispensing equipment into the
fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons
other than the service station attendant.
SERVICE STATION Any place of business where Class I, II,
or III liquids are sold or offered for sale at
retail, and dispensed into the fuel tanks of
motor vehicles.
3-6-3: PERMITS REQUIRED: Except at service stations which hold current and valid
self-service station permits issued pursuant to this Chapter by the Village
Manager, no person other than an owner of a service station, or an employee
of such owner, shall use or operate any motor fuel dispensing equipment at
any service station. No owner of a service station shall permit any person to
violate the provisions of this Chapter.
3-6-4: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS: Self-service station permits
shall be issued by the Village Manager upon written application in form to be
established by said Village Manager and accompanied by complete, detailed
plans in triplicate, for each service station sought to be used for self-service.
Such plans shall be drawn to scale, and shall include the following:
A. Lot lines and dimensions.
B. Building lines and dimensions.
C. Location and size of tanks and pump islands.
D. Location of control station.
E. Type, make, model and location of dispensing devices or equipment.
F. Fire extinguisher locations.
G. Clearances.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 3
H. Such other relevant information as may be requested by the Village Manager.
No construction of a self-service station or modification of an existing service
station to conduct self-service business shall be commenced until such
application and plans are given written approval by the Village Manager, no
such station shall open for business until inspected and approved by the
Village Manager, and until the Village Manager issues a self-service station
permit, which must be displayed prominently, at all times, at such self-service
station.
Self-service permits shall be initially issued for a period extending to the next
succeeding April 30. Renewal permits shall be issued for a period of twelve
(12) months.
3-6-5: RULES OF OPERATION: The following rules shall be followed at all selfservice
stations, and violation of any said rules shall constitute grounds for
suspension or revocation of a self-service station permit:
A. The installation or use of unattended self-service dispensing devices formotor
fuel of any kind is hereby prohibited.
B. No dwelling unit or sleeping facilities of any kind for the owner, attendant or
any person shall be permitted at a self-service station.
C. Dispensing of Class I, II or III liquids at locations not open to the public does
not require an attendant or supervisor. Such locations may be used by
commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments for
fueling vehicles used in connection with their businesses. However, this shall
not include private fraternal clubs or associations.
D. Special dispensing devices for motor fuel are not to be installed or used
without prior written approval of the Village Manager.
E. Approved self-service dispensing devices are permitted at service stations
available and open to the public provided that all dispensing of Class I, II or III
liquids by a person other than the service station attendant is under the
supervision and control of a qualified attendant and the dispensing nozzle isa
listed automatic closing type without a hold open latch approved by the Village
Manager.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 4
1. Dispense Class I, II or III liquids into approved portable containers.
2. Control sources of ignition.
3. Immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers if needed.
The attendant on duty shall be mentally and physically capable of
performing the functions and assuming the responsibility prescribed in this
Section.
G. One type ABC fire extinguisher with a capacity of ten (10) pounds shall be
provided for each pump island containing four (4) or less dispensing pumps;
on pump islands containing more than four (4) dispensing pumps, an
additional extinguisher shall be provided for each four (4) additional dispensing
pumps or fraction thereof. Such extinguishers shall be located at points
approved by the Village Manager away from the dispensing area but close
enough to the dispensing area to be readily available. Such extinguishers shall
be plainlymarked, shall be protected fromthe weather and shall bemaintained
in operable condition and available at all times when the self-service station is
open to the public. All employees of the self-service station shall be thoroughly
instructed as to the location and proper use of such extinguishers, and shall,
upon request, demonstrate their ability in such use to the approval of
representatives of the Village Manager.
H. Signs giving instructions for the operation of gasoline dispensing equipment
must be conspicuously posted at each self-service station offering self-service.
Signs bearing the following words must conspicuously be posted on each
gasoline pump island where self-service is offered:
1. Self-Service Island.
2. "Warning"
a. "Stop Engine"
b. "No Smoking"
c. "It is unlawful and dangerous for anyone other than the attendant to
dispense gasoline into approved
containers."
d. "It is unlawful and dangerous to dispense gasoline without an attendant
on duty."
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 5
The signs shall bemade of all-weather, rigidmaterial and the wording,
lettering, size, design, material, mounting and location of said sign
shall be subject to the approval of the Village Manager.
I. All fuel dispensing units shall be mounted or protected against collision
damage by suitable means in a manner approved by the Village Manager.
J. Every self-service station shallmaintain a control station in a location approved
by the Village Manager, equipped in such manner that the flow of liquid fuel
from any or all fuel dispensing unitsmay be stopped from such control station;
a master electric switch shall be maintained at such control station so that
electric power and pump lighting to all pumps may be disconnected, at one
time, and said switch shall be plainly marked and easily accessible. The
control station shall be located at ground level notmore than one hundred feet
(100') from the farthest pump. The control station shall be so located that the
attendant of such control station shall have a clear and unobstructed view of all
pumps. The attendant shall at all times be able to communicate with persons
in the dispensing area. The Village Manager may at his discretion require a
communications system between the control station and each pump island.
K. At all times when a self-service station is open for public use, not less than one
attendant shall be on duty, and no motor fuel shall be dispensed at any time
when such attendant is not at or near the control station or pump island. The
attendant's primary duty shall be to supervise the dispensing of motor fuels,
motor oils and services normally related to such dispensing. Such attendant
shall refuse service to any person who is smoking or who appears for any
reason to be unable to dispense fuel safely, and shall shut off the dispensing
unit if a patron fails to follow instructions in compliance with the rules. All
attendants and other employees of the service station shall be thoroughly
instructed in the operation and use of the communication system, the control
station, and fire extinguishing equipment, the operation of the dispensing units,
and safety regulations for the dispensing of motor fuels.
L. All persons identifying themselves as an invalid or having a handicap and
unable to service their vehicle with motor fuel will be provided assistance by
the self-service attendant on duty. The assistance will be provided without
undue delay or additional charge.
3-6-6: VIOLATION; REVOCATION OF PERMITS: TheVillage Manager may,for
failure to comply with these rules, for violation thereof, or for other good and
just cause, including the violation of other provisions of this Chapter, refuse to
issue or renew or suspend or revoke a self-service station permit. The Village
Manager shall serve notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation on the
applicant for or holder of such permit by personal service or by certified or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS
Revised 07/19/1999 Page 6
registered mail. If the applicant for or holder of such permit, within ten (10)
days after notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation is served, shall file
in the office of the Village Manager written request for a hearing, the Village
Manager shall grant a hearing. (Ord. 78-530-19) (Ord. Amd. 99-1656-40, eff.
6/14/99)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Purpose
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Franchise Requirement; Authority Granted by a Franchise
3-7-4 Terms and Conditions For Each Franchise
3-7-5: Selection of Grantees
3-7-6: Franchise Agreement
3-7-7: Franchise Fee
3-7-7-1: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed (Ord. 07-3009-37, eff. 11/26/07)
3-7-8: Nature of the System
3-7-8-1: Technical Standards
3-7-8-2: Repealed (Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-9: Construction of the System
3-7-10: Cable and Video Customer Protection Law (Ord. 07-3009-37, eff. 11/26/07)
3-7-10-1: Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law
3-7-10-2: Enforcement
3-7-10-3: Penalties
3-7-10-4: Customer Credits
3-7-11: Rates and Charges
3-7-12: Records and Reports
3-7-13: Repealed (Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-14: Reviews, Modifications and Renewal of the Franchise
3-7-15: Repealed (Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-16: Repealed (Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-17: Procedures Following Revocation or Expiration of Franchise
3-7-18: Hiring and Employment Practices
3-7-19: Repealed (Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-20: Repealed (Ord. 07-3009-37, eff. 11/26/07)
3-7-21: Rights Reserved to the Village
3-7-22: Continuing Regulation and Administration by the Village
3-7-23: Unlawful Acts
3-7-24: Miscellaneous
3-7-1: PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the granting of
nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate and maintain broadband
communication networks in the public streets of the Village; to provide for the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 2
specifications, procedures and standards for the same; to provide for the
regulation of such networks; and to provide for the payment to the Village for
the privilege of exercising the rights granted by such franchises.
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS: All capitalized terms not otherwise defined in this Chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to such terms in the Cable Act, the Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-100, et seq., and the Cable
and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501, et seq. (Amd. Ord.
11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
BASIC SERVICE Shall have the meaning ascribed to the term
Abasic cable service@ in the Cable Act.
BOARD or VILLAGE BOARD The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Lincolnshire.
BROADBAND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
or
Any network operated in whole or in part within
the right-of-way capable of providing Cable
Service, as defined in the Cable Act,
NETWORK Video Service, as defined in the Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21
100, et seq.
CABLE ACT The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
47 U.S.C. '521, et seq.
CABLE SERVICE Means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
COMMISSION The Illinois Commerce Commission
FCC The Federal Communications Commission and
any legally appointed or elected successor with
respect to Federal regulation and licensing in
connection with the subject matter of this Chapter.
FRANCHISE The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this
Chapter to construct and operate a Broadband
Telecommunications Network along the public
streets within all or a specified area of the Village.
Any such authorization, in whatever Franchise
(cont.)form granted, shall not mean and include
any license or permit required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the
Village as required by other ordinances and laws
of this Village.
GRANTEE Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to
this Chapter and under the granting franchise
ordinance, its present subsidiaries and affiliates,
and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GROSS REVENUES All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and inkind
contributions received for the operation of a
cable or video system to provide cable service or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 3
video service within the Village.
(1) Gross revenues shall include the following:
(i) Recurring charges for cable or video service.
(ii) Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
(iii) Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
(iv) Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair
charges.
(v) Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
(vi) Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
(vii) A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the Grantee or Holder or
its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or
for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from
the operation of the operator=s network to provide cable service or
video service within the Village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national
compensation arrangement.
(viii) Compensation received by the Grantee or Holder that is derived from
the operation of its network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the Grantee or
Holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services on its network, such as a Ahome shopping@ or similar
channel, subject to subsection (ix).
(ix) In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder=s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue
unless the Grantee or Holder can reasonably identify the division or
exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in
the regular course of business.
(x) The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) and the
franchise fee collected under any Franchise issued under Section 3-7-
3.
(2) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
(i) Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 4
subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
(ii) Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the Grantee or Holder to the
extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable
service or video service.
(iii) Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or
video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other
revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the Grantee=s or Holder=s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
(iv) The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser=s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing
that it will resell the service within the Village and pay a service
provider fee or franchise fee with respect to the service.
(v) Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or
the transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental
entity and collected by the Grantee or Holder and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
(vi) Security deposits collected from subscribers.
(vii) Amounts paid by subscribers to Ahome shopping@ or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as
part of the cable service or video service.
(3) Revenue of an affiliate of a Grantee or Holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the Grantee or Holder has the effect of
evading the payment of the service provider fee or franchise fee which
would otherwise be paid on the cable service or video service.
HOLDER A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
INCUMBENT CABLE
OPERATOR
A person or entity that provided cable services or video
services in the Village of Lincolnshire under a franchise
agreement with the Village pursuant to Section 3-7-3 of
the Village Code on January 1, 2007.
MAY "May" is permissive.
PERSON An individual, partnership, limited partnership, asso
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 5
organization, corporation or any lawful successor, transf
assignee of the same.
REASONABLE NOTICE Written notice addressed to the grantee at its office,
which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less
than seven (7) days prior to the day in which the party
giving such notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing said seven
(7) days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded.
SERVICE The provision of Acable service@ or Avideo service@ to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the
person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
SHALL and MUST Each is mandatory and not merely directory.
SUBSCRIBER Shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in 47 CFR
76.5(ee)(1).
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire, a Municipal corporation in
the State of Illinois.
3-7-3: FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT; AUTHORITY GRANTED BY A RANCHISE:
A. Authorization Required: A person or entity, including a telecommunications
carrier, seeking to provide Cable Service or Video Service pursuant to this
Chapter shall not use the public rights-of-way for the installation or construction
of facilities for the provision of Cable Service or Video Service or offer Cable
Service or Video Service until it has obtained either: (i) a State-issued
authorization from the Commission to offer or provide cable or video service
under Section 401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS
5/21-100 et seq.); or (ii) a cable franchise from the Village under Section 11-
42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-42-11). (Amd. Ord. 07-3008-
36, eff. 11/26/07)
B. Authority Granted: Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the grantee,
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the right and privilege at its own
expense to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon, along,
above, over and under the streets such antennas, BTNs, electronic equipment
and other network appurtenances as are necessary for the operation of a BTN
in the Village.
3-7-4: TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR EACH FRANCHISE:
A. Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be
exclusive. The Village reserves the right to grant other franchises to other
persons at any time or times.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 6
B. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
C. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
D. Transfer of Franchise: No franchise granted by the Village shall be sold,
transferred, leased, assigned, disposed of, whether by way of sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, without in each case the prior written consent of the
Village. The consent of the Village shall be obtained in compliance with the
rules established therefore under the Cable Act and the FCC regulations
promulgated thereunder, or in the absence of such law and regulations in
compliance with the rules described therefore in the applicable franchise.
(Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
E. Franchise Territory. Each franchise granted hereunder shall relate to: 1) the
territorial limits of the Village as such limits exist on the date that the franchise
is granted; and 2) such other areas as designated in the franchise agreement.
(Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
F. Privileges Must be Specified: No privilege or exemption shall be granted or
conferred by any franchise granted except those specifically prescribed herein.
G. Obligations of Grantee to Obtain Other Permits: Any franchise granted
hereunder shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining
pole or conduit space from any department of the Village, utility company or
from others maintaining utilities in streets. Grantee shall not commence any
underground work within the Village without first submitting detailed plans to
the Village's engineer, obtaining approval of said plans and obtaining a permit
from the Village. Grantee must also comply with all other Village codes and
ordinances in installing a broadband communication network within the Village,
including but not limited to building codes and zoning ordinances.
H. Franchise Binding: Any franchise granted hereunder shall be binding upon the
grantee, and all successors, lessees or assignees as may be approved by the
Village.
I. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-5: SELECTION OF GRANTEES:
A. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
B. Criteria for Evaluation of Applications: Applications for a BTN franchise will be
evaluated under the following criteria:
1. Experience: Preference may be given to applicants that can give evidence
of providing dependable and complete service to other communities and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 7
who have established a record of excellent construction practices, ability to
meet deadlines, and good planning and marketing practices.
2. Financial Stability: Preference may be given to applicants that present
evidence of financial resources which will assure that the applicant will have
the ability to complete the entire BTN in the franchise area within the time
period set forth in Section 3-7-9.
3. System Design: Preference may be given to a system which contains the
flexibility to adjust to new technological development and which indicates
that high quality equipment will be used and high quality maintenance
practices will be followed.
4. Services: Preference may be given to the applicant that proposes to
provide superior programming. In determining what constitutes superior
programming, particular consideration will be given to local origination and
the resources which an applicant proposes to devote to local origination in
order to make it interesting, innovative and financially feasible.
5. REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
6. Local Ownership and Control: The degree of local ownership and control of
an applicant may be taken into account. The foregoing criteria are not
listed in an order of priority.
C. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
D. Effective Date of a Franchise: The effective date of a franchise shall be the
date on which the ordinance referred to in paragraph 4 of Section 3-7-5C is
adopted by the Village Board.
3-7-6: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
A. Agreement Required: No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the
applicant and the Village have executed a franchise agreement which shall set
forth the terms and provisions of the franchise.
B. The Village=s execution and enforcement of any Franchise Agreement, and the
grant of such benefits given to the Grantee in consideration for the same, are
an exercise of the Village=s home rule authority to enter into contracts having a
bearing on the local government and affairs of the Village to the extent granted
or permitted by Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution. (Amd. Ord. 11-
3182-04, eff. 24/11).
3-7-7: FRANCHISE FEE:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 8
A. The Grantee shall pay to the Village a franchise fee in an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenues. The payment of franchise fees shall
be made on a quarterly basis and shall be due forty-five (45) days after the
close of each calendar quarter. Each franchise fee payment shall be
accompanied by a report prepared by a representative of the Grantee showing
the basis for the computation of the Franchise Fees paid during that period.
For any Franchise Fee payments, owed by Grantee in accordance with this
Section which are not made on or before the due dates, Grantee shall make
such payments including interest at an annual rate of twelve percent (12%) or
two (2) percent over prime lending rates as quoted by Chase Bank U.S.A or its
successor, whichever is higher, computed daily from time due until paid. Any
undisputed overpayments made by Grantee to the Village shall be credited
upon discovery of such overpayment until such time when the full value of such
credit has been applied to the franchise fee liability otherwise accruing
hereunder.
B. In the event that at any time during the duration of a Franchise granted
hereunder the Village is authorized to collect an amount in excess of five
percent (5%) of Gross Revenues, then the Village may unilaterally amend such
Franchise by ordinance following a public hearing on the matter, provided such
amendment is competitively neutral. Said ordinance shall provide that such
excess amount shall be added to the Franchise Fee payments to be paid by
Grantee to the Village hereunder, and provide the Grantee at least ninety (90)
days prior written notice from the Village to implement the increase in the
amount of the Franchise Fee.
C. Acceptance by Village: No acceptance of any payment by the Village shall be
construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
Village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee
under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee. (Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-7-1: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the Village.
B. Amount of Fee: The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby shall
be five percent (5%) of the holder=s gross revenues.
C. Notice to the Village: Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to the Village
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall notify the Village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the Village.
D. Holder=s Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 9
to the Village. The holder=s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day
of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance
adopting this Article [Chapter] by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
Article [Chapter] shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed
on the holder=s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to
the Village. Together with this ordinance the Village shall send the holder
instructions for remitting the payment and statement required hereby.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or video
service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village,
under 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11, in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit for Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of
such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section 3-7-7-1(B).
H. Applicable Principles: All determinations and calculations under this Chapter
shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder: Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be
imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be
paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A
State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the Village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax
or any other tax as it applies to any telecommunications service provided by
the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government=s 911 or E911
fees, taxes or charges.
J. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
K. Late Fees / Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due shall be
governed by Section 3-1-9, et seq., of the Village Code. (Amd. Ord. 07-3008-
36, eff. 11/26/07)
3-7-8: NATURE OF THE SYSTEM:
3-7-8-1: VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS; PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE
REQUIREMENTS: On the date set forth in Section 3-7-7-1(D), but not
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 10
earlier than 90 days after a holder sends notice to the Village under 220
ILCS 5/21-801(a), a holder shall (i) designate the same amount of capacity
on its network to provide for public, education, and government access use,
as the incumbent cable operator is required to designate under this Section
and its franchise terms in effect with a local unit of government on January
1, 2007; and (ii) retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public,
education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable
operator was retransmitting to subscribers on January 1, 2007. (Amd. Ord.
07-3008-36, eff. 11/26/07) (Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-8-2: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-9: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-10: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW: (Amd. Ord. 07-3009-
37, eff. 11/26/07)
3-7-10-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services
within the Village's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this Chapter
shall be incorporated into this Chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the municipality=s boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
3-7-10-2: ENFORCEMENT: The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent
to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the
Cable and Video Protection Law.
3-7-10-3: PENALTIES: The Village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby
declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, as incorporated by reference in this
ordinance, a cable or video provider shall be subject to the monetary penalties
described in accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set
forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1of the Code. Such penalties shall be in addition to
the penalties provided in the Law and shall not represent the Village's
exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on
a competitively neutral basis. (Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 11
A. Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to
comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of
the law.
B. The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged
material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the
receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to
occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable
or video service provider after the notice in (B).
D The Board of Trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the
Village Administrator.
E. Any decision of the Village Administrator to levy penalties may be appealed to
the Board of Trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material
breach and penalties levied therefore within twenty-one (21) days following
receipt of the cable or video providers request for an appeal.
3-7-10-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS: The Village hereby adopts and incorporates by
reference the schedule of customer credits for violations of the Law provided
for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be applied
on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider
is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under
no obligation to request the credit.
3-7-11: RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Rates and Service Schedules: The grantee shall at all times maintain on file
with the Village a complete and current schedule showing all services being
provided under the grantee's franchise, the fees and charges for each of such
services, the charges for connections or disconnections and any other charges
which may be made by the grantee in connection with the BTN. Such schedule
shall also show the components of the basic service and the pay service, each
on a channel-by-channel basis, the monthly charge for each service package,
and reasonably complete descriptions of each service package. (Ord. 84-787-
01)
B. REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF 9/11/06.
C. REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF 9/11/06.
D. REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF 9/11/06.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 12
E. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
F. No Consideration Beyond Schedule: A grantee shall not receive any
consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of service to its
subscribers other than as set forth in this Section or in the schedule then on file
with the Village.
G. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-12: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Required: Each grantee shall at all times maintain:
1. A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of
service experienced for the preceding three (3) years.
2. A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the
exact location of all BTN equipment installed or in use in the Village
(exclusive of subscriber service drops).
3. Financial records of the grantee in connection with its activities within the
Village maintained in a manner distinguishing revenues earned within the
Village from revenues earned by the grantee in other municipalities. .
(Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-13: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-14: REVIEWS, MODIFICATIONS AND RENEWAL OF THE FRANCHISE:
A. Reviews: On or about the third and sixth anniversaries of the effective date of
the franchise, the Village Board shall schedule and hold a special public
meeting or meetings with the grantee to review the performance by the grantee
under the franchise, including future plans of the grantee regarding operation
and performance. In particular, the Village may inquire whether the grantee is
supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those being generally
offered at that time in the industry in comparable market situations.
B. Modifications: No provision of any Franchise Agreement shall be amended or
otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument, in writing, duly
executed by the Village, which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the
Village through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or ordinance by the
Village, as required by applicable law.
C. Renewal: Franchises granted hereunder may be considered for renewal in a
manner which complies with the procedures set forth therefore in the Cable Act
and the FCC regulations promulgated thereunder, or in the absence of such
law and regulations in compliance with the rules described therefore in the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 13
applicable franchise. The Village=s election to proceed with a formal or
informal renewal proceeding shall in no event prejudice the Village=s right to
proceed on the alternative basis. (Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-15: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-16: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-17: PROCEDURE FOLLOWING REVOCATION OR EXPIRATION OF
FRANCHISE:
A. Disposition of Facilities: If a franchise expires, is revoked or is otherwise
terminated, the Village may order the removal of the network facilities from the
Village within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Village.
B. Restoration of Property: in removing its plant, structures and equipment, the
grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that has been made by
it and shall leave all public streets, easements and places in as good condition
as prevailed prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances,
without affecting the electrical or telephone BTN wires, or attachments. The
Village shall inspect and approve the condition of the public streets and public
places, and BTNs, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability,
indemnity and insurance as provided herein, and the letter of credit provided
herein, shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and
until full compliance by the grantee with all the terms and conditions of this
Section 3-7-17B and this Chapter.
C. Restoration by the Village; Reimbursement of Costs: in the event of a failure by
the grantee to complete any work required by Section 3-7-17A and/or Section
3-7-17B, or any other work required by the Village ordinances within the time
as may be established and to the satisfaction of the Village, the Village may
cause such work to be done and the grantee shall then reimburse the Village
for the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs; or the Village may recover such costs through the letter of credit
provided by the grantee. The Village shall be permitted to seek legal and
equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Section.
D. Conveyance upon Revocation/Non-Renewal: The sale, transfer or conveyance
of the Cable System upon the revocation or non-renewal of any franchise
granted hereunder shall be performed in a manner which is not inconsistent
with the Cable Act and the FCC regulations promulgated thereunder. (Amd.
Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
E. Village's Rights Not Affected: The termination and forfeiture of any franchise
shall in no way affect any of the rights of the Village under the franchise or any
provision of law, and the grantee shall continue to maintain records and make
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 14
reports as required by this Chapter until such time as all payments due the
Village under this Chapter have been paid and accounted for to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Village.
3-7-18: HIRING AND EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES: In the carrying out of the
construction, maintenance and operation of the BTN, the grantee shall not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of
race, creed, color, sex or national origin.
3-7-19: REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
3-7-20: REPEALED BY ORD. 07-3009-37, EFF. 11/26/07.
3-7-21: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE VILLAGE:
A. Eminent Domain: Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or
affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the Village to acquire the
property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right
of eminent domain, at a fair and just value; and nothing herein contained shall
be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in
perpetuity, the Village's right of eminent domain.
B. All Legal Rights and Powers: There is hereby reserved to the Village every
right of power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by law, and
the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby
and to comply with any action or requirement of the Village in its exercise of
such rights or powers, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the right is hereby reserved to the Village to
adopt and enforce in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions contained
in this Chapter and in otherwise existing applicable ordinances, such additional
ordinances, rules and regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its
police powers.
C. No Waiver: Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental rights or powers
of the Village, subject to the rights of a grantee under its franchise and the
franchise agreement.
D. FCC Jurisdiction: If the FCC or any other Federal or State body or agency shall
now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of
any franchise granted under this Chapter, then to the extent such jurisdiction
preempts or precludes the exercise of like jurisdiction by the Village, the
jurisdiction of the Village shall terminate; provided, however, the Village shall
thereupon have the right to modify or amend any of the provisions of this
Chapter and of the franchise agreement to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary :o carry out the full intent and purpose of this Chapter, after
consultation with the grantee.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 15
E. Village's Contract Rights: The preemption or preclusion by the State of Illinois
of the exercise by the Village of any of its police powers shall not diminish,
impair. alter or affect any contractual benefit to the Village or grantee nor any
contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder.
Any and all rights, powers, privileges and authorization arising under this
Chapter or any franchise agreement are each and all hereby declared by the
Village and any grantee accepting any franchise hereunder to be contractual in
nature and to be for the benefit of the Village.
F. Right to Make Rules and Regulations: There is hereby reserved to the Village
the right to impose rules and regulations, reasonably required, in order to
better carry out the purpose and intent of this Chapter. Before any such rules
and regulations are adopted, the Village shall give notice to the grantee and
afford the grantee an opportunity to be heard.
3-7-22: CONTINUING REGULATION AND ADMINISTRATION BY THE VILLAGE:
A. Continuing Supervision by Village Board: The Village Board shall have
continuing supervision over the operation of any franchise granted hereunder.
Routine responsibilities in the administration of this Chapter and any franchise
agreement hereunder shall be performed by the Village Manager. (Amd. Ord.
11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-23: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Unlawful interception of Communications: it shall be unlawful for any person to
make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a grantee's BTN"1 for the
purpose of enabling such person or any other party to receive any signal,
information or intelligence transmitted over the BTN, without payment to the
grantee of full amount properly due for such signal, information or intelligence.
B. Unlawful Tampering With Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any person,
without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any
BTN, wires or other equipment used for the distribution of signals, information
or intelligence over a grantee's BTN.
C. Penalties: It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by the fine described in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set forth in
Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this Section 3-7-23. (Amd. Ord. 11-3182-04, eff. 1/24/11)
3-7-24: MISCELLANEOUS:
A. Compliance With Applicable Laws and Regulations: Each grantee, at its
expense, shall comply with all generally applicable laws, orders and regulations
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 16
of Federal, State and Village authorities.
B. Diligence by Grantee: Each grantee shall diligently apply for all necessary
permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business, and shall
diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment
agreements, easements and necessary authorizations from the Federal
Aviation Agency to construct such receiving antennae as may be required, and
any necessary authorizations or waivers from the FCC, and shall assist the
Village in filing its application to the FCC for waiver of franchise fee limitations.
C. Notification to Village of Certain FCC Communications: Each grantee shall not
apply for any waivers, exceptions or declaratory rulings from the FCC or from
any other Federal or State regulatory agency without prior written notification to
the Village Manager.
D. Transfer of Village's Rights, Powers or Duties: Any right or power in, or duty
impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the Village
shall be subject to transfer by the Village to any other officer, employee,
department or board of the Village.
E. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
F. No Waivers by Village: A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any
of the terms and conditions of this Chapter or the franchise agreement by any
failure of the Village, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the
grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any one or more
of such terms or conditions.
G. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
H. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
I. Construction of Chapter: This Chapter shall be construed and interpreted
according to the following principles:
1. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter
are hereby repealed.
2. Words in the present tense include the future.
3. Words importing the singular number may extend to and include plural,
words importing the plural number may extend to and include the singular,
and words in masculine gender shall include female gender.
4. The specification in this Section of principles to apply in the construction
and interpretation of this Chapter shall not be a limitation as to other
applicable principles.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 17
5. Whenever this Chapter shall set forth any time for any act to be performed
by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence
and any failure of the grantee to perform within time allotted shall always be
sufficient grounds for the Village to terminate, cancel and revoke the grant
or use other remedies.
J. REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-7: BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Revised 01/24/2011 Page 18
APPENDIX I
REPEALED BY ORD. 11-3182-04, EFF. 1/24/11.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-8: COMMERCIAL CONTRACTORS
Revised 02/26/2007 Page 1
TITLE 3, CHAPTER 8 HAS BEEN RENUMBERED TO BE
TITLE 5, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 11,
PER ORDINANCE 07-2974-02,
EFFECTIVE FEBRUARY 26, 2007
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-9: SURCHARGE FOR EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 9
SURCHARGE FOR EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SYSTEM
SECTION:
3-9-1: Surcharge Imposed
3-9-2: Referendum Authorized
3-9-3: Definitions
3-9-4: Exempt Network Connections
3-9-5: Effective Date of Surcharge
3-9-6: Remittance
3-9-7: Written Report of Remittance Required
3-9-8: Erroneous Payment
3-9-1: SURCHARGE IMPOSED: A surcharge is hereby imposed, subject to the
provisions of Section 3-9-2, upon all billed subscribers of network connection
provided by telecommunications carriers engaged in the business of
transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within the corporate
limits of the Village for funding of the implementation, maintenance and
improvement of a Village "911" Emergency Telephone System.
3-9-2: REFERENDUM AUTHORIZED:
A. A referendum shall be placed by the County Clerk of Lake County on the
November 7, 1989 ballot for all legal voters residing in the Village to vote upon
the following question:
Shall the Village of Lincolnshire impose a surcharge of
up to $1.50 per month per network connection, which
surcharge expense will be added to the monthly bill you
receive for telephone or telecommunications charges,
for the purpose of implementing, maintaining and
improving a 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System?
YES
____________
NO
B. If a majority of the votes cast upon the question are in favor thereof, a
surcharge is hereby imposed at a rate as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code, per month per inVILLAGE
OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-9: SURCHARGE FOR EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
service network connection, as hereinafter defined. A network connection shall
not be deemed to be in service where a subscriber's account is deemed
uncollectible by the telecommunication carrier.(Amd. Ord. 98-1550-12, eff.
4/13/98)
3-9-3: DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Chapter the fol-lowing definitions shall
apply:
NETWORK The number of voice grade communications
CONNECTIONS channels directly between a subscriber and a
telecommunications carrier's public switched network
without the intervention of any other
telecommunications carriers' switched network which
would be required to carry the subscriber's
interpremises traffic.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
CARRIER association, join stock company, joint
adventure, corporation, Municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this State, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed
by order of any court engaged in the business of
trans-mitting messages by means of electricity.
TRANSMITTING Shall have the meaning ascribed to the term in section
MESSAGES term in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code1.
3-9-4: EXEMPT NETWORK CONNECTIONS: The Village Clerk shall provide any
telecommunications carrier subject to the surcharge with a certified list of those
network connections assigned to the Village to be exempt from imposition of
the surcharge. The certified list may be revised by the Village on sixty (60)
days prior written notice provided to the telecommunications carriers.
3-9-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF SURCHARGE: The surcharge shall be imposed on the
first day of the month following the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date
the Village Clerk certifies to any of the telecommunications carriers who are
subject to the surcharge that the referendum referred to in Section 3-9-2 has
passed.
3-9-6: REMITTANCE: Every telecommunications carrier shall remit to the Village the
amount of surcharge collected for each calendar month within thirty (30) days
165 ILCS5/8-11-2
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-9: SURCHARGE FOR EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
following expiration of any month to which the surcharge applies, net of any
network or other "911" or sophisticated "911" system charge then due the
particular telecommunications carrier as shown on an itemized bill. The
telecommunications carrier collecting the surcharge shall be entitled to deduct
three percent (3%) of the gross amount of the surcharge collected to reimburse
the telecommunications carrier for the expense of accounting and collecting the
surcharge.
3-9-7: WRITTEN REPORT OF REMITTANCE REQUIRED: Simultaneously with the
remittance required in Section 3-9-6 above, each telecommunications carrier
shall make a written report to the Village Treasurer and Village Manager for the
period for which the remittance applies stating as follows:
A. The name of the telecommunications carrier.
B. The telecommunications carrier's principal place of business.
C. The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies.
D. The amount of surcharge due.
E. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities
may from time to time require.
3-9-8: ERRONEOUS PAYMENT: If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this Chapter from
the telecommunications carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided,
that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of
a claim therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 89-1082-49)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 1
CHAPTER 10
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SECTION:
3-10-1: GENERAL
3-10-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND
PROVIDERS
3-10-3: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
3-10-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
3-10-5: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-6: FEES AND COMPENSATION
3-10-7: CONDITIONS OF GRANT
3-10-8: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
3-10-1: GENERAL
3-10-1-1: Purpose: The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise
of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
C. Promote competition in telecommunications;
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and
services;
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the Village;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 2
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust
by the Village;
H. Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the residents
of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways;
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services
within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Village;
K. Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the
public health, safety and welfare;
L. Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly
evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development.
3-10-1-2: Definitions: For the purpose of this Ordinance, and the interpretation and
enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are
used shall indicate otherwise:
Affiliate A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls,
is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with another person.
Annual gross revenue Reserved.
Cable Act The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. '532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
Cable operator A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide "cable service" within the Village as that term
is defined in the Cable Act.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 3
Cable service For the purpose of this Ordinance shall have the
same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
Corporate Authorities The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
Excess capacity The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility
within the public way that is or will be available for use
for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC or Federal
Communications Commission The Federal administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers
on a national level.
ICC or Illinois Commerce
Commission The State administrative agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers
in the State of Illinois.
Other ways The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or
other rights-of-way within the Village, but under the
jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other
than the Village.
Overhead facilities Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications
facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations
for such facilities.
Person Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint
stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships,
limited liability companies and individuals and
includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
Public street Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way
for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and
control of the Village which has been acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted to highway
purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications
facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 4
Public way Includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter
owned by the Village, but only to the extent of the
Village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets
and easements for telecommunications facilities.
State The State of Illinois.
Surplus space That portion of the usable space on a utility pole
which has the necessary clearance from other pole
users, as required by the orders and regulations of
the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by
a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
Telecommunications carrier Includes every person that directly or indirectly owns,
controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or
property within the Village, used or to be used for the
purpose of offering telecommunications service.
Telecommunications facilities The plant, equipment and property, including but not
limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used
or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide
or offer telecommunications services.
Telecommunications provider Includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications
facilities without any ownership or management
control of the facilities.
Telecommunications service The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in
exchange for other value received, of the transmittal
of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming
information between or among points by wire, cable,
fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or
similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed
transmission medium.
Telecommunications system See Telecommunications facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 5
Underground facilities Utility and telecommunications facilities located under
the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.
Usable space The total distance between the top of a utility pole
and the lowest possible attachment point that
provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as
specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission.
Utility easement Any easement owned by the Village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility
purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications
facilities.
Utility facilities The plant, equipment and property, including but not
limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts,
cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on
or above the surface of the ground within the public
ways of the Village and used or to be used for the
purpose of providing utility or telecommunications
services.
Village The Village of Lincolnshire.
Village property Includes all real property owned by the Village, other
than public streets and utility easements as those
terms are defined herein, and all property held in a
proprietary capacity by the Village, which are not
subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as
provided in this Ordinance.
3-10-1-3: Registration: Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications
carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the Village shall
register with the Village pursuant to Article 2 of this Ordinance.
3-10-1-4: Telecommunications License: Except as otherwise provided therein, any
telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate,maintain,
or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any
public way of the Village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications
service to persons and areas outside the Village shall first obtain a license
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 6
granting the use of such pubic ways from the Village pursuant to Article 3 of
this Ordinance.
3-10-1-5: Telecommunications Franchise: Except as otherwise provided herein,
any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate,
maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or
across any public way of the Village, and to also provide
telecommunications service to persons or areas in the Village, shall first
obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the Village
pursuant to Article 4 of this Ordinance.
3-10-1-6: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-1-7: Application to Existing Franchise Ordinances and Agreements: This
Ordinance shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
A. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
B. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement,
unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later
than the present expiration date.
3-10-1-8: Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
3-10-1-9: Other Remedies: Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as limiting
any judicial remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this Ordinance.
3-10-1-10: Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other
portion of this Ordinance, or its application to any person, is, for any reason,
declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof.
3-10-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND
PROVIDERS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 7
3-10-2-1: Registration Required: All telecommunications carriers and providers that
offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public,
either within the Village, or outside the corporate limits from
telecommunications facilities within the Village, shall register with the Village
pursuant to this Article on forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which
shall include the following:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee
responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
C. A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities
within the Village.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to
offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the Village.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public
way licensing or franchising under this Ordinance.
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or
receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the
registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal
telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed
by the Village.
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and
received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
Village.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and
received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required
by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the Village.
I. Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
3-10-2-2: Registration Fee: Each application for registration as a telecommunications
carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of Twenty-Five Dollars
($25.00).
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 8
3-10-2-3: Purpose of Registration: The purpose of registration under this Article 2 is to:
A. Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning the
telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the Village;
B. Assist the Village in enforcement of this Ordinance;
C. Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes,
franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Village;
D. Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, State and Federal
laws.
3-10-3: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
3-10-3-1: Telecommunications License: A telecommunications license shall be
required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific
public ways of the Village for the sole purpose of providing
telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the Village.
3-10-3-2: License Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications
license pursuant to this Article 3 shall file an application with the Village
which shall include the following information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered
or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee
to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 9
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in
the public way along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications
facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions,
if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus
space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or
conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or
conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 10
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities
and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article 6 of this
Ordinance.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the Village
Manager.
3-10-3-3: Determination by the Village: Within 120 days after receiving a complete
application under Section 3.2 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed
facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction
within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is
granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 11
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies and applicable Village Ordinances, Codes and Policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
3-10-3-4: Agreement: No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the
applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth
the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and
use public ways of the Village will be granted.
3-10-3-5: Nonexclusive Grant: No license granted under this Article shall confer any
exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public
ways of the Village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
3-10-3-6: Rights Granted: No license granted under this Article shall convey any
right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only
to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated
in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
3-10-3-7: Term of Grant: Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a
telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term
of five (5) years.
3-10-3-8: License Route: A telecommunications license granted under this Article
shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions
thereof.
3-10-3-9: Location of Facilities: Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement,
all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with
the following terms and conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such
utility facility.
B. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its
telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 12
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the
Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize
the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a
public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future telecommunications carriers.
3-10-3-10: Construction Permits: All licensees are required to obtain construction
permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Article 7 of this
Ordinance provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the
Village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
3-10-3-11: Compensation to Village: Each license granted under this Article is
subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a
fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted
to the licensee; provided, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and
a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
3-10-3-12: Service to Village Users: A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide
telecommunications services to persons or areas within the Village upon
submitting an application for approval pursuant to Article 4 hereof.
3-10-3-13: Amendment of Grant:
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 13
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this Ordinance.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Village shall grant a license amendment without further application.
3-10-3-14: Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its license under
this Article shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for
renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 3.2 of this Article.
B. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the
Village and the grantee.
3-10-3-15: Renewal Determinations: Within 90 days after receiving a complete
application under Section 3.14 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue
a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole
or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the
license agreement.
E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
3-10-3-16: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 14
3-10-4-1: Telecommunications Franchise: A telecommunications franchise shall
be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public
ways of the Village and to provide telecommunications services to any
person or area in the Village.
3-10-4-2: Franchise Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications
franchise pursuant to this Article 4 shall file an application with the Village
which shall include the following information:
A. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered
or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in
the public way along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications
facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions,
if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus
space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or
conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 15
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or
conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities
and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone
service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
N. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications
facilities in the Village that applicant intends to use or lease.
O. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make
available to the Village and other public, educational and governmental
institutions.
P. A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 16
Q. The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
R. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article 6 of this
Ordinance.
S. Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village
Manager.
3-10-4-3 Determination by the Village: Within 150 days after receiving a complete
application under Section 3.2 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed
facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction
within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise
requested is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 17
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways
will serve the community interest.
3-10-4-4: Agreement: No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant
and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways
of the Village will be granted.
3-10-4-5: Nonexclusive Grant: No franchise granted under this Article shall confer any
exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways
of the Village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
3-10-4-6: Term of Grant: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of
ten (10) years.
3-10-4-7: Rights Granted: No franchise granted under this Article shall convey any
right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to
use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and termstated in the
grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title.
3-10-4-8: Franchise Territory: A telecommunications franchise granted under this
Article shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the Village to be
served by the franchise grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to
serve such areas.
3-10-4-9: Location of Facilities: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement,
all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the
following terms and conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground
duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility.
B. A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its
telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only,
and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications
facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village, a
franchisee with permission to occupy the same public waymust also locate its
telecommunications facilities underground.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 18
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary
circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public
ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a
public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future carriers.
3-10-4-10: Construction Permits: All franchisees are required to obtain construction
permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Article 7 of this
Ordinance provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the
Village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
3-10-4-11: Compensation to Village: Each franchise granted under this Article is
subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair
and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the
franchisee; provided, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a
franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
3-10-4-12: Nondiscrimination: A franchisee shall make its telecommunications
services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request
such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or
charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this Article
shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among
differently situated customers.
3-10-4-13: Service to the Village: A franchisee shall make its telecommunications
services available to the Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated
users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
3-10-4-14: Amendment of Grant:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 19
A. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are
not included in a franchise previously granted under this Ordinance.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in
public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the Village shall
grant a franchise amendment without further application.
3-10-4-15: Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under
this Article shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 150 days before
expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the Village for
renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 4.2 of this Article.
B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the
Village and the grantee.
3-10-4-16: Renewal Determinations: Within 150 days after receiving a complete
application under Section 4.15 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in
part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the
franchise agreement.
E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
3-10-4-17: Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal: No franchise shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance
of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this Ordinance, have
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 20
been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee
has been approved by the Village.
3-10-5: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-1: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-2: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-4: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-5: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-6: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-7: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-8: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-9: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-10: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-11: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-12: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-13: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-14: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-15: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-16: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-17: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-18: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-19: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
.
3-10-5-20: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 21
3-10-5-21: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-22: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-23: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-24: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-5-25: REPEALED BY ORD. 06-2953-45, EFF. 9/11/06
3-10-6: FEES AND COMPENSATION
3-10-6-1: Purpose: It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and
recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village related to
the enforcement and administration of this Ordinance.
3-10-6-2: Application and Review Fee:
A. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Articles 3 or 4 of this
Ordinance shall pay a fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
B. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as part of
the application filed pursuant to Article 3 or Article 4 of this Ordinance.
C. An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn,
abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and review
fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section,
less:
1. Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and
2. All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection
with the application.
3-10-6-3: Other Village Costs: All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30)
days after written demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and
indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any
modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any
license or franchise agreement.
3-10-6-4: Reserved Compensation for Public Ways: The Village reserves its right
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 22
to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property
rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise grantee. Nothing
in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid for the granted property rights.
3-10-6-5: Compensation for Village Property: If the right is granted, by lease, license,
franchise or other manner, to use and occupy Village Property for the
installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid shall
be fixed by the Village.
3-10-6-6: Construction Permit Fee: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the
permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to the greater of Two Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($250.00) or one-half percent (1/2%) of the estimated cost of
constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's
engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater.
3-10-6-7: Annual Fees: Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant
agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee
to the Village equal to Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) as reimbursement
for the Village's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising
the use and occupancy of the public ways in behalf of the public and existing
or future users.
3-10-6-8: Cable Fees: Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise
fees, payments and costs provided in Article 5 of this Ordinance.
3-10-6-9: Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax: The regulatory fees and
costs provided for in this Article, and any compensation charged and paid for
the public ways provided for in Section 6.4 of this Article, are separate from,
and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and village taxes as may be
levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its
customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
3-10-7: CONDITIONS OF GRANT
3-10-7-1: Location of Facilities: All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located
in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise
specified in a license or franchise agreement:
A. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such
utility facility.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 23
B. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its
telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only,
and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications
facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village, a grantee
with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its
telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary
circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public
ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a
public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future carriers.
3-10-7-2: Compliance with J.U.L.I.E.: All license or franchise grantees shall, before
commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of
J.U.L.I.E.
3-10-7-3: Construction Permits: All license or franchise grantees are required to
obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in
Article 8 of this Ordinance. However, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the
Village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
3-10-7-4: Interference with the Public Ways: No license or franchise grantee may
locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably
interfere with the use of the public ways by the Village, by the general public or
by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways.
All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently,
as determined by the Village Engineer.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 24
3-10-7-5: Damage to Property. No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting
on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done
which may impair or damage any Village Property, public ways of the Village,
Other Ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
3-10-7-6: Notice of Work: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the
grantee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the
Public Ways of the Village or Other Ways without ten (10) working days
advance notice to the Village.
3-10-7-7: Repair and Emergency Work: In the event of an unexpected repair or
emergency, a Grantee may commence such repair and emergency response
work as required under the circumstances, provided the Grantee shall notify
the Village as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or
as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable. An
unexpected repair or emergency work shall require obtaining from the Village
an AAfter Fact@ permit with no permit fee charged to the Grantee.
3-10-7-8: Maintenance of Facilities: Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain
its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all
applicable federal, state and local requirements.
3-10-7-9: Relocation or Removal of Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways
whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or other
public improvement in or upon the public ways.
B. The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon the public
ways.
3-10-7-10: Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or
other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized
telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the
public ways of the Village shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities
or appurtenances from the public ways of the Village. A
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 25
telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
A. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or
franchise.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the Village.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a
telecommunications license or franchise.
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance
of a required construction permit.
E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted
by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
3-10-7-11: Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located
within the public ways of the Village, as the Village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency.
3-10-7-12: Damage to Grantee's Facilities: Unless directly and proximately caused y b
the willful, intentional or malicious acts by the Village, the Village shall not be
liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the
public ways of the Village as a result of or in connection with any public works,
public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any
kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Village.
3-10-7-13: Restoration of Public Ways, Other Ways and Village Property.
A. When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does
any work in or affecting any Public Ways, Other Ways or Village Property, it
shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the
work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required
by this Section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or
property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the Licensee's sole expense
and the Licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 26
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent
such permanent restoration.
C. A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades,
flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of
all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any
person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways or
property.
3-10-7-14: Facilities Maps: Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the Village
with an accuratemap ormaps certifying the location of all telecommunications
facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps
annually.
3-10-7-15: Duty to Provide Information: Within ten (10) days of a written request from
the Village Manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the Village
with information sufficient to demonstrate:
A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this Ordinance.
B. That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the
Village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
C. All books, records,maps and other documents,maintained by the grantee with
respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for
inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals.
3-10-7-16: Leased Capacity: A license or franchise grantee shall have the right,
without prior Village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its
customers; provided:
A. Grantee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
3-10-7-17: Grantee Insurance: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and
the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as co-insureds:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 27
A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
1. Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and,
3. Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability.
B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of
Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for each person and Three Million Dollars
($3,000,000) for each accident.
C. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance
with limits of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).
D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard,
underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less
than Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000).
E. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by
the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license or
franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating
without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its
telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the
following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew."
F. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event
later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain
and furnish to the Village replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this Section.
3-10-7-18: General Indemnification: Each license or franchise agreement shall include,
to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and
expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense,
arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 28
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act ormisconduct of
the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts
or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Ordinance or by a
grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this Ordinance.
3-10-7-19: Performance and Construction Surety: Before a license or franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance is effective, and as necessary thereafter,
the grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or
other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the Village as may be
required by this Ordinance or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
3-10-7-20: Security Fund: Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with
the Village by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the Village in cash, an
unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the Village,
which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of grantee so long as any
of grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of
the Village.
A. The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this
Ordinance, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the Village pays or
incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the
codes, ordinances, rule, regulations or permits of the Village.
B. Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village shall give
written notice to the grantee:
1. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost
or expenses which the Village has incurred by reason of grantee's act or
default;
2. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing
or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
3. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the
Village before the Village withdraws the amount thereof from the security
fund, if applicable;
4. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or
failure described in the notice with the Village Manager or his designee.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 29
C. Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after
written notice from the Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the
fund.
3-10-7-21: Construction and Completion Bond: Unless otherwise provided in a
license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate
surety acceptable to the Village equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of
constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of
the Village shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
A. The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after
substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
B. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the Village:
1. Timely completion of construction;
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical
codes and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Village;
4. Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction;
5. The submission of "as-built" drawings after completion of the work as
required by this Ordinance.
6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for
labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.
3-10-7-22: Coordination of Construction Activities: All grantees are required to
cooperate with the Village and with each other.
A. By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the Village with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
B. Each grantee shall meet with the Village, other grantees and users of the
public ways annually or as determined by the Village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 30
C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as
ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience,
disruption or damages.
3-10-7-23: Assignments or Transfers of Grant: Ownership or control of a
telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or
indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger,
consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise,
without the prior consent of the Village, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then
only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
A. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within twelve (12)
months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement.
B. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or
integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before construction of
the telecommunications system has been completed.
C. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system shall
provide and certify the following information to the Village not less than one
hundred and fifty (150) days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the
proposed transfer or assignment;
2. All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise
applicant pursuant Articles 3 or 4 of this Ordinance with respect to the
proposed transferee or assignee;
3. Any other information reasonably required by the Village.
D. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal,
technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate
the telecommunications system pursuant to this Ordinance.
E. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee
shall reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses
reasonably incurred by the Village in considering a request to transfer or
assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 31
F. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral
part of a system without prior approval of the Village under this Section or
pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for
revocation of the grant.
3-10-7-24: Transactions Affecting Control of Grant: Any transactions which singularly
or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) ormore of the ownership
or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a
telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of
affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee or of a
telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of
grantee's telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof,
shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval
pursuant to Section 7.22 hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are
not exempt from Village approval.
3-10-7-25: Revocation or Termination of Grant: A license or franchise granted by the
Village to use or occupy public ways of the Village may be revoked for the
following reasons:
A. Construction or operation in the Village or in the public ways of the Village
without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
C. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
D. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
E. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license
assets, or a substantial interest therein.
F. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any
application to the Village.
G. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
H. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Ordinance.
I. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the
Village.
J. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 32
K. Violation of material provisions of this Ordinance.
L. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
3-10-7-26: Notice and Duty to Cure: In the event that the Village Manager believes
that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the
grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing
a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the
violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period
of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction
less than revocation.
3-10-7-27: Hearing: In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably
satisfactory to the Village Manager as provided in Section 7.27 hereof, the
Manager shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the
corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee
with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
3-10-7-28: Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that the
grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this
Ordinance, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities
shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish
some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances,
extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the
following factors:
A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
B. Whether substantial harm resulted.
C. Whether the violation was intentional.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 33
E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
3-10-8: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
3-10-8-1: General: No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village
except as provided in this Article.
3-10-8-2: Construction Codes: Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed,
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical
Safety Code.
3-10-8-3: Construction Permits: No person shall construct or install any
telecommunications facilities within the Village without first obtaining a
construction permit therefore, provided, however:
A. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the
Village pursuant to Article 2 of this Ordinance.
B. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or
franchise pursuant to Articles 3, 4 or 5 of this Ordinance.
C. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in Section 6.6 of this Ordinance.
3-10-8-4: Applications: Applications for permits to construct telecommunications
facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Village and
shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient
detail to demonstrate:
A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable
codes, rules and regulations including the Illinois Department of
Transportation (IDOT) specifications for land and bridge construction.
B. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 34
C. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the
ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points
along the route which are within the public ways.
D. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes,
mains and installations which are within the public ways along the
underground route proposed by the applicant.
E. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the Village, but not
within the public ways.
F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
G. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the
public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring
any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
3-10-8-5: Engineer's Certification: All permit applications shall be accompanied by
the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings,
plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with
applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.
3-10-8-6: Traffic Control Plan: All permit applications which involve work on, in,
under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic
control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be
employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions
to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3-10-8-7: Issuance of Permit: Within forty-five (45) days after submission of all
plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit
fees required by this Ordinance, the Village Engineer, if satisfied that the
applications, plans and document comply with all requirements of this
Ordinance, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities,
subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the
time, place and manner of performing the work as he may deem necessary
or appropriate.
3-10-8-8: Construction Schedule: The permittee shall submit a written construction
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 35
schedule to the Village Engineer 10 working days before commencing any
work in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further notify the
Village Engineer not less than 2 working days in advance of any excavation
or work in the public ways.
3-10-8-9: Compliance with Permit: All construction practices and activities shall be
in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications
for the facilities. The Village Engineer and his representatives shall be
provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may
require to ensure compliance with such requirements.
3-10-8-10: Display of Permit: The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction
permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed
and made available for inspection by the Village Engineer or his
representatives at all times when construction work is occurring.
3-10-8-11: Survey of Underground Facilities: If the construction permit specifies the
location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other
standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be
verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate
any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements.
3-10-8-12: Noncomplying Work: Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which
does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for
the work, or the requirements of this Ordinance, shall be removed.
3-10-8-13: Completion of Construction: The permittee shall promptly complete all
construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the village ways and
other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a
permit within village ways, including restoration, must be completed within
120 days of the date of issuance.
3-10-8-14: As-Built Drawings: Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction,
the permittee shall furnish the Village with two (2) complete sets of plans,
drawn to scale and certified to the Village as accurately depicting the
location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the
permit.
3-10-8-15: Restoration of Improvements: Upon completion of any construction work,
the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and provide property
improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities in the public ways or
otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same
as nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of construction.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Revised 09/19/2006 Page 36
3-10-8-16: Landscape Restoration:
A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement of
telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a
franchise, license, permit replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
B. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done is accordance with
landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer.
3-10-8-17: Construction Surety: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the
permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in Section 7.21 of
this Ordinance.
3-10-8-18: Exceptions: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements
of this Article 8.
3-10-8-19: Responsibility of Owner: The owner of the facilities to be constructed
and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this Article. (Ord. 97-
1478-2, effective 1/13/97)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 11
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Levy of Tax
3-11-3: Collection
3-11-4: Existing Franchises and Licenses
3-11-5: Rebates and Exceptions
3-11-6: Conformity, Conflict
3-11-7: Severability
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS: As used in this Chapter the following terms shall the following
meanings:
Amount paid The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
Department The Illinois Department of Revenue.
Gross charge The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in such municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel termination point within thismunicipality,
and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within this municipality. Charges for that portion of the
inter-office channel connecting 2 or more channel termination
points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer
by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice
channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number
of channel termination points that are located within the
jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the denominator of
which is the total number of channel termination points connected
by the inter-office channel. However, "gross charge" shall not
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
include any of the following: (1) any amounts added to a
purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax
imposed by this Act, (ii) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (iii) the tax imposed by
Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges,
or (v) charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions
of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended,
or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who
are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities
or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public
Utilities Act; (2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication
received outside of such municipality; (3) charges for leased time
on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting
equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a
time-sharing agreement; (4) charges for customer equipment,
including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer
from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and
separately identified from other charges; (5) charges to business
enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and
Economic Opportunity; (6) charges for telecommunications and all
services and equipment provided in connection therewith between
a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Act
has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the
charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent
expense allocation between the corporations and not the
generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; (7)
bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax
standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment ismade);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices; (9) amounts paid by
telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act; (10) Charges for nontaxable
services or telecommunications if (i) those charges are aggregated
with other charges for telecommunications that are taxable, (ii)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable
charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular
course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably
be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and
nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined
basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges
shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications. (Amd. Ord. 10-
3138-15, eff. 4/26/10
Interstate
Telecommunications All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside
this State.
Intrastate
Telecommunications All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this
State.
Person Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State
governments, including State universities created by statute, or
any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State.
Purchase at retail The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
Retailer Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in this Section. The Department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of
business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the
Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection
and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall
be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the
gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same
manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit
may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.
Retailer maintaining
a place of business
in this State Includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 4
business, or any agent or other representative operating within
this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in
this State.
Sale at retail The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith
for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State
governments, and State universities created by statute and
other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use
or consumption and not for resale.
Service address The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the
event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of
mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service
address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For
air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall
mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone
number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.
Taxpayer A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality
and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this Act.
Telecommunications In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it,
includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary
two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and
portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in
this Act, "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive
service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 5
exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or
more other specified locations. The definition of
"telecommunications" shall not include value added services in
which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall
not include purchases of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component
part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-toend
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access
charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used
as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for
resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be
considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed
under this Act.
3-11-2: LEVY OF TAX: The Village shall levy a tax at a rate as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
against the gross charges collected by all persons engaged in:(Amd Ord.
08-3073-56, eff. 12/8/08)
A. The act or privilege of originating in such municipality or receiving in such
municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person. However, such tax
is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege
may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made
the subject of taxation by municipalities in this State. To prevent actual
multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation
under this Chapter, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a
tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against
any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of
the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax. However,
such tax is not imposed on the act or privilege to the extent such act or
privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States,
be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this State.
B. The act or privilege of originating in such municipality or receiving in such
municipality interstate telecommunications by a person. To prevent actual
multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject
to taxation under this Chapter, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer
has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this State on such event,
shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 6
by this Chapter to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and
paid in such other state or such tax property due and paid in a municipality
in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this State. However, such tax is not imposed on the act
or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by municipalities in this State. (Amd. Ord. 10-3138-15, eff. 4/26/10)
3-11-3: COLLECTION: The tax authorized by this Chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailermaintaining a place of business in this State and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this Act and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Act shall constitutea
debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and if unpaid, is recoverable at
law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the
retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by
the Department.
3-11-4: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES: The Village shall be deemed to
have waived its right to receive all fees, charges and other compensation that
might accrue to the Village after the effective date of this Chapter, under any
franchise agreement, license, or similar agreement, executed on or before
January 1, 1998 with telecommunications retailers. This waiver shall be
effective only during the time that the tax authorized under this Chapter is
subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and the
tax is collected by the Village or the Department and paid over to the Village.
3-11-5: REBATES AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Any unit of local government or school district whose territory includes part of
the Village,may file a petition with the Village Clerk requesting that the amount
of the tax authorized by this Chapter and paid by the other unit of local
government or school district to the Village be rebated to such unit of local
government or school district, in whole or in part. The Village Board may
provide by ordinance, in its sole discretion, whether to grant such petition and,
if so, the duration of the applicability of such rebate provisions.
B. Any persons 65 years of age or older may file a petition with the Village Clerk
requesting that the amount of the tax authorized by this Chapter and paid by
such persons be rebated to such persons, in whole or in part. The Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-11: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 7
Board may provide by ordinance, in its sole discretion, whether to grant such
petition and, if so, the duration of the applicability of such rebate provisions.
3-11-6: CONFORMITY, CONFLICT: This Chapter is intended to conform to the
provisions of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Act, P.A. 92-526, or
any amendatory or successor law. To the extent this Chapter conflicts with
any other previously adopted chapters of the Village, or parts thereof, this
Chapter shall prevail and supercede such other chapters, or parts thereof, to
the extent required to cure such conflict.
3-11-7: SEVERABILITY: In the event any provision or application of this Chapter is
found unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not
affect any other application or the remaining provisions of this Chapter to the
maximum extent permitted by law. (Ord. No. 03-1833-10, eff. 4/14/03)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 1
Chapter 12
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3-12-1: Purpose and Findings
3-12-2: Definitions
3-12-3: Reserved for Future Use
3-12-4: Sexually Oriented Business License Required
3-12-5: Sexually Oriented Business Employee License Required
3-12-6: Sexually Oriented business License Application
3-12-7: Issuance of a Sexually Oriented Business License
3-12-8: Sexually Oriented Business Employee License Application
3-12-9: Issuance of Sexually Oriented Business Employee License
3-12-10: Fees
3-12-11: Expiration and Renewal of License
3-12-12: Suspension
3-12-13: Revocation
3-12-14: Appeal Rights
3-12-15: Transfer of License
3-12-16: Additional Regulations Concerning the Operation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses
3-12-17: Penalty
3-12-18: Injunction
3-12-19: Effect of Partial Invalidity
3-12-1. PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Lincolnshire
Sexually Oriented Business Licensing Ordinance, and is also referred to herein
as this Ordinance.
B. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES within the municipality in order to
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the MUNICIPALITY.
The provisions of this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content any communicativematerials
or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not
the purpose or effect of this Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 2
sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this Ordinance to
condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is
obscene.
C. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES presented to the MUNICIPALITY from findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap=s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120
S.Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) Young v. American Mini
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation, 865
F.2d 797 (7th Cir 1989); Ellwest Stereo Theaters v.Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th
Cir. 1982); Bamon Corp v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990)
and EWAP Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr.
(1979), and on studies in other cities including the Report of the Attorney
General=sWorking Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses
(Minnesota, 1989); Memorandum re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance, of the
Assistant Chief of Police of the Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter
R., Ph.D., Report to the American Center for Law and Justice on the
Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (March 31, 1996); Adult
Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, An Analysis (1984) and McCleary,
Richard, Ph.D. and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., Final Report to the City of
Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business
Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard, (Garden Grove, CA, October 23,
1991), this Legislative body finds:
1. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities.
2. Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live
sexually oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading
communicable diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
3. Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that encourage
such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
4. Sanitary conditions in some SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and OPERATORS to
regulate those activities and maintain their facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 3
5. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the
areas of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES where PERSONS view
sexually oriented films concealed from public view.
D. The findings noted in Section 3-12-1(C), subparagraphs number 1 through 5
raise compelling and substantial governmental concerns for protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare.
E. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the compelling and
substantial governmental interest in protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare.
F. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the
burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and OPERATORS of
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Further, such a licensing procedure
will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on OPERATORS to see that
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES are run in amanner consistent with the
health, safety and welfare of PATRONS and EMPLOYEES, as well as the
citizens of the MUNICIPALITY. It is appropriate to require reasonable
assurances that the LICENSEE is the actual OPERATOR of the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS, and fully in possession and control of the premises
and activities occurring therein.
G. The regulation of NUDITY, SEMI-NUDITY, and physical contact between
EMPLOYEES and PATRONS in SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES will
further the compelling and substantial governmental interests in preventing
prostitution and other sex-related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and
protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
H. Requiring open sight lines in SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES and
requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES and will facilitate
enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance and other federal, state and
local laws, thereby furthering the compelling and substantial governmental
interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
I. The disclosure of certain information by those PERSONS ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES, and by EMPLOYEES of such businesses, will
facilitate the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance and other federal,
state and local laws, and will thereby further the compelling and substantial
government interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 4
J. A PERSON who recently has been convicted of a sexually related crime is not
an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS.
K. Barring such individuals from the management of and employment in
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES for a period of years serves as a
deterrent to and prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts,
including conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases.
L. A reasonable licensing procedure for SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
assists the MUNICIPALITY in preventing the adverse secondary effects of
such businesses on property values, the prevention of crime, and the public
health.
3-12-2: DEFINITIONS: For purposes of this Ordinance,
A. EMPLOYEE shallmean a natural PERSON who performs any service or work
on the premises of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, including but not
limited to providing entertainment, performing work of a management or
supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or
contract basis, whether or not the PERSON is denominated an EMPLOYEE,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said PERSON
is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the OPERATOR of said
business. EMPLOYEE does not include a PERSON on the premises
exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the
premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
B. EMPLOYEE STATION shall mean an area on the premises of a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS designated for occupancy exclusively by one ormore
EMPLOYEES whose duties include assuring compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
C. EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS shall mean urination, defecation, lactation,
ejaculation and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation
performed in a public or employee-only restroom in themanner in which those
facilities are intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a
commercial purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an
infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than
education and training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an
infant.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 5
D. ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean the Chief of Police of the Village of
Lincolnshire or his or her designee.
E. LICENSEE shall mean, with respect to a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
license issued under this Ordinance, a PERSON in whose name a license to
operate a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS has been issued, as well as the
individual(s) designated on the license application as principally responsible for
the operation of the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. With respect to a
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license issued under this
Ordinance, LICENSEE means a natural PERSON in whose name a license
has been issued authorizing employment in a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS.
F. MUNICIPALITY shall mean the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
G. NUDITY or NUDE shall mean exposing to view SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS or any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or
simulates any SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
H. OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED shall mean to control or hold
primary responsibility for the operation of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS, either as a business entity, as an individual, or as part of a group
of individuals with shared responsibility. It shall alsomean to cause to function
or to put or keep in operation. A PERSON may be found to be operating or
causing to be operated a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS whether or not
that PERSON is an owner, part owner, or LICENSEE of the business.
I. OPERATOR shall mean any PERSON who OPERATES or CAUSES TO BE
OPERATED a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
J. PATRON shall mean any natural PERSON who is not an EMPLOYEE or
OPERATOR.
K. PERSON shall mean a natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
L. SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE shall mean exposing to view, with less than a
fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the
areola, any portion of female or male buttocks, or the male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. This
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 6
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall
not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
M. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall mean any of the following when
done in a place where the public is invited or permitted, or when done for any
commercial purpose including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or
receives the consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of
consideration:
1. Live exhibition or display of a natural PERSON or people in the state of
NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY, or engaged in SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS;
2. Engaging in, promoting or permitting a natural PERSON or people to
engage in SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or EXCRETORY
FUNCTIONS.
3. Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
natural PERSONS, when one ormore of the PERSONS is NUDE or SEMINUDE.
4. Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural PERSON or
people when one or more of the people, whether a PATRON, agent,
EMPLOYEE or otherwise, is in a state of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY.
5. Displaying or offering to others any publication or recorded depiction of a
natural PERSON, or created image or character, as in cartoons and
animation, by any medium, including without limitation film, videotape,
closed-circuit television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc
(CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and
computer software, which is:
a. characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY
FUNCTIONS, or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS; or
b. advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized
or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, including without limitation, the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 7
use of the term Aadult@ and the use of the designation of one or more
AX@ such as, but not limited to, AXXX@.
6. The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or that give the appearance of or
simulate any of the SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
7. The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the following:
a. The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other
non-prescription contraceptives;
b. The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices
which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in
connection with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, and which are in
fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed
by the State of Illinois;
c. The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES if they are displayed and offered to
others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the State of
Illinois is employed to dispense prescription drugs, instruments or
devices;
d. Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a
commercial purpose other than education and training in the art,
science or technique of breast-feeding an infant;
e. The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format,
which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of
America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed
substantially in their entirety;
f. Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or
local governmental funds.
g. The display and offering to others of items described in Section 3-12-
2(M)(5) of this Ordinance, if and only if the display and offering are
done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the
business displaying and offering such items to others:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 8
(1) Less than 5% of its gross income comes from the sale, rental
or exhibition of the following types of items:
(a) items which are characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination
thereof, and
(b) items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the
public as being characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination
thereof, including without limitation, the use of the term
Aadult@ and the use of the designation of one or more
AX@ such as, but not limited to, AXXX@; and
(2) Less than 5% of its display space is used for the sale, rental or
exhibition of the items described in paragraph (1)(a) and (b)
above; and
(3) Less than 5% of the items it offers to others are the items
described in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) above; and
(4) The items described paragraph (1)(a) and (b) above are
segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the
premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no
openings or windows and with entrance and egress by means
of a solid door posted with a sign not less than one foot by one
foot with the words AUNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED@ lettered on
the sign, except thatmagazines characterized or distinguished
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination thereof
may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the
magazine is encased or otherwise covered up and concealed
from common view of anything other than themagazine title or
text or other materials which would not be described as
sexually oriented.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 9
Certain uses which fall within the definition of SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS may also constitute uses which are
illegal under local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or
child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS under the definition set
forth in this Ordinance, they shall not be permitted to receive a
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license.
N. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS shall mean the human genitals, pubic
area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the
areola of the female breast if less than a fully and opaquely covered; and the
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an
opaque covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the
anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by make-up, paint, or
similar matter applied directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully
and opaquely covered.
O. SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY shall mean:
1. Any of the following offenses, as set forth in the Illinois Criminal Code of
1961, as amended, or any substantially similar offenses to those set forth
below under the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state,
country, or international law: Indecent Solicitation of a Child, Indecent
Solicitation of an Adult, Adultery, Fornication, Public Indecency, Sexual
Exploitation of a Child, Custodial Sexual Misconduct, Presence Within
School Zone By Child Sex Offenders Prohibited, Sexual Relations Within
Families, Bigamy, Marrying a Bigamist, Prostitution, Solicitation of a Sexual
Act, Soliciting for a Prostitute, Soliciting for a Juvenile Prostitute,
Pandering, Keeping a Place of Prostitution, Keeping a Place of Juvenile
Prostitution, Patronizing a Prostitute, Patronizing a Juvenile Prostitute,
Pimping, Juvenile Pimping, Exploitation of a Child, Obscenity, Child
Pornography, Commercial Film and Photographic Print Processor -
Reports, Harmful Material, Tie-in Sales of Obscene Publications to
Distributors, Criminal Sexual Assault, Aggravated Criminal Sexual Assault,
Predatory Criminal Sexual Assault of a Child, Criminal Sexual Abuse,
Aggravated Criminal Sexual Abuse, Criminal Transmission of HIV,
Ritualized Abuse of a Child, Female Genital Mutilation, violation of the Sex
Offender Registration Act, Stalking (if the basis of the conviction is the
threat of immediate or future sexual assault, or placing a person in
reasonable apprehension of immediate or future sexual assault), First
Degree Murder (if the basis for the conviction is 720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(3),
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 10
commonly known as felony murder, where the predicate felony is any
felony otherwise set forth in this definition), Burglary (if the basis for the
conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this
definition), Residential Burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to
commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), Armed Violence (if
the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set
forth in this definition), Attempt to commit any of the foregoing crimes,
Conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes, and any other felony or
misdemeanor for which an element of the offense is the commission of any
of the foregoing crimes or an intent to commit any of the foregoing crimes.
2. For which: (A) less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor, business offense or petty offense; or (B) less than five years
have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is of a felony offense.
3. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY as defined
in this Ordinance.
P. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall mean any of the following, whether
actual or simulated:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a
state of NUDITY or in a state of SEMI-NUDITY;
2. Themanipulation of the human body of another, includingmassage, by the
use of any portion of manipulator=s body, whether covered or uncovered,
or by any device, if the PERSON performing the manipulation is in a state
of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY.
3. Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual,
including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and
masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 11
4. Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or
with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
Q. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS shall mean of the following:
1. the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
2. the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
3. the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the PERSON
possessing the ownership or control.
3-12-3: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
3-12-4: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No PERSON shall OPERATE a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS withouta
valid SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license issued by the
MUNICIPALITY pursuant to this Ordinance.
B. No PERSON shall, in connection with OPERATING a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS, retain the services of a PERSON as an EMPLOYEE who is not
licensed as a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE by the
MUNICIPALITY pursuant to this Ordinance.
3-12-5: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED: No
PERSON shall act as an EMPLOYEE on the premises of a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS without having secured a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license pursuant to this Ordinance.
3-12-6: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license shall be
submitted to the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk on a form provided by the
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The application may request and the applicant
shall provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 12
to enable the MUNICIPALITY to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this Ordinance.
B. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license shall identify
the following PERSONS and be signed under oath by said PERSONS that the
information contained therein is true:
1. If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that sole proprietor;
2. If the business entity is a corporation, each officer and Director of the
corporation and each individual with a 10 percent or greater ownership
interest in the corporation;
3. If the business entity is a partnership, each general partner, and each
limited partner who owns 10% or more of total limited partnership interest;
4. If the business is a limited liability company, each manager, and each
member with a 10% or greater ownership interest in the company. If the
limited liability company does not have any managers, then each member
holding a 10% or greater ownership interest in the company.
C. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license must
designate one ormore natural PERSONS who are to be principally responsible
for the operation of the proposed SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, if a
license is granted. At least one natural PERSON so designated must be
involved in the day-to-day operation of the proposed SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS on a regular basis. Each natural PERSON so designated, as well
as the business entity itself, shall be considered a license applicant, must
qualify as a LICENSEE under this Ordinance, and shall be considered a
LICENSEE if a license is granted.
D. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license shall be
completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall
require the following:
1. If the applicant is:
a. an individual, state the legal name, address, date of birth, social
security number, and any aliases of such individual;
b. a partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and all of
its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 13
provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the
information specified in (A) for each partner;
c. a corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and the
date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and of
Illinois, and state the names and capacity of all officers and directors,
all persons owning 10% or more of the the stock of the corporation,
the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the
registered office for service of process, and the information specified
in (A) for each officer, director and owner of 10% ormore of the stock;
d. a limited liability company, state the complete name of the company
and the date of its organization, provide evidence that the company is
in good standing under the laws of its state of organization and of
Illinois, and state the names and capacity of allmembers, owners and
managers, the name of the registered agent, and the address of the
registered office for service of process, and the information specified
in (A) for each member, owner and manager;
2. If the applicant intends to operate the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
under a name other than that of the applicant, state the fictitious name to
be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the registration of
the business name under applicable laws.
3. State whether any applicant has been convicted of a SPECIFIED
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY, and if so, the SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
involved and the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such conviction.
4. State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
Ordinance or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and
state whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, Director or 10 percent or greater owner of a corporation, or a
member or manager of a limited liability company, licensed under this
Ordinance whose license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the
permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 14
5. State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this Ordinance
or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if so, the
names and locations of other such licensed businesses.
6. State the nature of the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS for which the
applicant is filing.
7. State the location of the proposed SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS,
including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and lot), street
address, telephone number(s), e-mail address and internet website URL, if
any.
8. State themailing address of each applicant and each PERSON signing the
application.
9. For any applicant who is a natural PERSON, describe and identify the
location of any tattoos on such PERSON=s face, arms, legs, or hands, or
any other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such
PERSON is on the premises of the proposed SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS.
10.Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural PERSON is at least
eighteen (18) years old.
11.Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises of
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, including the location of all stages,
walls, partitions, designated sales areas, book cases, and PATRON
seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS license will be conspicuously posted, if granted.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one (1) foot.
12.The applicant is under a continuing affirmative duty to notify the
MUNICIPALITY in writing of any change, alteration, or event respecting
items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 11 in this Section 3-12-6.
3-12-7: ISSUANCE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS license, the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk shall immediately file a copy
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 15
of the completed application with the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
B. Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS license, the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, or any peace
officer designated by the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, shall promptly
investigate the information provided in the application concerning the criminal
background of the applicants and shall record the results of the investigation in
writing within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER, then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with
the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation.
C. Within five (5) days of receipt of a copy of a completed application for a
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license, the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
shall notify the MUNICIPALITY=s Fire Chief and Building Department of such
application. Inmaking such notification, the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall
request that the Fire Chief and the Building Department promptly inspect the
premises for which the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license is sought
to assess compliance with the regulations under their respective jurisdictions.
D. The Fire Chief shall provide to the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the Fire Code
within five (5) days of completing the inspection.
E. The Building Department shall provide the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER a
written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the Building
Code, the Planning and Zoning Code, and the provisions of this Ordinance
related to physical characteristics of the premises within five (5) days of
completing the inspection.
F. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:
1. An applicant is a natural PERSON is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has
provided false information.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 16
3. An applicant has been denied a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
license or has had a license to operate a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS revoked within the preceding thirty-six (36) months by any
jurisdiction.
4. An applicant has been convicted of a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
5. The proposed SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS or the premises on
which it would OPERATE would violate or fail to be in compliance with any
provisions of the Zoning Code, the provisions of this Ordinance related to
physical characteristics of the premises, or any state or federal law.
6. The application and investigation fee required by this Ordinance has not
been paid.
7. An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in compliance with any
provision of this Ordinance.
G. If the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER determines that no grounds for denial of a
license exist under this Section, the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall not
delay approval of the application.
H. A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the PERSON or PERSONS to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, and the address of the licensed SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. All
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read
at any time.
I. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICERmay, but is not required to serve the
written license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
3-12-8: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license
shall be submitted to the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk on a form provided by the
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The application may request and the applicant
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 17
shall provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints)
to enable the MUNICIPALITY to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this Ordinance.
B. An application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license
shall be completed according to the instructions of the application form, signed
by the applicant under oath that the information contained therein is true, and
shall require the following:
1. State the applicant=s name and any other names (including Astage@
names) or aliases used by the applicant.
2. State the applicant=s date and place of birth.
3. State the applicant=s height, weight, and hair and eye color.
4. Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the applicant=s face,
arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be
visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS.
5. State the applicant=s present and intended business address and
telephone number, identifying the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS at
which the applicant intends employment.
6. Submit proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years old.
7. Provide a statement detailing the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
EMPLOYEE license history of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant previously OPERATED or is seeking to OPERATE
a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, in this or any other jurisdiction, and
whether the applicant has ever had a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
license or a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license,
permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended by
this or any other jurisdiction. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or
suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and
describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. Attach
a copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension.
8. State whether the applicant has been convicted of a SPECIFIED
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY and, if so, the SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 18
involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and
the date of release from confinement, if any, for such conviction.
9. The applicant is under a continuing affirmative duty to notify the
MUNICIPALITY in writing of any change, alteration, or event respecting
items 7 and 8 in this Section 3-12-8.
3-12-9: ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license, the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk shall immediately
file a copy of the completed application with the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
B. Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license, the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER,
or any peace officer designated by the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, shall
promptly investigate the information provided in the application concerning the
criminal background of the applicant and shall record the results of the
investigation in writing within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation. If the investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, then the written results of the investigation shall
also be filed with the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER within five (5) days of the
completion of the investigation.
C. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:
1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has given
false information.
2. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
3. The applicant has been convicted of a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
4. The SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law,
statute, rule or regulation.
5. The SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS where the applicant intends
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 19
employment is not a licensed SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS pursuant
to this Ordinance.
6. The applicant has been denied a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
license or a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license, or
has had a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license or a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license revoked within the preceding
twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
D. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICERmay, but is not required to serve the
written license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
3-12-10: FEES: Fees for SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS and SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE licenses shall be those set forth in
Section 1-15-9 of this Code.
3-12-11: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Each license issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as provided in
this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than ninety (90)
days and no less than twenty-eight (28) days before the expiration date. If
application ismade less than twenty-eight (28) days before the expiration date,
the license will not be extended pending a decision on the application, but will
expire on its normal expiration date.
B. An application for renewal of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license or
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license shall be submitted to
the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk on a form provided by the ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER. The renewal application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary to enable the
MUNICIPALITY to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this Ordinance. The completed renewal application shall
describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information
provided in the applicant=s initial license application. The completed renewal
application shall be accompanied by copies of any document or material
submitted in connection with the initial license application that has been
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 20
revised or requires revision to reflect any change in circumstances or
conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an initial SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in writing
that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
C. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shallmake the determination concerning the
approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and using the same
procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this
Ordinance.
D. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any renewal denial, and shall the written renewal denial on the
applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial application.
E. When the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER denies an application for renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from the
date of denial.
3-12-12: SUSPENSION:
A. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall suspend a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days if the
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER determines that a LICENSEE: (1) has violated or
is not in compliance with any section of this Ordinance except as set forth in
Section 3-12-12 (b); or (2) has knowingly allowed an EMPLOYEE to violate or
fail to comply with any section of this Ordinance.
B. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall suspend a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days if
the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER determines that a LICENSEE has violated or
is not in compliance with any section of this Ordinance, except as set forth in
Section 3-12-12(c).
C. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall advise the LICENSEE in writing of the
reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five days before the suspension is to take
effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the LICENSEE at the
address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States
Postal Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five days
before the suspension is to take effect. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICERmay,
but is not required to serve the written suspension by certified or registered
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 21
mail, as set forth above.
3-12-13: REVOCATION:
A. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall revoke a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS license or SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE
license if a cause of suspension under Section 3-12-12 of this Ordinance
occurs and the license has been suspended two times within the preceding
twelve (12) months.
B. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall revoke a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS license if he/she determines that:
1. a LICENSEE gave false ormisleading information in thematerial submitted
during the application or renewal process;
2. a LICENSEE has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
3. a LICENSEE has knowingly allowed any SPECIFIC CRIMINAL ACTIVITY,
or the commission of any felony on the premises;
4. a LICENSEE knowingly OPERATED the SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS during a period of time when the LICENSEE=s license was
pending initial application, expired or suspended;
5. a LICENSEE has knowingly allowed one or more SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES to occur in or on the licensed premises;
6. a LICENSEE has been convicted of a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
during the term of the license; or
7. a LICENSEE is delinquent in payment to the MUNICIPALITY for any taxes
or fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any business
or business property.
C. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall revoke a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license if he/she determines that:
1. the LICENSEE gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 22
2. the LICENSEE has knowingly acted as an EMPLOYEE on the premises of
a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS during a period of time when the
LICENSEE=s license was pending initial application, expired or suspended;
or
3. the LICENSEE has been convicted of a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
during the term of the license.
D. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall advise the LICENSEE in writing of the
reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five days before the revocation is to take
effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the LICENSEE at the
address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States
Postal Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five days
before the revocation is to take effect. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may,
but is not required to serve the written revocation by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
E. When the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER revokes a license, the LICENSEE shall
not be issued another license for three (3) years from the date the revocation
became effective.
3-12-14: APPEAL RIGHTS:
A. Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a new or renewal license under this
Ordinance may be appealed to the Mayor of the MUNICIPALITY by written
notice filed with the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk within ten (10) days of the
effective date of such denial, suspension, or revocation. A suspension or
revocation of a license under this Ordinance shall be stayed pending appeal.
B. The Mayor shall notify the appellant in writing of the date for the hearing on the
appeal. The written notice shall be either served on the appellant personally
on or before five days before the hearing, or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the appellant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class postage
prepaid, on or before seven days before the hearing. The Mayor may, but is
not required to, serve the written notice by certified or registered mail, as set
forth above.
C. The Mayor shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the written notice of appeal by the MUNICIPALITY=s clerk, at which
hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence opposing the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 23
denial, suspension or revocation. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may also
present witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or
revocation. Both parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses.
D. The Mayor shall determine whether the preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing supported the decision of the ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER to deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.
E. The Mayor shall issue a written decision setting forth his findings regarding the
evidence presented at the hearing, and his decision to affirm or overrule the
decision of the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Mayor shall serve a copy of
his written decision on the appellant and the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER in
writing. The written decision shall be either served on the parties personally on
or before five days after the date of the hearing, or by placing it in a sealed
envelope, addressed to the respective parties at the address set forth in the
application and at the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER=s ordinary business
address, and depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first
class postage prepaid, on or before five days after the hearing. The Mayor
may, but is not required to, serve the written decision by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
F. The written decision of the Mayor shall be considered a final decision.
3-12-15: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license is not transferable from one
LICENSEE to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer
of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license shall automatically and
immediately revoke that license.
B. A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE license is not transferable
from one LICENSEE to another, but the use of the license by the individual to
whom it was issued may be transferred from one licensed SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS to another such licensed establishment during the
term of the license, provided that the LICENSEE gives written notice of such
transfer to the ENFORCEMENT OFFICER within fifteen (15) days after such
transfer.
3-12-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. No EMPLOYEE on the premises of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSmay
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 24
engage in any SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY, SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS.
B. Any EMPLOYEE appearing on the premises of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS, in a place that can be viewed by PATRONS, when said
EMPLOYEE is in a state of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITYmust be on a stage that
is at least 45 inches from the floor, and at a distance at least 72 inches from all
parts of a clearly designated area in which PATRONS will be present, and no
PATRON shall be permitted in any area closer than 72 inches from the stage.
C. No EMPLOYEE appearing on the premises of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS in a state of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY may intentionally or
knowingly touch a PATRON or a PATRON=s clothing or permit himself or
herself to be touched by a PATRON or a PATRON=s clothing. No
EMPLOYEE may intentionally or knowingly touch SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS of a PATRON either directly or through clothing or other covering. No
EMPLOYEE may intentionally or knowingly permit a PATRON to touch
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS of an EMPLOYEE either directly or
through clothing or other covering. For purposes of this subsection, touching
need not be accomplished by the hand, and includes the touching by any part
of the toucher=s body, clothing or device held by the toucher.
D. All SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES that offer live entertainment must
provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male EMPLOYEES,
and which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than
EMPLOYEES.
E. No PERSON under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted on the
premises of a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Mistake of age is not a
defense to a charge under this Section, unless the PERSON under the age 18
who was permitted on the premises exhibited to the EMPLOYEE a driver=s
license, or other apparently official government-issued identification card
bearing the PATRON=s photograph, and purporting to show that the PERSON
was eighteen years of age or over, and the EMPLOYEE to whom that
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe
that the PERSON seeking admittance was under eighteen years .
F. No SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall remain open at any time between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 12:00
a.m. and noon (12:00 p.m.) on Sundays, nor shall any entertainment, service,
or product be provided to a PATRON on the premises of a SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS during those hours.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Revised 02/20/2006 Page 25
G. A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall meet the following standards for
minimum lighting levels:
1. The premises of every SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which PATRONS are permitted access, including restrooms,
at an illumination level of not less than fifty (50) foot candles as measured
at floor level.
2. The illumination described in subsection (1) above shall be maintained at
all times that any PATRON is present in the premises. In the event of a
power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all
PATRONS shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be
reopened until the minimum illumination level is restored.
H. No SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation from outside the premises of any image, material or
entertainment depicting or describing EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or anyPERSON
in a state of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY, whether by means of display,
decoration, sign, window or any other means.
3-12-17: PENALTY: Any PERSON who violates or who intentionally or knowingly
permits the violation of any Section of this Ordinance shall be subject to the
General Penalty provisions of Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
3-12-18: INJUNCTION: Any PERSON who OPERATES or CAUSES TO BE
OPERATED a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS in violation of this
Ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for
ordinance violations as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
3-12-19: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY: If any section, subsection, clause or
phrase of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, clauses and
phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. 06-2013-04, eff. 2/13/06)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-13: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
Revised 02/24/2014 Page 1
Chapter 13
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
3-13-1: PURPOSE
3-13-2: FINDINGS
3-13-3: DEFINITIONS
3-13-4: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
3-13-5: SEVERABILITY
3-13-1: PURPOSE: The provisions of this chapter are designed to describe themanner
in which the Village shall implement an opt-out electricity aggregation program
authorized by section 1-92 of the Illinois Power Agency Act.
3-13-2: FINDINGS: The Mayor and Board of Trustees hereby make the following
findings of fact:
A. Section 1-92 of the Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-1 et seq. (The
AAct@), authorizes municipalities to aggregate the electric loads of residential
and small commercial retail customers and to then solicit bids, select a retail
electric supplier, and enter into a Supply Agreement to facilitate the purchase
of electricity and related services and equipment on behalf of its participating
residents and small businesses (collectively, an AAggregation program@)
B. At the March 20, 2012 General primary Election, electors of the Village of
Lincolnshire approved a referendum authorizing the Village to adopt an AOpt-
Out@ Aggregation Program.
C. The Village held public hearings on the proposed Plan of Operation and
Governance (the APlan@) for the Aggregation Program on April 9, 2012, and
April 23, 2012, notice of which was given prior to the first hearing once a week
for 2 consecutive weeks in the Lincolnshire review, a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village.
D. On April 23, 2012, the Village adopted the Plan of Operation and Governance
for the Electricity Aggregation Program herein described, a copy of which shall
be available for public inspection and copying at the Village Hall.
3-13-3: DEFINITIONS: The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this
Chapter, shall be defined as follows:
ACT The Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-
92, as may be amended from time to time.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-13: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
Revised 02/24/2014 Page 2
CUSTOMER Recipients of residential and small commercial
retail electric loads as provided in the Act.
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION A program pursuant to the Act for the
PROGRAM aggregation of residential and small commercial
retail electric loads located within the corporate
limits of the Village that provides customers with
the opportunity to opt out of participating in that
program as provided in the Act.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND The Plan of Operation and Governance
GOVERNANCE adopted by the Village on April 23, 2012, or as
thereafter amended, which describes (1) how the
Aggregation Program will provide for universal
access to all applicable residential customers
and equitable treatment of applicable residential
customers; (2) how demand management and
energy efficiency services will be provided to
each class of customers; and (3) how the
Aggregation Program will meet any other legal
requirements concerning aggregated electric
service.
ALTERNATIVE RETAIL ELECTRIC An entity certified by the Illinois
SUPPLIER OR ARES Commerce Commission (AICC@) to offer electric
power or energy for sale, lease or in exchange
for other value received to one or more retail
customers, or that engages in the delivery or
furnishing or electric power or energy to such
retail customers, and shall include, without
limitation, resellers, aggregators and power
marketers but shall not include the incumbent
electric utility. For purposes of this ordinance,
the definition of alternative Retail Electric
Supplier ismore completely set forth in 220 ILCS
5/16-102.
3-13-4: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM:
A. The Village is authorized and hereby adopts an Electricity Aggregation
Program in a manner not inconsistent with the Act.
B. The Village is authorized to exercise its power to operate an Electricity
Aggregation Program jointly with two or more other municipalities or counties.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 3-13: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
Revised 02/24/2014 Page 3
C. The Electricity Aggregation Program shall operate in themanner prescribed in
the Plan of Operation and Governance, as amended from time to time.
D. The Plan of Operation and Governance may be amended from time to time,
without further public hearings, by an ordinance approved by the Mayor and
Board of trustees, provided that at all times the Plan shall describe (1) how the
Aggregation Program will provide for universal access to all applicable
residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential
customers; (2) how demand management and energy efficiency services will
be provided to each class of customers; and (3) how the Aggregation Program
willmeet any other legal requirements concerning aggregated electric service.
(Amd. Ord. 14-3316-42, eff. 02/24/14)
E. The Village Manager is designated as the Village=s authorized representative
for the purpose of (I) cooperating with other municipalities, townships or
counties for the joint exercise of the power herein described, (ii) soliciting bids
for electricity and other related services in themanner provided by the Act and
the Plan of Operation and Governance, and (iii) negotiating and awarding a
contract with an Alternative Retail Electric Supplier for the provision of electric
power to Customers participating in the Electricity Aggregation Program. (Amd.
Ord. 14-3316-42, eff. 02/24/14)
F. Except for those Customers who opt out of the electricity Aggregation Program
pursuant to the Plan of Operation and Governance and the Act, the Electricity
Aggregation Program shall automatically apply to each person owning,
occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be
aggregated in the corporate limits of the Village.
3-13-5: SEVERABILITY: In the event any provision or application of this Chapter is
found unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not
affect any other application or the remaining provisions of this chapter to the
maximum extent permitted by law.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-1: NUISANCES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-3: Deposits and Dumping of Offensive Material
4-1-4: Excavations
4-1-5: Abatement by Village
4-1-6: Failure to Remove or Destroy
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS: The following acts, omissions or conditions shall be deemed
nuisances: (Ord. 73-311-26)
A. An act which shall offend public decency.
B. An act which shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or
render dangerous for passage, a public park, public way or other public place.
C. Obstruction of any gutter, culvert, inlet, or other drainage way so as to cause
water to stagnate therein or permitting foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises.
D. Causing or permitting the collection, deposit or continuing existence of any
garbage or hazardous substance, other than prescribed by Code, including
but not limited to : animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation cooking and consumption of food; combustible and
noncombustible waste materials; paper; rags; cartons; boxes; tree
branches; rubber; yard trimmings; cans; metals; glass; crockery; dust; and
wood, other than that permitted for burning in code-permitted fire
receptacles. (Ord. 14-3337-64 eff. 10/27/14)
E. All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire,
decay or otherwise and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the
public.
F. All dangerous or unsanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or equipment
in any public place or situated or operated on private property. (Ord. 73-311-
26; and. Ord. 74-340-16)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-1: NUISANCES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 2
4-1-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall constitute a nuisance to commit any offense which is in fact a nuisance,
or which is a nuisance according to the common law, or which is made such by
this Code, other ordinances of this Village or by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control or do any act which constitutes a
nuisance. (1971 Code, '73-311-22)
C. Repealed by Ord. 06-2042-34, eff. 6/26/06
4-1-3: DEPOSITS AND DUMPING OF OFFENSIVE MATERIAL:
A. Grass and Rubbish: it shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or
cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches or parts of
trees or any other things in any public way within the Village, and such is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
B. Dumping and Storing: it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or
store material of any kind on any real property in the Village, except:
1. When dumping, depositing or storing is for a purpose which is customarily
incidental to residential use.
2. When building materials are deposited on a site for which a building permit
has been issued and the building materials are to be used for construction
purposes thereon in conformance with the applicable codes of the Village.
3. Where the building materials are deposited on a site used in accordance
with the applicable codes of the Village for the purposes of storing building
materials.
4. When operating a concrete recycling, storage and sales facility pursuant to
a special use permit granted under Section 6-7A-7 of the Zoning
Code.(Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
5. When operating a tree chipping facility pursuant to a special use
permit.(Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
In the event that building materials are deposited on a site in the Village, for
which a building permit has been issued, and such permit expires, the
continued existence of the building material on such site is declared to be a
nuisance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-1: NUISANCES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 3
4-1-4: EXCAVATIONS:
A. When any person makes an excavation within the Village to be used in the
construction of a building, it shall be unlawful for such person to allow such
excavation to remain open for a period of time in excess of that time necessary
or reasonably required to accomplish the construction of said building.
B. In the event that such unlawful excavation, as defined above, is made, the
continued existence of such excavation in violation hereof is declared to be a
nuisance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation within the Village for
the purposes of constructing a building without providing adequate safeguards
and precautions to protect the health, safety and lives of all members of the
community and, in particular, of minor children who might be attracted to or
have occasion to go upon the property where such excavation exists. The
continued existence of any such excavation without such adequate safeguards
and precautions is declared a nuisance.
4-1-5: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE: Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this
Chapter shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the Village to collect
the costs of removal of any nuisance or nuisances as defined by the provisions
of this Chapter. (1971 Code, '73-311-22)
4-1-6: FAILURE TO REMOVE OR DESTROY: In the event that any owner shall
neglect or refuse to abate a nuisance as indicated above, the Village shall
notify the owner, or his agent, in writing of the failure. Failure of the Village to
give notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the
payment of any penalty provided for under this Code. In case any owner or
agent shall refuse to or neglect to abate the nuisance after receipt of two
notices; the first which shall provide seven calendar days for abatement
followed immediately by a second which shall provide five calendar days for
abatement, the Village Manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to enter
upon the land and to abate the nuisance. If the same owner or agent has
previously been notified to abate a similar nuisance under similar
circumstances anytime in the past twenty four months, then one notice
providing five calendar days for abatement shall be all that is necessary. In
addition to any other duties or obligations set forth in this Article A, any owner
who shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance, shall be subject to a fine
set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in Section
17-1. Each day such nuisance remains shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 14-3337-64 eff. 10/27/14 eff. 10/27/14)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-1: NUISANCES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 4
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
ARTICLE A. VEGETATION NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Nuisance Declared
4-1A-2: Failure to Remove or Destroy
4-1A-3: Lien Imposed; Foreclosure
4-1A-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns vacant or improved property within
the Village to permit the growth of noxious weeds upon their property. Noxious
weeds shall be defined to be Common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), Giant
ragweed (Ambrosia trifida), Musk thistle (Carduus nutans), Canada thistle
(Cirsium arvense), Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense), Perennial sowthistle
(Sonchus arvensis), Sorghum-almum (Sorghum almum) and Marijuana
(Cannabis satiua). It shall be the duty of all owners of land or improved property
to keep such property free of noxious weeds, and to destroy all noxious weeds
necessary to be in compliance herewith. It is hereby declared a nuisance to
permit the growth of noxious weeds.
B. It is hereby declared a nuisance to permit the growth of lawn grasses on vacant
land or improved property within the Village in excess of six inches (6?) in
height. The growth of any lawn grasses in violation of this Section 4-1A-1 is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
4-1A-2: FAILURE TO REMOVE OR DESTROY: In the event that any owner shall
neglect or refuse to abate a nuisance as indicated above, the Village shall notify
the owner, or his agent, in writing of the failure. Failure of the Village to give
notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the
payment of any penalty provided for under this Code. In case any owner or
agent shall refuse to or neglect to abate the nuisance after receipt of two
notices; the first which shall provide seven calendar days for abatement
followed immediately by a second which shall provide five calendar days for
abatement, the Village Manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to enter
upon the land and to abate the nuisance. If the same owner or agent has
previously been notified to abate a similar nuisance under similar circumstances
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-1: NUISANCES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 5
anytime in the past twenty four months, then one notice providing five calendar
days for abatement shall be all that is necessary. In addition to any other duties
or obligations set forth in this Article A, any owner who shall refuse or neglect to
abate such nuisance, shall be subject to a fine set forth in the Comprehensive
Fine Schedule of the Code described in Section 17-1. Each day such nuisance
remains shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff.
3/22/10; and Ord. 14-3337-64 eff. 10/27/14)
4-1A-3: LIEN IMPOSED; FORECLOSURE: In addition to the penalties provided, the
reasonable cost of the abatement of the nuisance by the Village shall become a
lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens; provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and
expense is incurred by the Village, the Village Clerk shall file a notice of such
lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in Lake County, Illinois, and the
Village Clerk is authorized and directed to file such notices of such liens. The
notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the
real estate upon or for which the nuisance was abated, the amount of money
due for such service and the date or dates when such costs or expenses were
incurred. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of the
property, or persons interested by the owner of such property, or persons
interested therein, after the notice of lien has been filed, the Village shall issue a
release of lien suitable for recording by the owner, provided release fee as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code has been paid in addition to the costs or expenses incurred by
the Village including the cost of recording the notice of lien. (Ord. 08-3031-14,
eff. 4/14/08)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 1
TITLE: 4
CHAPTER 2: Environmental Control
Article A. Air Pollution; Open Burning
Sections:
4-2A-1: Definitions
4-2A-2: Prohibited Acts
4-2A-3: Exemptions
4-2A-4: Penalties
4-2A-1: Definitions:
In the interpretation of this Article the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL WASTE Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on
a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices,
including, but not limited to, such items as bags, cartons, dry
bedding, structural materials, and landscape wastes.
AREA OF CONTROLLED The area specified on an IEPA and Village permit
BURNING subject to controlled burning.
BURN LEADER The person, not necessarily the applicant, responsible for
oversight of the controlled burning.
CONTROLLED BURNING The burning, pursuant to an IEPA permit, of unharvested
ground cover or vegetation for the restoration or active
management of a natural area for the purposes of improving
native ecosystems.
ECOSYSTEM An integrated system of living species, their habitat, and the
processes that affect them.
GARBAGE Refuse resulting from the handling, processing preparation,
cooking, and consumption of food or food products.
LANDSCAPE WASTE Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage. The term
includes, but is not limited to, trees, tree trimmings, branches,
stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard
trimmings, and crop residues.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 2
NATURAL AREA A vegetative landscape state that features either preserved
or restored native grasses, native perennials, native trees
and/or other native ecosystems.
OPEN BURNING The combustion of any matter in the open or in an open
dump.
OPEN DUMPING The consolidation of refuse from one or more sources at a
disposal site that does not fulfill the requirements of a
sanitary landfill.
REFUSE Any discarded matter; or any matter which is to be reduced in
volume, or otherwise changed in chemical or physical
properties, in order to facilitate its discard, removal or
disposal. (Ord. 71-250-11)
RESTRICTED AREAS The area within the boundaries of the Village, plus a zone
extending one mile beyond the boundaries of the Village.
(Ord. 91-1168-01)
TRADE WASTE Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade,
business, industry, commercial venture, utility or service
activity, and any governmental or institutional activity,
whether or not for profit. The term includes landscape waste
but excludes agricultural waste. (Ord. 71-250-11)
4-2A-2: Prohibited Acts:
A. Except as provided in Section 4-2A-3 below, no person shall cause or allow, in the
restricted area, open burning of any agricultural waste, garbage, trade waste, or
refuse. This provision does not pertain to open burning of landscape waste which is
prohibited only as indicated in subsection B of this Section.
B. No person shall cause or allow within the boundaries of the Village open burning of
landscape waste as defined to include leaves, trees, tree trimmings, branches,
stumps, brush, weeds, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
C. No person shall cause or allow the burning of any refuse in any chamber or
apparatus, unless such chamber or apparatus is designed for the purpose of
disposing of the class of refuse being burned. (Ord. 91-1188-01)
D. No person shall cause or allow within the boundary of the Village any outside burning
of any unharvested ground cover or vegetation. (Ord. Amd. 97-1537-61, eff. 11/10/97)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 3
4-2A-3: Exemptions: The following activities are hereby made specifically exempt
from the provisions of this Article:
A. The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when reasonably necessary in the
judgment of the responsible governmental official.
B. The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, barbecue, recreational, and cooling
purposes, or in domestic fireplaces, provided that no garbage shall be burned in such
cases.
C. The controlled burning of ground vegetation for the purpose of establishing, restoring,
sustaining or nurturing native ecosystems shall be permitted subject to the following:
1. Permit Required. A permit for such controlled burning must be obtained from
the Public Works Department.
2. Conditions of Permit. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides to
the Village each of the following:
a. A valid and current Open Burning Permit from the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, along with all documents submitted to the IEPA to
secure the Permit.
b. A detailed site plan, specifying the exact area of the burn, all adjacent
property boundaries, all structures and uses within fifty (50') feet of the
boundaries of the burn area and the location of natural and planned fire
breaks.
c. The name and qualifications of the burn leader. The burn leaders must
possess and provide proof of at least one of the following qualifications:
i. Certification as such by a State agency.
ii. Be an acting full time firefighter with an Illinois municipality or Fire
Protection District with classroom and field training in open burning
management.
iii. Proof of certified training in natural area management that has included
actual classroom and field training in controlled burning of ground
vegetation.
d. Payment of a fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set
forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. This fee shall be paid at the time
of permit application.
e. Execution of an agreement prepared by the Village Attorney releasing and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 4
holding the Village and the Fire Protection District and their respective
officials and employees harmless from any damages or injuries arising out of
the controlled burn, including but not limited to any halting of the burn
pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Section 4-2A-3.
f. The permit applicant, as part of the burn permit application, shall provide to
the Village a certificate of insurance as evidence of insurance coverage for
general liability with coverage limits of not less than $2,000,000 directly
related to controlled burning activity.
3. Areas Where Controlled Burning is Permitted.
a. This exemption shall apply only to 4-2A-3 areas which have been
designated by either a federal, state, county or Village agency as being
either an established natural area or being in the process of being restored
as such, or areas not so designated and which are not part of a residential
lot or development and which, in the opinion of the Public Works
Department, would benefit from a controlled burning.
b. No portion of an area of controlled burning may be within fifty feet (50') of
any residential structure. This restriction shall not apply to a controlled
burning conducted and supervised by the Village on Village property or to a
controlled burn supervised by the Village and performed pursuant to an
obligation undertaken as a condition of Village approved covenants or
Special Use or PUD zoning.
c. Residential property shall require a site inspection, conducted by the Village
of Lincolnshire. In addition to all other permit criteria, the following criteria
must be met for residential controlled burning:
i. the site must contain burn buffers on all sides. Buffers shall be a
minimum of 5 feet in width for woodland controlled burns. Buffers shall
be a minimum of 10 feet in width for prairie controlled burns.
ii. the site must exhibit restoration efforts, i.e., evidence of buckthorn
removal, brush and debris removal, existence of a minimum of five
native perennial or grass species.
iii. if any residence, sharing a common border or boundary with the
residence conducting the controlled burning objects to the controlled
burning, no permit will be issued.
d. Any area requested for a controlled burning shall have adequate fuel to carry
the fire. No additional fuel, including but not limited to leaves, grass or other
materials not naturally occurring in the area to be burned, shall be added to
the controlled burn location.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 5
4. Denial of Permit.
A permit shall be denied if any of the conditions of subparagraphs 2 or 3
above are not met. Further, either the Village or the local Fire Protection
District having jurisdiction may halt any controlled burning, either before or
after commencement of such burn if, weather or other conditions are such
that, in the sole discretion of either, the burning would constitute a hazard to
other properties.
5. Notification.
Prior to the commencement of the controlled burning, the applicant must
provide the following to the Public Works Department, or the person, if any,
designated by the Village to observe the controlled burning:
a. A Notification shall be sent to all property owners within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the boundaries of the burn area. The notification must
indicate a time frame and duration of when the burning will take place.
For example: Controlled burning shall take place between April 15th and
22nd, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. It is estimated the
burning will be completed within one day.
Included in this notification shall be a contact name and phone number
for those property owners wishing to be contacted within three hours of
any controlled burning. It shall be the responsibility of the burn leader
to contact each of these property owners not more than twenty-four (24)
hours and not less than three (3) hours prior to the start of any burn.
b. Provide proof of written notification to the Public Works Department,
the Police Department and the local Fire Protection District of the time
frame of when the burning will take place as detailed in “a” above
c. At least one hour prior to the start of the burning, the burn leader shall
contact the Public Works Department, the Police Department, and the
local Fire Protection District to obtain permission to burn that day,
providing the location and anticipated completion time. No burning shall
be allowed unless all of these departments provide permission for the
burn at the time of the contact.
d. Thirty minutes prior to the start of the burning, the burn leader shall
contact by phone Red Center (Regional Emergency Dispatch Center).
e. At the conclusion of the burning, the burn leader shall contact the
Public Works Department, the Police Department, the local Fire
Protection District and Red Center to advise that the burning has been
completed and all fire and smoldering have been completely
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 6
extinguished.
6. Post Burn Report.
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the controlled burning, the applicant must file a
report with the Public Works Department, stating whether the purpose was
accomplished, percentage of area burned and whether any damage was done
outside of the specified area. Included in this report shall be a site diagram
identifying the area burned.
4-2A-4: PENALTIES: The violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall be in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of
Title 1 of this Code. Each day any violation of any provision of this Article shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 71-250-11) (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08,
eff. 3/22/10) (Ord. Amd. 11-3195-17, eff. 3/14/11)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Revised 02/12/2018 Page 7
CHAPTER 2
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
ARTICLE B. PESTICIDES
This section is being deleted in its entirety per
Ordinance 01-1743-01, effective 2/12/01.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-3: HOTELS
Revised 07/09/1999 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
HOTELS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Building and Premises Requirements
4-3-2: Sanitary Requirements and Maintenance
4-3-3: Attendant Requirements, Duties
4-3-4: Register of Guests Kept
4-3-5: Rate Notices Posted
4-3-1: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each hotel establishment shall maintain an office, lobby or other room
which shall be available for the registration of guests. (1971 Code, '20-6-1)
B. Any area or premises of the hotel open to use by the public or by all
persons staying in or being accommodated in the said hotel shall be kept
adequately lighted at nighttime provided that such lights shall be so shaded
or regulated so as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent
premises. (1971 Code, '20-6-10)
C. Each room, including the bathroom, shall have facilities to keep such room
at a minimum temperature of not less than sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60E F)
between October 1 and May 15 of each year. (1971 Code, '20-6-11)
D. For each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area on
each floor, one two and one-half (2-1/2) gallon soda and acid approved type
fire extinguisher or an approved wet water type extinguisher shall be
available, but in no event shall there be less than one fire extinguisher on
each floor. (1971 Code, '20-6-12)
4-3-2: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS AND MAINTENANCE:
A. All floors in the bathrooms shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected for
each incoming guest. (1971 Code, '20-6A)
B. All areas shall be kept free from rubbish, litter and inflammable materials at
all times, and no inflammable liquids or chemicals shall be kept on the
premises unless the same are in a special room so designed and
constructed as to be fireproof. (1971 Code, '20-6-5)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 4-3: HOTELS
Revised 07/09/1999 Page 2
C. All sheets, towels and other linens, furnished for each accommodation unit
shall be clean and freshly laundered for each incoming guest. (1971 Code,
'20-6-6)
D. Paper cups in proper dispensers shall be provided in each accommodation
unit. If drinking glasses are furnished in lieu thereof, they shall be washed
and sterilized for each incoming guest. (1971 Code, '20-6-7)
E. The entire establishment shall be so operated in such a manner as to
provide clean, wholesome accommodations to the guests at all times.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing it shall be the duty of the
operator of the establishment to keep the furniture, furnishings and
equipment and the premises as a whole in a good state of repair and
maintenance. (1971 Code, '20-6-8)
F. In any accommodations where cooking facilities are provided, fly-proof and
metal containers shall be supplied for garbage and refuse and it shall be the
duty of the hotel operator to promptly remove and dispose of such garbage
and refuse. (1971 Code, '20-6-9)
4-3-3: ATTENDANT REQUIREMENTS, DUTIES: Each establishment shall have
at least one competent attendant or caretaker available at all times. It shall
be his duty to receive and deliver telephone messages and mail, to
maintain the premises, facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and
sanitary condition and free from rodents and vermin. (1971 Code, '20-6-2)
4-3-4: REGISTER OF GUESTS KEPT: Each establishment shall keep a register
of all transient guests. This register shall contain the name, legal residence,
make of car, car license, number and names of persons occupying the
rooms, the number or numbers of the room or rooms assigned to the guest
or guests and the date of arrival and departure. The register shall be
available for inspection by law enforcement officers for a period of not less
than three (3) years. (1971 Code, '20-6-3)
4-3-5: RATE NOTICES POSTED: Printed notices shall be posted in each room
giving the established rate for said room for one or more persons and it
shall be unlawful to charge a rate in excess of such rate; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the hotel from establishing other
or different rates during seasonal periods and nothing herein contained
shall prevent the proprietor from changing such published rates from time to
time. Such notices shall also prescribe any reasonable rules and
regulations of the establishment, not in conflict with any Statute or
regulation of the State of Illinois or Village ordinances in such case made
and provided. (1971 Code, '20-7)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 1 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Background; Purpose
4-4-2: Definitions
4-4-3: Enclosed Public Places
4-4-4: Places of Employment
4-4-5: Public Entrances
4-4-6: Open Air Dining Areas
4-4-7: Reserved
4-4-8: Designation of Other No Smoking Areas
4-4-9: No Retaliation
4-4-10: Signs
4-4-11: Intentionally Omitted
4-4-12: Penalties
4-4-13: Severability
4-4-14: Effective Date
4-4-1: BACKGROUND; PURPOSE
A. Smoking creates the hazard of injury to the personal health of those in the environment of such
smoke as well as the potential of damage to property that may result from the incendiary nature of
such activity. It has been determined that breathing ambient smoke is a health hazard to both
smokers and nonsmokers. Smoking produces several substances that are considered hazardous to
health including carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, nitrous oxide and formaldehyde. Secondhand
smoke affects the health of the bystander, interfering with respiratory tract defenses, often causing
nonsmokers to have allergic or irritative reactions, and is a known cause of lung cancer. Because the
hazards of smoking have a potentially harmful effect, material and direct, on the public health,
safety, welfare, comfort, and property of residents of the Village, it is necessary and desirable to
establish regulations that regulate smoking in enclosed Public Places, in enclosed Places of
Employment, in Open Air Dining Areas and near entrances to such Public Places and Places of
Employment. (Amd. Ord. 16-3404-131, eff. 07/01/16)
B. This Chapter may be cited as the LINCOLNSHIRE SMOKE FREE AIR ORDINANCE , the purpose of
which is to protect the public health, comfort and environment by regulating smoking in enclosed
Public Places, Places of Employment and Open Air Dining Areas.
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS
In the interpretation of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
BUSINESS Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association
or other business entity, whether formed for profit or nonprofit purposes.
"Business" includes a "Club" as defined in this section.
CLUB A private not-for-profit association, corporation or other entity consisting of
persons who are bona fide members and which owns, leases or uses a building or
portion thereof, the use of which is restricted primarily to members and their
guests.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 2 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
DWELLING A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy by an owner or tenant, including single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels or motels.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING
DEVICE
An electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble
smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other
regulated substances. “Electronic Smoking Device” includes any such device,
whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette,
an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. Electronic smoking devices
excludes any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration as a nontobacco product used for medicinal purposes and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. (Ord. 16-3404-131,
eff. 7/1/16)
EMPLOYEE Any person who is employed or retained by a Business, and shall include the
owner or operator of a sole proprietorship or other similar business entity.
EMPLOYER Any Business that employs one or more Employees.
ENCLOSED AREA All space in any structure or building that is enclosed on all sides by any
combination of walls, windows, or doorways, extending from floor to the ceiling.
OPEN AIR DINING
AREA
A seating area open to the air that is accessory to a restaurant, hotel, cafeteria,
Club or other Public Place engaged in purveying commercial food or beverage
service where the public, members or guests are invited to sit and receive food
and beverage service for a consideration.
OWNER Any person, Business or Club who by reason of law or any written or oral
arrangement or contract exercises exclusive rights of possession, exclusion
and control over any Enclosed Area or Open Air Dining Area; provided that
where there is a landlord-tenant relationship, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that both the landlord and tenant shall be jointly and severally
responsible for complying with the terms of this Chapter.
An Owner may rebut said presumption by demonstrating by clear and
convincing evidence that the Owner has taken reasonable steps to exercise all
of its rights to compel the tenant to comply with this Chapter and the tenant
has refused or failed to comply.
PLACE OF
EMPLOYMENT
An area under the control of a public or private Employer within the Village that
Employees normally frequent during the course of employment, and includes,
without limitation, common work areas, private offices, auditoriums,
classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, elevators, employee
lounges, staircases, hallways, restrooms, medical facilities, Clubs, and the
interior of a vehicle of public conveyance.
Place of employment also includes the home office portion of a private Dwelling,
but only if the home office is used by more than one Employee or is frequented
by business invitees. Place of employment does not include that part of a private
Dwelling used as a home office if it is used by a single Employee only who
resides in that Dwelling.
Place of employment does include a private Dwelling used as a daycare facility.
PARK A public park or recreation area that is open to and used by the general public.
PUBLIC The doorway or other entrance to a Public Place that is open to and intended
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 3 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
ENTRANCE for use by the general public for ingress and egress to the Public Place.
Public entrance also means a doorway or other entrance for pedestrian
ingress and egress to a Place of Employment: 1) that is open to and intended
for use by the general public=s or business invitee's ingress and egress to the
Place of Employment; and/or 2) where Employees are required or permitted
to enter or exit the Place of Employment.
Public Entrance also means the area immediately above, below or aside and
adjacent to any window or other means, whether electronic, mechanical or
manual, by which a Public Place or Place of Employment may be ventilated
for exposure to or gathering of ambient air.
PUBLIC PLACE An area that is open to and used by the general public, or any area to which the
public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including without
limitation:
1. Vehicles of public conveyance;
2. Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies,
hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, elevators and staircases) of
apartment buildings, condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing home
care facilities, and other multiple-family Dwellings;
3. Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies,
hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, elevators and staircases) of
any building or structure that is accessible to the public including,
without limitation, office, commercial, and industrial buildings, banks
and financial institutions, educational institutions, healthcare facilities
such as hospitals, clinics and doctor's offices, museums, libraries,
restaurants, polling places, government and village owned buildings,
food stores, cafeterias, theaters, auditoriums, train and bus stations,
hotels, motels, and retail and service establishments;
4. Rooms, chambers, halls, or other locations within which meetings,
hearings, or gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted, including specifically, but without
limitation, any enclosed area under the control of the Village of
Lincolnshire where there is in progress any public meeting.
Public place shall not include:
1. A private Dwelling which does not meet the criteria for a PLACE OF
EMPLOYMENT; or
2. Hotel or motel rooms designated as smoking, provided that no more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the available rooms for rent under common
ownership or control shall be designated as smoking rooms.
SCHOOL
GROUNDS
All public or private outdoor school grounds.
SMOKE
OR SMOKING
Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, other
lighted nicotine or tobacco product, or electronic smoking device in any manner
or in any form. (Amd. Ord. 16-3404-131, eff. 07/01/16)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 4 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire.
4-4-3: ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES
A. It is unlawful to smoke in any Enclosed Area of any Public Place.
B. It shall be unlawful for the Owner in control or possession of a Public Place to knowingly permit
smoking in any Enclosed Area in a Public Place.
4-4-4: PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
A. It is unlawful to smoke in any Enclosed Area of any Place of Employment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any Employer to knowingly permit smoking in any Enclosed Area of any
Place of Employment.
4-4-5: PUBLIC ENTRANCES
It is unlawful to smoke within twenty feet (20') of a Public Entrance to a Public Place or to a
Place of Employment.
4-4-6: OPEN AIR DINING AREAS
A. It is unlawful to smoke in any Open Air Dining Area.
B. It shall be unlawful for the Owner of an Open Air Dining Area to knowingly permit smoking in an
area available for open air dining.
C. It is unlawful to smoke within twenty feet (20') of an Open Air Dining Area.
4-4-7: RESERVED
4-4-8: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO SMOKING AREAS
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the Owner of a Public Place or a Place of
Employment to further prohibit smoking by designating outdoor areas not subject to the restrictions
in this chapter as a place where smoking is also prohibited, provided that the Owner shall cause
signs to be posted at appropriate locations advising persons that smoking is prohibited within the
designated outdoor area. Violations of such privately designated non-smoking areas shall not be
construed a violations of this Chapter.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to require any Owner of a Public Place or Place of
Employment to allow smoking in areas authorized to be designated as smoking areas under this
Chapter, provided that the Owner shall cause signs to be posted at appropriate locations advising
persons that smoking is prohibited within the designated area. The exceptions and exemptions
described herein shall be construed as permissive and not mandatory.
C. This Chapter shall be cumulative with other laws applicable to smoking in Public Places, Places of
Employment and Open Air Dining Areas and shall not be interpreted or construed to permit
smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
4-4-9: NO RETALIATION
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 5 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
No person, Business or Employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against
an Employee or customer because that Employee or customer reports a violation of this Chapter or
exercises any rights afforded by this Chapter.
4-4-10: SIGNS
A. Any "No Smoking" sign required by this Chapter shall have a white field with the words "No
Smoking" printed in red letters, four inches (4") high with a one-half inch (2") face, or shall bear the
international "No Smoking" symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette
enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Stylized signs may be permitted so long as one of the
foregoing designs is incorporated into the sign.
B. Each Owner, Employer, or other person in control of a Public Place or Place of Employment shall
post conspicuous "No Smoking" signs in the enclosed area of any Public Place or Place of
Employment. Compliance with this requirement may be achieved by posting a conspicuous sign at
all Public Entrances which declares smoking is prohibited in such Public Place or Place of
Employment.
C. Each Owner, licensee or other person in control of an Open Air Dining Area shall cause signs to be
posted at appropriate locations advising persons that smoking is prohibited within the Open Air
Dining Area.
D. Each Owner, licensee or other person in control of any Enclosed Area within any Public Place or
Place of Employment which is exempt from these regulations under Section 4-4-11 shall post
conspicuous signs at all Public Entrances which indicate that smoking is permitted within such
exempt area.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or obscure any sign posted pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter.
4-4-11: INTENTIONALLY OMITTED (Ord. 07-3007-35, eff. 11/26/07)
4-4-12: PENALTIES
A. Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the
Code described in 17-1. (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
B. Any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a Public Place, a Place of
Employment or an Open Air Dining Area that knowingly permits smoking in an area where smoking
is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense subject to the fine set
forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff.
3/22/10)
C. Any person who fails to post the signs required by this Chapter shall be guilty of an offense subject
to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. (Amd. Ord.
10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
D. Each day that any violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Page 6 of 6
Revised 12/09/2019
4-4-13: SEVERABILITY
If any provision or part of this chapter or application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application
of the provision or part thereof to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
4-4-14: EFFECTIVE DATE
The prohibitions stated in this Chapter shall be effective on August 1, 2006. All premises affected by
this Chapter that are in existence on the approval date hereof shall cause such signs to be posted in a
conspicuous location within the Public Place, Place of Employment or Open Air Dining Area on or
before August 1, 2006. All premises affected by this Chapter that are established subsequent to the
approval date hereof shall cause such signs to be so posted as a condition to obtaining applicable
business licensing and certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 06-2035-27, eff. 5/8/06)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Title
5-1-2: Purpose
5-1-3: Interpretation; Responsibility for Compliance
5-1-4: Separability
5-1-5: Public Utilities
5-1-6: Fire District and Protection Regulations
5-1-6-1: Fire District
5-1-6-2: Fire Protection Requirements
5-1-6-3 Special Fire Protection Area Limits and Requirements
5-1-7: Curb Cut Restrictions (Rep. by Ord. 91-1206-19) Relocated to Title 8
5-1-8: Violation and Enforcement of Regulations
5-1-8-1: Penalties for Violation
5-1-8-2: Procedure for Abatement of Violations
5-1-8-3: Continuation of Violation
5-1-8-4: Stop Work Orders
5-1-8-5: Revocation of Building Permit
5-1-8-6: Portable Toilets
5-1-8-7: Temporary Trailers, Dumpsters and Portable Storage Containers
5-1-8-8: Failure to Install or Construct According to Plan
5-1-9: Conflict with Zoning Code
5-1-10: Rooftop Equipment and Ground-Installed Mechanical Equipment
5-1-11: Commercial Contractors
5-1-12: Staging; Parking
5-1-13: Site Construction Fencing
5-1-1: TITLE: This Title of the Village Code shall be known, cited, and referred to as
The Lincolnshire Building Code.
5-1-2: PURPOSE: This Building Code is to provide the rules and regulations of the
Village for all matters concerning the erection, construction, alteration, addition,
repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
buildings and structures and to provide for the payment of fees and the
inspections of said buildings and structures. (Ord. 73-305-20)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 2
5-1-3: INTERPRETATION; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE:
A. Building Official: Any officer or employee of the Village authorized to administer
or enforce any provision of this chapter or any provision of this Code that is
administered pursuant to this chapter. The term ABuilding Official@ shall include:
the Village Manager; the Development Manager; the Planning Manager; the
Code Enforcement Officer; the Director of Public Works; the Village Engineer
the Fire Chief, or their designate. It is expressly intended that those officials
shall be, and are empowered to enforce the provisions of the International
Building Code and this Code including the initiating and signing of formal
complaints alleging violations of such provisions.
B. Municipality: Any reference in the codes to the Amunicipality@ shall
mean the Village of Lincolnshire.
C. Responsible Parties: The property owner, general contractor and
developer, where applicable, shall be jointly and severally liable for any
violations of this Section 5 and any consequences of or penalties for
such a violation. This joint and several liability shall apply irrespective
of which party actually committed the violation and whether or not all of
the parties were aware of the violation. (Ord. Amd. 99-1691-75, eff.
12/13/99)
5-1-4: SEPARABILITY: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and
Board of Trustees of the Village that the several provisions of this Code are
separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Code
not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any
provision of this Code to a particular property, building or other structure, such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,
building or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
5-1-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All public utility distribution lines for telephone, gas and electric service shall be
placed in rear lot line easements and entirely underground. Installation of such
facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders, rules and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective
and the owner and builder shall be responsible for compliance with rules and
regulations, now and hereafter effective and filed with said Commission
pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act,1 of any public utility whose service
1220 ILCS 5/1-101
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 3
will be required for the building with respect to the provision of such facilities.
B. Underground telephone, electric and gas service facilities, including conduits
and cables, shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a
manner which will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all
transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to
the public.
C. All utility lines and facilities for water and sewer service shall be placed in
appropriate easements and entirely underground. (Ord. 76-436-66)
D. In all residential zoning districts, subdividers and developers shall install all
required utilities underground. All existing overhead utilities in residential
zoning districts are exempt from this requirement when any alterations are
made to any single-family home with overhead utilities, except as to electrical
services as required under the Building Code.
E. In all nonresidential zoning districts all existing overhead utilities must be
placed underground at the time of development of the property, or in the case
of developed property, at the time the principal building is altered, restored or
expanded and the cost of such alteration, restoration or expansion exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the original cost to construct said principal building.
Provided, however, that where the size or configuration of the lot and nature
and extent of the existing overhead utilities make it impractical to place existing
utilities underground on a parcel by parcel basis, the developer will have the
option of submitting a cash deposit to pay for the construction costs of placing
the overhead utilities underground at a future time. The cash deposit must be
in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of a certified cost estimate
for placing the existing overhead utilities underground. The cash deposit will be
held in an escrow fund by the Village which will be used for placing utilities
underground in a comprehensive manner as the properties in the area
develop. The developer will be entitled to a refund of the deposit if the funds
are not expended within seven (7) years of receipt. (Ord. 90-1173-57)
F. It is expressly prohibited and shall be unlawful for any contractor, builder,
developer, surveyor, engineer, and/or any other party to break, sever, damage,
interrupt, or otherwise interfere with, or to cause a break, severance, and/or
interruption of, damage to, and/or other interference with, whether by
negligence or design, any utility line located anywhere within the Village.
1. Any contractor, builder, developer, surveyor, engineer, and/or other party
who breaks, severs, damages, interrupts, or otherwise interferes with, or
who causes a break, severance, and/or interruption of, damage to, and/or
other interference with, any utility line located anywhere within the Village
shall be subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 4
the Code described in 17-1 for each such break, severance, and/or on
interruption of, damage to, and/or other interference with any utility line
located anywhere within the Village.
2. With respect to Village owned utilities, the fine shall be in addition to any
and all amounts necessary to repair and/or otherwise remedy the utility line
breakage.
5-1-6: FIRE DISTRICT AND PROTECTION REGULATIONS:
5-1-6-1: FIRE DISTRICT: The Fire District includes that portion of the village in which
there are located business, industrial or commercial uses, or in which such
uses are developing, and also all future areas to be annexed and developed
with business, industrial, multi-family or commercial uses. All areas within any
industrial or Business District under the Lincolnshire Zoning Ordinance are in
the Fire District.
5-1-6-2: FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. The Village discourages any use of non-potable water systems for fighting fire
because of the danger of water pollution. If a non-potable water system is
used, the same shall be designed so that it shall be impossible to have a
cross-connection between the Village's potable water system and such nonpotable
water system, including, but not limited to, such measures to preclude
the possibility of a fire hose or solid cross-connection between the systems.
B. All commercial, industrial and multiple-family residential buildings, including
condominiums and townhouses, over two (2) stories in height shall have
Standpipe Systems, installed in accordance with NFPA 14.
1. Sections 905.3 through 905.3.7 of the IBC and IFC are deleted.
C. Stand pipes and sprinkling areas shall have hydro pneumatic water storage
facilities or other pressurized systems as approved by a Village Building
Official.
5-1-6-3: SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION AREA LIMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. A Special Fire Protection Area is hereby established which shall consist of
portions of the Village designated by the Village and lying south of State Route
22 (Half Day Road) as realigned west of Milwaukee Avenue, north of Aptakisic
Road, and east of the Soo Line Railroad tracks right of way, plus the Adlai E.
Stevenson High School site and building, and such other areas as may be from
time to time specifically annexed into the Special Fire Protection Area,
excluding, therefrom, however, all existing industries served by the Village's
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 5
water system which are incapable of currently being served by a water flow of
three thousand (3,000) gallons per minute (gam) for two (2) hours at a residual
pressure at the Village hydrants of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square
inch (psi).
B. The Village has caused the design of a reservoir and pumping stations so that
a water supply for fire purposes of three thousand (3,000) gallons per minute
(gam) for two (2) hours at a residual pressure at the Village hydrants of not
less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch (psi) will be available throughout
the Special Fire Protection Area (except where the existing water mains are
incapable of providing such flow). All new or future water mains in the Special
Fire Protection Area shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") in diameter and
shall be designed so as to be capable of meeting all fire flow requirements.
C. All other fire protection and water system requirements, including those set
forth in Section 5-1-6--2, shall remain applicable to buildings and structures in
the Special Fire Protection Area to the extent they are not inconsistent with or
in conflict with the provisions of this Section 5-1-6-3; to which extent of any
such inconsistency or conflict the provision which is more restrictive shall be
deemed applicable. (OD. 81-648-A)
5-1-7: Relocated to Title 8
5-1-8: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
5-1-8-1: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS: Any person who shall (1) violate any
provisions of this Code or the other technical codes which have been adopted
by reference or otherwise; or (2) shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building
or structure; or (3) perform any engineering, landscaping or earthwork in
violation of any approved plan or direction of the Building Official or of any
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to
the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in
17-1. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The property owner, general contractor and developer shall be jointly and
severally liable for any penalties assessed pursuant to this Section.(Ord. Amd.
99-1691-75, eff. 12/13/99) (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
5-1-8-2: PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS: The procedure in all
cases of unauthorized deviations from, or violations of, the provisions of the
Building Code found on inspection by the Building Official or his authorized
representative shall be as follows: A verbal notice shall be immediately served
by the inspector at the site, and on the person or persons doing or in charge of
the work being done, or responsible for or capable of correcting, or of causing
to be corrected the deviation or violation observed. If a verbal notice cannot be
served on the site, or if served, is disregarded, or deemed inadequate by the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 6
inspector for the purpose then a written notice, on forms prepared for the
purpose and designating the deviation observed, shall be posted at the site, in
as safe and conspicuous a place as practicable, and where, if unmolested, the
same must certainly come to the notice of any person or persons either
employed on the work, or frequenting or occupying the building, structure or
premises; and a copy of the notice so posted shall be mailed to the last known
address of the owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure
involved.
5-1-8-3: CONTINUATION OF VIOLATION: In the event a written notice of a violation
has been posted, and the violation or condition continues; or if the violation, of
whatever nature, is not promptly corrected in a manner consistent with the
provisions of the Building Code or order of the Village, the inspector shall
promptly stop the work as set forth below and may close the building or
structure to any further work.(Ord. Amd. 99-1691-75, eff. 12/13/99)
5-1-8-4: STOP WORK ORDERS:
A. The Building Official is authorized to stop work on any building,
structure, or any portion of any building or structure if it is being
done: (1) in violation of any law, rule, regulation or approved plan;
or (2) in a reckless, unsafe or unsanitary manner; or (3) with the
use of defective or improper materials; or (4) contemplating an
unlawful result as regards to location, intended use or occupancy;
or (5) in any other respect contrary to the provisions of this
Building Code or to the requirements of any other laws of the
Village. This right to stop work shall exist and be performed
irrespective of any permit that may or may not have been either
required or issued for any portion of the work, building or
structure.
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property. This order shall state the
conditions, if any, under which work may be resumed. The
Building Official shall give notice in writing setting forth the alleged
violation(s) to the owner of the property involved, or to the
owner=s agent, or to the person doing the work at least twenty
four (24) hours in advance of the actual issuance of a stop work
order except in the event that an emergency affecting health,
safety and welfare is deemed to exist by the Building Official, in
which case the stop work order shall be issued immediately.
B. The suspension of work shall be for such time as may be
necessary to secure a correction of the violation or violations, or
until a satisfactory arrangement for completion has been
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 7
submitted by the violator and approved by the Building Official, or
until a court of competent jurisdiction renders a decision stating
otherwise. (Amd. Ord. 99-1691-75, eff. 12/13/99)
5-1-8-5: REVOCATION OF BUILDING PERMIT: Any person having charge of,
directing, or in any way engaged in work that violates the Building Code, who
shall refuse or fail to promptly desist from such work on written notice from any
Building Official; or who having desisted on either verbal or written notice shall
resume the work before the violation which occasioned the order is corrected
or agreed to be corrected satisfactorily to the officer causing the work to be
stopped and consistent with the purposes of the Building Code; or who before
having been authorized by the officer causing the same to be stopped resumes
work stopped by the Building Official shall be deemed guilty of violating the
Building Code, and shall be subject to the general penalty provided herein.
Permits for work being done in violation of the Building Code may be canceled
or revoked on order of the Building Official. A permit once revoked cannot be
restored and to resume further work shall require the obtaining of a permit for
the original purpose. (Ord. 73-305-20)
5-1-8-6: PORTABLE TOILETS:
A. General Requirements: The location of portable toilets must be indicated on a
site plan which is approved by the Department of Community Development.
Portable toilets must be located completely on private property. The portable
toilets must be properly installed and maintained in working order and shall be
kept free from leaks and defects. All portable toilets shall be maintained in a
sale, sanitary and usable condition.
B. Special Events: Portable toilets for special events shall be permitted where
existing plumbing facilities may be inadequate to accommodate the demand. A
no-fee building permit must be obtained from the Department of Community
Development prior to installing portable toilets for special events. The portable
toilets may not be put in place more than forty eight (48) hours before the
scheduled event and must be completely removed from the property within
twenty four (24) hours of the conclusion of the special event.
C. Subdivision Improvements and Commercial Construction Sites: Portable toilets
must be provided for construction workers in accordance with OSHA
standards. Portable toilets must be promptly removed after construction
activity is completed and in all cases before a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued.
D. Residential Construction Sites: Portable toilets in residential areas must be
discretely located so they are not visible from the street.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 8
E. When Site Construction Fencing is required by Section 5-1-13, the owner and
commercial contractor shall be responsible for placing portable toilets inside
site construction fencing and no closer than five feet (5') from any property line
or the right-of-way. (Amd. Ord. 07-2974-02, eff. 2/26/07)
5-1-8-7: TEMPORARY TRAILERS:
A. General Requirements: A specific area designated for temporary trailers, as
defined in this Section, must be indicated on a Site Plan and approved by the
Department of Community Development prior to the placing of trailers on the
site and prior to the issuance of any Building Permit or Public Improvement
Permit. Temporary trailers must be located completely on private property.
B. Construction Office Trailers: Construction office trailers must be securely
affixed to the ground and meet all applicable codes and regulations of the
Village for light, ventilation, egress, and space for the occupancy of a structure.
C. Sales Office Trailers: Office trailers for the sales or marketing of real estate,
which are designed for use by the general public must be securely affixed to
the ground and meet all applicable codes and regulations of the Village for
light, ventilation, egress, and space for the occupancy of a structure. The
design, location, landscaping, and proposed signage for any such trailers must
be reviewed by the Architectural Review Board and approved by the Village
Board. Such trailers may not be put in place prior to the issuance of a public
improvement permit and must be removed when the last lot or unit is placed
under contract or within three (3) years, whichever is sooner.
D. Construction Material Trailers: Trailers for the temporary secure storage of
building material and equipment may be stored on the construction site in an
approved location. Construction material trailers will be allowed on site only
while the building trade owning or using the trailers is actively engaged in
construction activity. Construction trailers shall not be allowed in residential
areas unless a contractor is working on two (2) or more homes in the area
simultaneously. (Ord. 90-1175-59)
E. Dumpsters: Construction dumpsters require a permit. The fee to locate a
construction dumpster is noted in Section 1-15-5, Comprehensive Fee
Schedule. Dumpsters unrelated to a building permit are permitted for a
minimum of 7 days and a maximum of 28 days. However, if a dumpster is
approved in conjunction with a valid Building Permit for active construction, the
Building Official may permit the dumpster to remain on-site for the duration of
the construction project, or until such building permit has expired. Such
dumpsters are permitted only on surfaces approved by the Building Official.
Construction dumpsters must be setback no greater than 10’ from the principal
structure, unless they are located inside an approved construction fence.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 9
Construction dumpsters are permitted only on private property. (Ord. 14-3337-
64 eff. 10/27/14).
F. Portable Storage Containers: Portable storage containers and pods for short
term storage are permitted without a Building Permit but must be removed
within 28 days of placement. Portable storage containers are permitted only on
driveways or similar hard surfaces. Placement of a storage container on an
unpaved surface is prohibited. A portable storage container may not encroach
upon the public right-of-way nor be located in such a way that it obstructs
visibility of vehicle movements from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 14-3337-64
eff. 10/27/14).
5-1-8-8: FAILURE TO INSTALL OR CONSTRUCT ACCORDING TO PLANS:
Any public or private construction, engineering, landscaping, or installation of
improvements or structures, including remodeling and tenant finishes shall be
performed in strict accordance with approved plans. The owner, developer
and general contractor shall be jointly and severally liable for any failure to
perform in strict accordance with the approved plans and shall be subject to
the fines set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described
in 17-1. (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10).
5-1-9: CONFLICT WITH ZONING CODE: In the event that any provisions of this
Code or the other technical codes adopted herein by reference are in conflict
with any provision of the Lincolnshire Zoning Code or any amendment thereto,
the latter shall prevail and the conflicting provision of this Code shall be of no
effect. (Ord. 73-305-20)
5-1-10: EXTERIOR MOUNTED EQUIPMENT: Regulations pertaining to the placement
and installation of exterior equipment for single family residences only are
exempt from the screening provisions of this Section, except as otherwise
required by the Village Code. (Amd. Ord. 95-1413-43, eff. 12/11/95)
A. VILLAGE POLICY: It is the stated policy of the Village, by means of its
ordinances and codes, to maintain, protect, preserve and perpetuate the
existing rural character and aesthetic qualities of the Village by assuring its
residents that future construction will always advance and enhance this policy.
In addition, it is the intent of this Section to preserve, and protect and promote
the enhancement of property and taxable values, as well as the general
welfare of the residents of the Village.
One very important means by which this goal can be achieved is the
installation of exterior equipment in a manner that is pleasing to the eye and in
harmony with the predominantly residential character of the Village, and which
will contribute to those qualities that bring lasting value to our community and
raise the level of community expectations for the quality of its total
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 10
environment.
The method of equipment installation recommended by the Village is the
location of such equipment within the building itself or as provided for in the
following pertinent subsections of this Section.
Architects and mechanical engineers are urged to work in unison toward
achieving a design for buildings, proposed for construction in the Village in
which the equipment is totally encompassed as an integral part of the structure
and will not be visible to public view.
B. DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Section the following definitions are
hereby adopted. These definitions shall be mandatory in complying with the
provisions of this Section.
CONCEALED Any point of utility service entrance connection to
a building structure FITTING which is not readily
accessible by an individual for means of
installation, maintenance, service or repair.
EXTERIOR Equipment, devices, machinery and accessories,
including but not EQUIPMENT limited to heating,
ventilation, lighting, skylights, storage, refuse,
recycling, surveillance, and communication
installations; drainage, water, sewer, telephone,
gas, electric, cable television and other utility
services; and other similar purposes. All
equipment mounted to a roof, wall, pole, ground
or other surface shall be subject to the
regulations of this Section.
GROUND A structure of permanent construction material as
defined herein, or a MOUNTED berm, or
plantings, shrubbery, etc., that affords complete
screening of SCREEN the equipment from public
view.
PARAPET WALL That part of any wall that extends above or
through the roof line.
PARAPET the WALL
the HEIGHT
Parapet wall height shall be the vertical distance
measured from surface of the finished roof to the
top of the wall at the point where the roof line and
exterior wall meet.
PENTHOUSE An enclosed structure on the roof of a building
which houses rooftop equipment as defined herein.
PUBLIC UTILITY Any exterior equipment installed by a public utility
company for the purpose of servicing more than
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 11
one business, company, association,
EQUIPMENT user, entity, non-residential
structure or residential unit.
ROOFTOP An enclosure constructed on the roof of a building
to screen equipment.
SCREEN To screen from public view. This shall include a
parapet wall, or a separate screen used in
conjunction with a parapet wall, or a penthouse
used in conjunction with a parapet wall.
SHALL The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
permissive or discretionary.
TENSES Words in the present tense shall include the
future.
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire.
C. GENERAL REGULATIONS:
1. APPEARANCE
All exterior equipment shall be screened entirely from view as provided for in
the Village Code. Design of exterior equipment screens constructed of
building materials shall be consistent with the general architecture of the
principal structure. Design of exterior equipment screens constructed of
natural materials shall be approved by the Village Forester.
2. INSTALLATION
The construction and installation of all exterior equipment shall comply with
all codes adopted by the Village, shall be structurally sound and shall follow
the manufacturer's recommendations. All installations must satisfy
construction requirements for live, dead and wind loads, frost depth, and
soil constraints, as applicable.
Structural Engineer Design Criteria Drawings and Calculations stamped by
an Illinois Licensed Structural Engineer must be submitted if required by the
Department of Community Development.
Installation of public utilities on private property shall be in appropriate
easements benefitting the utility company. Installation of public utilities on
public property shall be in such easements or the public right-of-way.
3. MATERIAL
a. Permitted Materials: All exterior equipment screens constructed of the
same building material used in the walls of the building, shall be
continuous, and shall be the same basic design as the building. The
use of glass or wood shall be permitted as a screening material on
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 12
buildings having exterior walls constructed entirely of glass or wood.
Opaque glass block or opaque glass panes shall be considered
dependant upon color, thickness, size and incorporation into building
design. Screens using exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) shall
only be permitted when the primary building wall material is EIFS and
provided the screens are constructed as a continuous wall, not
panels.
All exterior equipment screens constructed of natural materials shall
be approved by the Village Forester.
b. Prohibited Materials: Materials used in trim, moldings, jambs, window
or door frames, or decorative features of a building shall not be
permitted for equipment screens unless used as a primary material in
the building facade. Composition, plastic or fiberglass shingles or
panels, and EIFS panels shall not be permitted.
c. Alternative Materials: The Architectural Review Board may
recommend an alternative material or color be allowed when the
standards for review in the Village Code are advanced and provided
the proposed materials are equal to, or better than the primary
material proposed for use in the building.
4. HEIGHT: The height of all required screening (including walls, parapets,
and penthouses), shall exceed the highest point of all exterior equipment by
a minimum of 6".
5. APPROVAL: The Architectural Review Board shall make a
recommendation and the Village Board shall have final approval on the
design, material, height, color, and location of all exterior equipment
screens based on quality and durability.
Board Submission Requirements: In order to facilitate the administration of
this Section, each petitioner at the time of filing building plans for review by
the Architectural Review Board shall submit the following documents:
a. A plan which indicates the location of all exterior equipment to be
mounted on any and all walls, roof, or ground area adjacent to a
building including, but not limited to provisions for gas, electric,
telephone, cable, communications, water, sewer, refuse, and
recycling.
b. A section/elevation drawing which indicates the height of all exterior
equipment in relation to the proposed screening. A note must be
included on the drawing that indicates all exterior equipment will be a
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 13
minimum of six inches (6") below the highest point of the associated
screen structure, or two inches (2@) below the plant material at the
time it is installed.
c. An equipment schedule which is keyed to both the plan and section
drawings. The schedule shall include the letter or number identifying
the proposed type of equipment, the height of the equipment, and the
distance between the highest point of the equipment and the
associated screen.
6. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION: Combination Flat/Peak Roof and Unique
Roof Designs Buildings which have a combination of a flat roof and peak or
sloping roof, or a roof of any other unique design shall be required to
screen the equipment on the flat portion of the roof in accordance with the
regulations of this Section.
If rooftop equipment is to be installed on a roof or any portion of a roof
which is not flat, the Architectural Review Board will give special
consideration to the type, design, construction, height and color of the
screen and equipment to be installed and may consider unscreened
equipment which is designed to meet the provisions and advance the
objectives of this Village Code Section.
7. MAINTENANCE: All exterior equipment, required screens, and premises
adjacent thereto shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a state of
preservation and appearance as originally approved. Plants used for
natural material screens shall be maintained in a live, thriving condition at
all times.
D. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS:
1. ROOFTOP MOUNTED EXTERIOR EQUIPMENT: Regulations pertaining to
rooftop equipment are applicable to all buildings, whether residential,
commercial, industrial, or public within the Village except for single-family
residences.
a. Parapet Wall
(1) Appearance: All portions of every flat roof building shall be
contained by a continuous parapet wall. The
parapet wall shall be of solid construction and shall
be a continuous vertical extension of each wall of
the building. (See Figures 1, 2, and 3)
(2) Materials: Parapet walls designed as a fascia or modified to
create an overhang or vertical extension shall be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 14
constructed of the same materials used in the
building walls, or of aggregate pre-cast panels of a
compatible or harmonious color.
Parapet walls designed as a mansard roof or roof of
similar style shall be clad with tile, slate, concrete
shingles, copper or pre-finished metal panels in a
thickness not less than recommended by the Sheet
Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National
Association (SMACNA).
(3) Height: Parapet walls shall be a minimum 30" above the
exterior horizontal roof surface and no less than 6"
above the highest point of all equipment to be
screened.
b. Screen Wall
(1) Appearance: Screen walls shall be of a solid, continuous
construction, completely surrounding the rooftop
equipment to be screened. Entry into the screened
area shall be provided by means of a hatch or blind
entrance. A concealed, flush door finished to match
the screen wall shall also be permitted provided the
door reverse handed (swings out from equipment
area). (See Figure 1)
Screen walls shall be constructed of the same
materials used in the building walls or a material that
visually appears to be similar and compatible as
recommended by the Architectural Review Board.
An opening for required ventilation at the bottom of
the screen shall be permitted provided the required
parapet wall is of sufficient height to completely
screen the opening between the flat surface of the
roof and the bottom of the screen. The bottom of
the screen shall be a minimum of 6" below the top of
the parapet wall. (See Figure 2)
(2) Quantity: One or more separate screen walls in conjunction
with a parapet wall may be utilized provided
construction is in compliance with the provisions of
this Section. (See Figure 4A)
(3) Location: The minimum distance between individual screens
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 15
shall be 100' if multiple screen walls are to be used
on the same building. No portion of a screen wall
shall be closer than its height to a parapet wall. (See
Figure 4B)
c. Penthouse
(1) Appearance: A penthouse in conjunction with a parapet wall may
be utilized. The penthouse shall have the same
number of walls and be of the same basic design as
the building itself and have a roof over the entire
structure except that the roof or a portion thereof
may be omitted if an opening is required for
ventilation. (See Figure 5)
Louvers, windows and doors shall be permitted in
the penthouse provided the finish is a compatible or
harmonious color with the penthouse walls.
No rooftop equipment shall be installed on the roof
of the penthouse or extend above the roof line.
(2) Quantity: One or more separate penthouse in conjunction with
a parapet wall may be utilized provided construction
is in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
(3) Location: The minimum distance between individual
penthouse screens shall be 100' if multiple
penthouses are to be used on the same building.
No portion of a screen wall shall be closer than its
height to a parapet wall.
2. GROUND AND WALL MOUNTED EXTERIOR EQUIPMENT:
a. Public Utility Equipment in a Public Right-of-Way:All equipment shall
be screened in accordance with the Landscape Regulations of the
Village Code pertaining to public right-of-ways.
b. Exterior Equipment on Private Property: Single Family Detached
Residential
(1) New Construction
(a) Equipment: All electric, water, gas, cable, data,
communication and any other meter, line, and
miscellaneous equipment shall be installed on that side
facade of a structure which most closely parallels an interior
side yard setback. In no instance shall equipment be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 16
installed in a required yard setback or on a front or rear
facade of a structure. (See Figure 6)
(b) Service Lines: To the extent that it is practical, all utility
service lines shall be placed parallel to each other and at a
distance as close to one another as safe practice will
permit. Above ground service lines shall not be permitted.
(c) Service Connections: Connections between outside meter
fittings and inside service devices shall be installed without
the use of concealed fittings.
(2) Existing Residences: Any new service lines or connections, upgrades
to existing lines or connections, or placement of existing lines
underground must be in full compliance with the regulations for new
construction.
c. Exterior Equipment on Private Property: All Other Uses
All methods of screening shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review
Board and applicable utility companies, and approved by the Corporate
Authorities prior to the time a building permit is issued for installation of
said equipment.
(1) New Construction
(a) Equipment:
(i) Equipment which is intended primarily for use by one
business, company, association, user, or entity shall
be located on the least prominent side of a building
and
! completely underground, or
! within one recessed area per structure which is
designed to be indistinguishable from the
building facade, or
! within the limits of a screen wall attached to, and
integrated into the principal structure on the lot,
or
! screened in full compliance with the Landscape
Regulations.
(ii) Each piece of exterior equipment shall be screened in
the same manner and in the closest possible proximity
to all other pieces of equipment without causing safety
concerns.
(iii) All electric, water, gas, cable, data, communication
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 17
and any other meter, line, and miscellaneous
equipment shall be installed on that side facade of a
structure which most closely parallels an interior side
yard setback. In no instance shall equipment be
installed in a required yard setback.
(b) Service Lines: To the extent that it is practical, all utility
service lines shall be placed parallel to each other and at a
distance as close to one another as safe practice will
permit. Above ground service lines shall not be permitted.
(c) Service Connections: Connections between outside meter
fittings and inside service devices shall be installed without
the use of concealed fittings.
(2) Existing Structures
Installation of exterior equipment on existing structures shall be in
conformance with all of the regulations for new construction and shall
be mounted at a height which does not exceed the first floor of the
structure to which it is attached.
3. POLE MOUNTED EXTERIOR EQUIPMENT: Equipment mounted to poles
shall not be permitted except by Special Use in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Regulations, and only in the event extenuating
circumstances exist and are substantiated by the owner and are approved
by the Corporate Authorities. The location of such pole(s) shall be
restricted to that area beyond the principal plane of the rear or interior side
building facade and shall not be located in any required yard setback.
Provisions for screening shall be in accordance with the recommendations
of the Department of Community Development and shall be reviewed as a
part of the Special Use process.
E. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING EQUIPMENT: Buildings presently without any
screening or with screening of exterior equipment which are not in full
compliance with the requirements of Section 5-1-10 of this Code, shall be
subject to the requirements of this subsection.
For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this subsection, any repair,
maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement or addition to a structure
within a 36 month time period shall be used to determine if the improvements
exceed 50% of the assessed value of the structure.
1. LAWFULLY EXISTING EXTERIOR EQUIPMENT AND STRUCTURES
Exterior Equipment which was installed in accordance with a legally issued
permit on file in the Village, or the property owner can produce written
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 18
approval that the building and related equipment were legally permitted and
erected prior to the introduction of screening regulations in 1987 shall not
be required to install screens or parapet walls except as outlined below.
Repair, maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement, and additions
related to existing equipment or structures shall however, be only in
accordance with the provisions below.
a. Repair and Maintenance
Repairs to, and maintenance of existing equipment and screens shall
be permitted.
b. Modification and Alteration to Equipment
(1) To Equipment: Any modification or alteration to existing equipment
shall only be permitted when the change makes the equipment more
conforming with the regulations of this Section.
(2) To Screen: Any modification or alteration to an existing screen
wall, parapet wall, or penthouse shall be constructed with the same
materials and in the same manner as the original screen.
(3) To Building: Existing buildings which are proposed to be modified
or altered greater than, or equal to 50% of the assessed value of the
building shall be required to conform to all of the regulations of this
Section.
c. Replacement of Equipment
Replacement of existing equipment shall be permitted provided the
size, height and location of the new equipment is the same as that
previously approved and installed. Proposed replacement equipment
which is larger in size shall be permitted provided it is screen in full
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
d. Addition
(1) Of Equipment: Installation of additional equipment to an existing
structure or a previously developed site shall be screened in the most
applicable practical manner described by this Code. The addition of
new equipment shall be located in close proximity to existing
equipment, and all proposed screens shall enclose the greatest
amount of equipment feasible.
(2) Of Floor Area to the Building: Installation of a new parapet around
the perimeter of an existing flat roof building and other screening shall
be required at the time proposed modifications or alterations to a
building are greater than or equal to 50% of the assessed value of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 19
building.
2. ELIMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING EQUIPMENT AND
SCREENS: A building presently without any screening or with
screening which is not in full compliance with the requirements of this
Section of the Village Code shall be made to fully comply with the
requirements at the time proposed modifications or alterations to the
building are greater than or equal to 50% of the assessed value of the
building.
Buildings constructed with a 24" parapet wall (prior to the 1995
Amendment), shall not be required to increase the height of the
parapet wall to 30". All existing and proposed equipment, however,
shall be required to be 6" below the top of the parapet wall.
5-1-11: COMMERCIAL CONTRACTORS:
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTOR : Any person, firm or corporation who
engages in, for profit, the business of providing labor and/or labor and
materials for any construction, repair or remodeling work within the Village,
including, but not limited to the construction, repair or remodeling of any
building, structure, fence, driveway or sidewalk; and Any person, firm or
corporation who engages in, for profit, the business of caring for or
maintaining landscaping and ornamental plantings including, but not limited to,
the care and maintenance of grass, trees and bushes.
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTORS/WASTEHAULERS: Any person, firm or
corporation collecting and/or disposing of waste or debris except the following:
1. Any landscaper who only hauls landscape waste generated from his
daily landscape services; or
2. Any plumber or contractor whose daily operations only generate
minor amounts of clean construction or demolition waste/debris
which can and are hauled away on a daily basis in a pick-up truck or
similar sized vehicle.
B. No Commercial Contractor or Commercial Contractors Wastehaulers, as such
terms are defined in Section 5-1-11 of this Code, shall perform any work,
provide any service or deliver any materials to any construction site on any
Sunday or federally-recognized holiday on which the Village administrative
offices are closed, or before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., Monday to Friday,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 20
and before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday.
5-1-12: STAGING; PARKING:
A. No more than two (2) Second Division motor vehicles, as such are defined by
Section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, will be permitted on Village streets
(defined as streets within the Village boundaries) at any one time while such
vehicles are temporarily parked and/or staging awaiting access to any
construction site. Additional Second Division motor vehicles must park and/or
stage outside of the Village boundaries. The foregoing limitation shall not
apply to Second Division motor vehicles performing work on and within the
subject construction site and which are located within the site construction
fencing, if applicable. When the two (2) Second Division motor vehicles
permitted on Village streets are parked or staging opposite from the permitted
side of the street, as described in paragraph C below, a traffic flagger must be
provided to manage traffic control. Second Division motor vehicles designed
for carrying passengers and First Division motor vehicles may not be stored on
a construction site for greater than twenty-four (24) hours.
B. Construction vehicles and passenger vehicles belonging to commercial
contractors, their employees and subcontractors are prohibited from staging or
parking in the bulb of any cul-de-sac. A variance from this prohibition may be
granted on a case-by-case basis following certification from the Police
Department that a safe means of ingress and egress can be maintained for the
benefit of public vehicles.
C. Commercial Contractors, their employees and subcontractors may only park
on Village streets during the course of construction under a valid building
permit. Such parking is permitted only on the even-numbered side of the street
on even-numbered days and on the odd-numbered side of the street on
odd-numbered days.
D. Commercial contractors shall use their best efforts to avoid parking or staging
immediately opposite from any driveway and in conflict with mailboxes erected
adjacent to the right-of-way.
5-1-13: SITE CONSTRUCTION FENCING: Site construction fencing meeting The
following criteria shall be installed and affixed to the ground prior to the
commencement of any construction activity whenever (I) a building permit is
issued for the construction of any principal structure on a parcel, or the
remodeling or renovation of more than 25% of an existing principal structure as
measured by floor area, and such parcel is located within two hundred and fifty
feet (250') of existing improvements on separate parcels, or (ii) the Community
Development Department finds extraordinary secondary impacts will arise from
the specific construction activity proposed.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-1: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 21
A. Whenever construction materials, vehicles or equipment are stored on-site in a
location viewable from the right of way, site construction fencing must have an
opaque wind screen, in forest green, black, or other opaque color that
complements the existing conditions on the site.
B. When applicable, the wind screen must be securely fastened to and completely
obscure the site construction fencing.
C. Site construction fencing shall completely enclose the work area described in
the approved construction documents and be contained within the permitted
building area on such parcel; provided that where construction is permitted in a
required yard such fencing shall be erected as far away from the nearest
boundary as possible. Site construction fencing must not be erected in a
manner which obstructs the visibility of vehicular traffic at an intersection.
D. The erection of site construction fencing shall not relieve the Owner or
Commercial Contractor from complying with Title 13 of the Village Code or
from erecting storm water management control measures when
applicable.(Amd. Ord. 07-2974-02, eff. 2/26/07) (Ord. Amd. 07-3000-28, eff.
8/13/07)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Required Permits
5-2-2: Building Permit Applications
5-2-2-1: Building Permit Expiration
5-2-3: Certificates of Occupancy
5-2-3-1: Temporary Certificates of Occupancies
5-2-4: Inspections
5-2-5: Security Deposit Requirements
5-2-1: REQUIRED PERMITS:
A. Building Permit: A building permit is required prior to starting any
construction, alteration, addition, removal, demolition or restoration of any
building or structure or its service equipment.
B. Certificate of Occupancy: A certificate of occupancy is required prior to
occupying or using any building, space, or structure for which a building
permit has been issued.
5-2-2: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS: The following procedure shall be
A As required by the Building Official, three (3) to six (6) sets of construction
documents and specifications shall be submitted to the Department of
Community Development of the Village, along with two (4) current prints of
the Plat of Survey showing the exact location of the building or structure on
the lot. The Plat of Survey shall also show all easements, required building
setbacks, lot dimensions, street name, north point, lot and block number
and subdivision name.
A Site Grading plan shall also be submitted for approval by the
Village. The Site Grading plan shall be in accordance with Chapter 8
of Title 5 of this code.
A Construction Staging plan shall be submitted for approval by the Village.
The Construction Staging plan shall depict the location of Site Construction
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 2
Fencing, construction dumpsters, portable toilets and other semi-permanent
construction structures and equipment. For new construction, all features
described on the Constructing Staging plan shall be depicted as they will be
placed after the foundation is poured. (Amd. Ord. 07-2974-02, eff. 2/26/07)
B. The first review comments will be provided to the Building Permit applicant,
by the Building Official within three (3) weeks for residential plans or within
six (6) weeks for multiple-family, commercial or industrial plans.
C. If plans are found not to conform to Village codes and ordinances, the
Building Official will provide the applicant with the review comments setting
forth the deficiencies. If the plans are in conformance, they will be approved
and the applicant will be notified of the fees due the Village. Approval of the
plans does not relieve the applicant from the obligation to comply with all
codes and ordinances of the Village.
D. Notice Required:
1. For all permits where site construction fencing shall be required
as a condition on commencement of construction, the applicant
shall provide written notice to all persons to whom the current real
estate tax bills are sent, as shown on the records of the Vernon
Township Assessor's office, for all lots any part of which lie within
two hundred and fifty feet (250') of the property lines of the lot for
which an application has been filed. Such written notice shall
give (I) the number, if any, assigned to the application, (ii) the
common address of the parcel or parcels involved in the
application, (iii) the name and daytime telephone number of the
applicant, (iv) the name and daytime telephone number of the
person responsible for supervising the work on a daily basis, and
(v) a brief description of the proposed improvements.
All such notices must be sent no more than fifteen (15) days
following the date the application has been filed. Notices shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The
applicant shall file one copy of the notice and a sworn affidavit
containing a complete list of the names and last known addresses
of all property owners entitled to notice and served, and attach
thereto copies of all Asender=s receipts@ as documentation of
compliance with this provision. Such affidavit shall be filed with
the Lincolnshire Building and Zoning Department not more than
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 3
four (4) days following the date such notices were mailed.
2. Exemptions.
a. For any subdivision or planned unit development which has
been granted final approval within the preceding six (6)
months, the foregoing notice requirement shall apply only for
the first building permit application. In the event more than
six months elapse between building permit applications in
such subdivision the foregoing notice requirements must be
repeated.
b. The foregoing notice requirements shall be waived in the
event the subject parcel or parcels were subject to a public
hearing under Title 6 of the Village Code for which a notice
of hearing was sent within the 90 days preceding the date on
which the application is filed.
E. After payment of the fees to the Village Collector; demonstration of
compliance with the notice requirements in paragraph (D); submittals are
approved by the Village; and a pre-construction meeting has taken place (if
required), the Building Permit will be issued and must be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.(Ord. Amd. 07-2974-02, eff. 02/26/07)
5-2-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT EXPIRATION:
A. Completion of Work: Every permit issued shall remain valid unless (i) the
work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after the
permit is issued, (ii) the work authorized by such permit is suspended after
the time when the work is commenced, or (iii) if the work is not completed
within 12 months after permit issuance. A temporary Certificate of
Occupancy, or a Village approved final inspection report if a Certificate of
Occupancy is not required, shall be the document verifying the time of
completion. The building official is authorized to grant, at his or her
reasonable discretion, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more
than 120 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated. Justifiable cause shall be demonstrated by
providing the following information; (a) statement of progress to date, (b)
reasons for delay/extension, and (c) a projected completion date. Any
subsequent extension request which delays completion of construction
beyond the applicant=s projected completion date shall require evidence of
new reasonable delays. Justifiable cause shall not include solely economic
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 4
reasons. Each extension shall be accompanied by a Permit Renewal fee as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
Title 1 of this Code. Building official shall retain the right to extend the initial
term for building permits if it is determined that construction of the proposed
building, progressing at a reasonable and consistent pace, is expected to
extend beyond twelve months. A permit that expires without an approved
extension shall also be subject to a permit expiration fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code. Any construction taking place after the expiration date will require a
new permit with accompanying new fees. In addition, all newly permitted
work, and any permitted work legally continuing beyond 36 months from
date of original permit issuance will be subject to the currently adopted
codes.
For the purpose of this section, work shall be considered Asuspended@ if less
than one sixth of the work authorized by the permit is completed during any
consecutive 120 day period.
B. Removal of Improvements: Within 30 days after the expiration of a permit, if
work has not progressed to a point of 50% completion or greater as
determined by the Building official, the contractor/owner/applicant shall be
responsible for removing any improvements constructed pursuant to the
permit and restore the site to its original condition or to a condition
acceptable to the building official. (Ord. Amd. 09-3115-38, eff. 11/9/09)
5-2-3: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A Certificates Required:
1. Any new, remodeled or moved building, space, or structure, to be used
for commercial or residential purposes, or any commercial space
requiring tenant change, change of ownership, or occupancy change
shall not be occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued
by the Building Official as hereinafter provided.
2. Builders (contractors), developers, carpenters, or other tradesmen shall
not deliver possession of a new, remodeled or moved building or
structure to be used for residence purposes to the proposed residents of
such building or structure until a certificate for such occupancy has been
issued by the Building Official as hereinafter provided.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 5
3. Realtors, leasing agents or owners of a new, remodeled or moved
building or structure to be used for residence purposes shall not deliver
possession of the whole or any part of such building or structure to any
tenant or lessee until a certificate for such occupancy has been issued
by the Building Official as hereinafter provided;
B. Requirements for Occupancy: Certificates of occupancy for any new,
remodeled or relocated building shall not be issued unless:
1. The building and site comply with all applicable provisions of the
Building, Subdivision and Zoning Codes of the Village and/or applicable
pre-annexation agreements.
2. All building fees, inspection fees and other fees shall have been paid to
the Village.
3. Water meter and other connections to all utilities shall have been
completed and approved unless waived by the express terms of a preannexation
agreement. (Ord. 85-860-44)
4. Driveways shall be constructed in compliance with Section 8-3-14, of the
Village Code, Titled Driveway Requirements. (Amd. Ord. 09-3101-24, eff.
06/22/09)
5. This Section shall apply to all buildings and structures in the Village,
including but not limited to residential, commercial and office buildings or
structures.
6. Certificates of Occupancy for nonresidential buildings will be issued for the
basic building structure in accordance with the requirements of this Title
and Section. Each tenant of a basic building structure which is allowed for
office building use under the zoning regulations in Title 6 of this Code, must
also be issued a Certificate of Occupancy in accordance with the
requirements of this Title and Section.
C. Filing Application, Fee: When construction has been completed, the owner or
his agent shall file with the Department of Community Development an
application for a Certificate of Occupancy, which shall be accompanied by the
payment of a fee, as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth
in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Upon such application being filed, an
inspection of the building or structure will be made, and if the same is in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 6
compliance with the provisions of this Section and all other applicable
provisions of this Title, a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued. If such
certificate is not issued in accordance with the provisions hereof, the
Department of Community Development shall provide the applicant with written
documentation stating the reasons for not issuing the certificate.
D. Site Grading Plan: At least ten (10) working days prior to submission of the
application for a Certificate of Occupancy, the ?as constructed? site grading
plan must be submitted to the Department of Community Development, in
accordance with Chapter 8 of this Title. (Ord. 90-1130-14)
E. Additional Requirements: When it has been determined by the Department of
Community Development that each of the above conditions has been complied
with, the following procedure must, as a condition to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, also be completed:
1. Deleted.
2. Deleted
3. Deleted
4. The Village, upon the issuance of an executed certificate of occupancy to
the property owner, shall file a certified copy of said certificate with the
County Assessor of Lake County. (Ord. 90-1167-51)
5-2-3-1: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY: A Temporary Certificate
of Occupancy may be applied for; 1) when all construction has been
completed and all that remains to be finished is the final driveway surface,
site grading and landscaping in accordance with Chapter 8 of this Title, 2) or
the outstanding issues remaining are found, in the sole discretion of the
Building Official, to be non-life safety related, or to be of a magnitude that, in
the opinion of the Building Official, could be completed in no more than thirty
(30) days for residential structures, or sixty (60) days for nonresidential
structures. The time allotted and the work allowed to be postponed shall be
determined by the Building Official. Final inspections will be performed, by
the Village, and a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. A written application formrequesting the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy must be submitted to the Department of Community Development
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 7
together with a filing fee, as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
B. The applicant must submit a written estimate of cost to complete such
unfinished work and said written estimate of cost must be in a form satisfactory
to the Building Official. The applicant must also post a cash deposit to the
Village in an amount equivalent to the cost of completing or remedying all items
stipulated in the estimate of cost to complete and in the written statement
required in subsection C of this Section. The amount shall not be less than as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code per residential structure and as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
per nonresidential structure. An irrevocable letter of credit may be accepted by
the Village , at the sole discretion of the Building Official or his designate.
However, the irrevocable letter of credit must be from a sound and reputable
banking or financial institution (selected by the applicant and approved in
writing by the Village) authorized to issue such irrevocable letter of credit,
which irrevocable letter of credit shall be substantially in the form contained in
Appendix I of Chapter 7 of Title 3 of this Code.
C. Applicant must also submit a written statement detailing the unfinished work,
which must be completed and be subject to the approval of the Building
Official, in order to bring the structure/site in question into full compliance with
the approved Building Permit construction documents. This written statement
must include the date the structure is to be occupied and the name, address
and telephone number of the prospective occupant, and the number of
employees, if nonresidential. All statements must be signed by both the
contractor/developer and the purchaser of the structure and it must be duly
attested by a notary public.
D. A written agreement, signed by both the contractor/developer and purchaser of
the structure, must also be filed with the Village, stating that all unfinished
items, as listed in a document entitled Conditions of Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy as provided by the Building Official, will be completed on or before
the date specified within the Conditions of Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
E. The occupant of the structure for which any Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy is issued, immediately upon issuance thereof, shall prominently
display on a window or door so as to be visible from the street and legible to a
person standing on the ground in front of the structure, the ? Temporary
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 8
Certificate of Occupancy?. The applicant shall display said notice continuously
until a Final Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
F. When the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy expires, it shall thereafter be
unlawful to occupy the area governed by the Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy until a Final Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.
G A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall not be renewed or reissued except
by approval of the Building Official, if by his/her determination, there is a
reasonable cause for the applicant's failure to complete the necessary work
within the effective period of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
H. In the event that the required unfinished items are not completed in full
compliance with the approved documents, by the specified date, the Village
may, at its option, cause the work to be completed and pay for the cost of said
work out of the cash bond deposited with the Village Clerk. Any cost to the
Village to complete said unfinished site grading and landscaping in excess of
the cash bond shall become a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that within sixty (60)
days after any such excess cost is incurred by the Village; the Village Clerk
shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in Lake
County, Illinois, and the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file
such notices of such liens. Said notice of such lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out a description of the real estate upon or for which the work
was completed, the amounts of monies due for such work and the date or
dates when such excess costs were incurred and became due. Upon payment
of the costs by the owner of such property, or persons interested therein, after
the notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village, as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code release fee has been paid in addition to the cost incurred by the
Village including the cost of recording the notice of lien.
I. In the event that the unfinished items are not completed in full compliance with
the approved documents, prior to expiration of the Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy, the Village shall deduct as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code from the cash bond on
deposit with the Village Clerk to reimburse the Village for its additional
administrative expenses caused by the failure to complete such work. This
shall be in addition to any other fees, penalties, or remedies available to the
Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 9
5-2-4: INSPECTIONS
A. Required: All permit work and the premises on which the permit work is being
performed shall be inspected by the Building Inspector or the appropriate
Building Official from time to time during the course of the work until a Final
Certificate of Occupancy is issued. The purpose of the inspection shall be to
determine that the permit work is being performed and has been completed in
conformity with the approved construction documents and this code. No
inspections shall be performed for any work or activity that is the subject of a
permit that has lapsed per section 105.5 of the International Building Code,
unless such permit has been revived pursuant to the provisions of said section
105.5.
B. Responsibility of Contractor: The contractor shall notify the Department of
Community Development at least twenty four (24) hours before one of the
required inspections is needed.
C. Concealed Work: The Building Official may require any work concealed prior to
inspection and approval to be uncovered to the extent the Building Official
deems it necessary to accommodate complete examination and approval of
the work.
D. Correction of Work: The Building Official may require the removal or
replacement of any work or equipment which has not been performed,
constructed or installed in compliance with this code.
E. Foundation Inspections; Spot Survey: A spot survey certified by an Illinois
Registered Land Surveyor showing the exact location on the lot and full
dimensions of a structure=s foundation and the top of foundation elevations
shall be required for all new primary structures upon completion of the
structure=s foundation.
5-2-5: SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Deposit Required: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, where the
construction done thereunder will require the use of heavy construction
equipment, including, but not limited to, trucks, sod trailers, concrete trucks,
bulldozers, backhoes, ditch diggers, etc., a security deposit in the form of a
cash deposit or letter of credit, in an amount determined by the Village
Engineer based upon the following criteria, shall be deposited with the Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 10
Clerk by the authorized agent whose signature appears on the application for
the building permit.
The deposit will be based on the following criteria:
-Number and type of water connections
-Number and type of sanitary sewer connections
-Number and type of storm sewer connections
-Lineal feet of curb removed and replaced
-Number of roadway cuts
-Acres of property to be protected by erosion and sediment control
The amount of the deposit will be calculated using the security deposit
worksheet prepared by the Public Works Department. The worksheet shall be
reviewed annually at the beginning of each fiscal year by the Village Engineer.
(Amd. Ord. 06-2032-24, eff. 05/08/06)
B. Purpose of Deposit:
1. Such security deposit shall be for the purpose of insuring against damage
to property for the Village by the general contractor or any subcontractor or
employee that he may engage to perform work under the building permit.
Damage to Village property shall include, but is not limited to, accumulation
of dirt, gravel, sand, etc. on street pavement, damage to street surface
(including, but not limited to, damage resulting from construction equipment
and vehicles), curbs, water mains, fire hydrants, sewer lines, traffic signs,
water courses, etc.
2. If and when such damage has occurred in the opinion of the Village
Engineer, the authorized agent shall be notified in writing and shall be
requested to make the necessary repairs.
3. If such repair has not been completed within the time period spelled out in
the written notice, the Village shall make such repairs, and shall assess the
cost of repairs against the owner of the property and the Village may offset
all or part of the security deposit against said cost. The contractor,
developer, and owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for
any excess payments. Such payments may be deducted from the security
deposit.
C. Refunding of Deposit: Upon expiration of one year after completion of all work
under each separate building permit and the issuance of a certificate of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 5-2: BUILDING PERMITS & INSPECTIONS
Revised 12/13/2009 Page 11
occupancy therefor, the security deposit, either the full amount or the amount
remaining, shall be released to the authorized agent; provided, that any and all
damage has been corrected. (Ord. 92-1235-13)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 1 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Fees for Permits
5-3-2: Reimbursement of Professional Review Fees
5-3-2A: Not-For-Profit Fees
5-3-3: Additional Fees
5-3-4: Water and Sewer Connection Charges
5-3-4-1: Connection Charges Outside Corporate Limits
5-3-1: FEES FOR PERMITS
The fee for a building permit to construct, alter or repair any building or other structure or its service
equipment in the Village shall be as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code (Ord. Amd. 96-1467-51, eff. 12/9/96).
A. Applicants for a building permit shall submit the estimated construction cost of the proposed
improvements. The Building Official shall use the most recent copy of the International Building
Code building valuation data report on file for verifying any estimates. The Building Official may
request a verified statement of actual costs upon completion of the work. In the event the actual cost
exceeds the estimate, an additional fee based upon such actual costs in accordance with this Section
shall be paid.
5-3-2: REIMBURSEMENT OF PROFESSIONAL REVIEW FEES
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, applicants for a building permit shall be required to
remain in compliance with Title 1, Chapter 8, Article D, as a condition of receiving a building permit
(Amd. Ord. 07-2981-09, eff. 4/23/07).
5-3-2A: NOT FOR PROFIT FEES (Ord. 94-1345-29, eff. 7/11/94)
A. Any local government serving all or any part of the Village, or any charitable organization,may file
an application with the Village for a waiver of fees imposed by the Village, excluding out-of-pocket
Village expenses. The application for waiver of fees shall be in writing and shall contain all the
information necessary to determine the applicant’s eligibility under this Ordinance and identify the
fees and amounts which the applicant is requesting to be waived. The Board of Trustees shall review
the application, satisfy itself of the sufficiency of the application and eligibility of the applicant, and
formally approve or disapprove the application at a regular meeting of the Village Board of Trustees
as part of the Consent Agenda, unless otherwise pulled for consideration under Items of General
Business per Section 1-5-3-5-8 of the Lincolnshire Village Code. Applications shall be filed with the
Community & Economic Development Department at least 14 (14) days before the date of the
scheduled meeting at which the application is to be considered initially. There shall be no waiver of
fees in excess of $5,000 per development or project.
B. DEFINITIONS
CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION
Any not-for-profit corporation, association, or foundation organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 2 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
safety, literary, educational, and/or cruelty to children or animals
purposes. For the purposes of this ordinance, homeowners associations
do not qualify as charitable organizations and may not seek fee waivers.
FEES Fees that would otherwise be required for, or incurred in connection with,
planning, zoning, and building applications and permits in regard to
construction, restoration, replacement, renovation, remodeling, addition, or
repair of a structure, but not including sewer and water connection fees and
fees or charges recovering direct out-of-pocket Village expenses.
OUT-OF-POCKET
VILLAGE
EXPENSES
Shall mean any costs incurred by the Village for outside services of
independent contractors related to the processing of any agreements,
petitions, or permits, including, but not limited to, postage, legal fees, costs
of legal notices, and the cost of any inspections or analysis required by the
Village from outside consultants.
5-3-3: ADDITIONAL FEES
A. Lake County Sanitary Sewer Fee: Applicants for connection to, or modification of, the Village
sanitary sewer system shall pay connection fees as required by the County of Lake. The Village
Engineer shall collect such fee on behalf of the County and transfer such funds to the County on a
schedule in accordance with the requirements of the County.
B. Outside Agency & Consultant Fees: Applicants for Building Permits shall reimburse the Village for all
costs incurred by contracted or specialized reviewers necessary to ensure that the application, design,
plans, and specifications meet the requirements of the Village. The Village reserves the right to
request a specialized review for any project submitted. In the event that such a review is required, the
Village shall make every effort to inform the applicant of the need for a specialized review that might
not typically be required, prior to securing the consultant and/or agency for said review.
C. Recapture Fees: Applicants shall pay any and all recapture fees prior to issuance of any permit
and/or at the time required for a plat of subdivision, in accordance with the applicable Recapture
Agreement (Amd. Ord. 09-3090-13, eff. 03/23/09).
5-3-4: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
A. Basis for Connection Charge: Water and sewer connection charges within the Village corporate limits
shall be calculated on the basis of equivalent dwelling units (EDUs). Each dwelling unit, as defined
by the Zoning Definitions as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 7 of this Code, is considered one EDU.
EDUs for all nonresidential buildings are determined according to a schedule based upon the
type/use of building.
B. Formula for Determining Annual Water and Sewer Connection Charges: Annually, prior to the start
of each fiscal year, the present value of the combined water and sewer system of the Village shall be
reviewed and set for the upcoming fiscal year. The Village Engineer, in consultation with the Finance
Director, shall determine the total value of the combined water and sewer system at such time based
upon the following:
Current replacement value of all accepted water and sanitary sewer improvements less accumulated
depreciation and less outstanding indebtedness (hereinafter referred to as CRV). For developments
under construction, the value of the public improvements shall be prorated based upon the
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 3 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
percentage of developed land.
The current replacement value of all improvements to the system shall be determined by the Village
Engineer by estimating the current construction costs and shall include all ancillary costs such as
engineering, land financing, legal, and all other costs of any kind. Such current construction costs
shall be estimated in accordance with the generally accepted standards in the engineering profession
for estimating costs of proposed projects (Ord. 89-1116-83).
C. Water Connection Charge: The connection charge for connecting to the water system of the Village
within its corporate limits shall be in accordance with the fees as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code (Ord. 90-1134-18; Amd. Ord. 92-1245-23;
Amd. Ord. 93-1283-13, eff. 5/10/93).
The minimum fee shall be the cost for one equivalent dwelling unit (Ord. 90-1161-45).
D. Sewer Connection Charge: The connection charge for connecting to the sewer system of the Village
within its corporate limits shall be in accordance with the fees as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code (Ord. 90-1134-18; Amd. Ord. 92-1245-23;
Amd. Ord. 93-1283-13, eff 5/10/93).
The minimum fee shall be the cost for one equivalent dwelling unit (Ord. 90-1161-45).
E. Equivalent Dwelling Units:
1. Basis for Mean Annual Expected Usage Coefficients: The number of equivalent dwelling
units used to determine water and sewer connection charges for nonresidential buildings
shall be based upon "A System of Computerized Models for Calculating and Evaluating
Municipal Water Requirements and Forecasting Municipal Water Requirements" prepared
by Hittman Associates, Inc. for the Office of Water Resources Research, United States
Department of the Interior. The “Commercial and Industrial Categories and Usage
Coefficient Values for the Library of Water Usage Parameters, tables AIII.2 through AIII.6”,
delineate the expected usage coefficients for the mean annual water usage expected in
commercial and industrial categories. These values shall be used in the formula to determine
EDUs. Due to the length of the documents referred to above, three (3) copies of said
documents shall remain on file for public inspection in the Lincolnshire Village Hall. These
documents are hereby adopted by reference.
2. Average Daily Water Usage for Residential Users: Annually, prior to the start of each fiscal
year, the average daily water usage for residential users for the previous five (5) calendar
years shall be determined by the Village Engineer. This shall be accomplished by dividing the
total volume of residential water metered for each of the previous five (5) calendar years by
the total number of residential customers at each of the five (5) calendar years' end. The five
(5) year average shall then be determined by adding the results of the five (5) individual
calendar year's averages and dividing by five (5).
3. Equivalent Dwelling Unit Formula: The equivalent dwelling units for each non-residential
building shall be determined by using the following formula:
Category parameter multiplied by the planned annual expected usage divided by the average
daily water use for residential users equals the equivalent dwelling units.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 4 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
For the purpose of determining fees, calculated EDUs shall be rounded to the nearest whole
EDU.
For example, for a new one hundred thousand (100,000) square foot office building, the
formula would be as follows assuming three hundred (300) gallons per day is the average
daily water usage for a single-family dwelling unit:
100,000 square feet X 0.093 / 300 = 31 EDUs (Ord. 89-1116-83)
4. In the case where a proposed use is not shown in “The Commercial and Industrial Categories
and Usage Coefficient Values for the Library of Water Usage Parameters, tables AIII.2
through AIII.6”, the Village Manager may, at his or her sole discretion, authorize the use of
other empirical data to determine the usage parameter. Such data may consist of engineering
studies completed by a licensed Illinois Professional Engineer, data from similar facilities, or
other data as determined to be acceptable. The Village may also rely on the data for
substantially similar uses which share a common North American Industry Classification
System code.
The Village reserves the right to adjust the parameters within two and one-half (2.5) full
years of occupancy of any nonresidential building so that the computed equivalent dwelling
units equals the actual equivalent dwelling units as determined from actual water usage. The
connection charges may then be adjusted based upon the revised computed equivalent
dwelling units and the connection charge as set forth in the Lincolnshire Village Code at the
time the original connection charges were computed (Ord. 00-1730-38, eff. 8/14/00).
F. Time of Payment: Water and sewer connection charges shall be due and payable at time of building
permit issuance for any building. If the category or parameter of any nonresidential building shall
change, at any time, the number of equivalent dwelling units shall be recalculated. If said new
category increases the number of EDUs, the difference between the original connection charges paid
and the new charges owed will be charged to the new user (Ord. 92-1245-23). The Village bears no
obligation to reimburse a new user if the new category decreases the number of EDUs from the
previous or original use.
G. The following information has been taken from the “Commercial and Industrial Categories and
Usage Coefficient Values for the Library of Water Usage Parameters” and shall be used in calculating
connection fees:
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 5 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
Commercial Categories and Usage Coefficient Values for
the Library of Water Usage Parameters
Date
Identification
Name
Commercial
Category Parameters
Coefficients
(gallons/day/unit of parameter)
Expected Usage Coefficients Mean Annual
BARB Barber Shops Barber Chairs 54.6
BEUT Beauty Shops Station 269.0
DPOT Bus-Rail Depots Sq. Ft. 3.33
CARW Car Washes Inside Sq. Ft. 4.78
CHUR Churches Member 0.138
CLUB Golf-Swim Clubs Member 22.2
BOWL Bowling Alleys Alley 133
COLG Colleges Resid. Student 106
HOSP Hospitals Bed 346
HOTL Hotels Sq. Ft. 0.256
LNDM Laundromats Sq. Ft. 2.17
LNDY Laundry Sq. Ft. 0.253
MEDL Medical Offices Sq. Ft. 0.618
MOTL Motels Sq. Ft. 0.224
MOVI Drive-In Movies Car Stall 5.3
NURS Nursing Homes Sq. Ft. 133.0
OFFN New Office Bldg. Sq. Ft. 0.093
OFFO Old Office Bldg. Sq. Ft. 0.142
JAIL Jail and Prison Person 133.0
EATN Restaurants Seat 24.2
EATO Drive-In Rest. Car Stalls 109.0
NITE Night Clubs Persons Served 1.33
SALE Retail Space Sale Sq. Ft 0.106
SKLL School, Elementary Student 3.83
SKLH School, High Student 8.02
YMCA YMCA-YWCA Person 33.3
GASS Service Station Inside Sq. Ft. 0.251
THTR Theaters Seat 3.33
Warehouses Sq. Ft. 0.025
Source: “A System of Computerized Models for Calculating and Evaluating Municipal Water Requirements and
Forecasting Municipal Water Requirements”
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 6 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
AIII.4
Industrial Categories and Usage Coefficient Values
for the Library of Water Usage Parameters
S.I.C Number Industrial Category Mean Annual Usage Coefficients*
(gal/day/employee)
201 Meat products 903.890
202 Dairies 791.350
203 Can, frozen food 784.739
204 Grain mills 488.249
205 Bakery Products 220.608
206 Sugar 1433.611
207 Candy 244.306
208 Beverages 1144.868
209 Miscellaneous foods 1077.360
211 Cigarettes 193.613
221 Weaving, cotton 171.434
222 Weaving, synthetics 344.259
223 Weaving, wool 464.439
225 Knitting mills 273.439
226 Textile finish 810.741
227 Floor covering 297.392
228 Yarn-thread mill 63.558
229 Miscellaneous textile 346.976
230 Whl. apparel industry 20.000
242 Saw-planning mill 223.822
243 Millwork 316.420
244 Wood containers 238.000
249 Miscellaneous wood 144.745
251 Home furniture 122.178
259 Furniture fixture 122.178
261 Pulp mills 13494.110
262 Paper mills 2433.856
263 Paperboard mills 2464.478
264 Paper products 435.790
265 Paperboard boxes 154.804
266 Building paper mills 583.355
270 Whl. print industry 15.000
281 Basic chemicals 2744.401
282 Fibers, plastics 864.892
283 Drugs 457.356
284 Soap-toilet goods 672.043
285 Paint allied product 845.725
286 Gumwood chemical 332.895
287 Agriculture chem. 449.836
289 Miscellaneous chemicals 984.415
291 Petroleum refining 3141.100
295 Paving-roofing 829.592
301 Tires and tubes 375.211
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 7 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
302 Rubber footwear 82.592
303 Reclaimed rubber 1031.523
306 Rubber products 371.956
307 Plastic products 527.784
311 Leather tanning 899.500
321 Flat glass 590.140
322 Press-blown glass 340.753
323 Prod. purch. glass 872.246
324 Cement, hydraulic 279.469
325 Structural clay 698.197
326 Pottery products 326.975
327 Cement-plaster 353.787
328 Cut stone prod. 534.789
329 Nonmetallic mineral 439.561
331 Steel rolling 494.356
332 Iron-steel found. 411.052
333 Prime nonferrous 716.626
334 Sec. nonferrous 1016.596
335 Nonferrous rollg. 675.475
336 Nonferrous found. 969.586
339 Prime metal ind. 498.331
341 Metal cans 162.547
342 Cutlery, hardware 459.300
343 Plumbing, heating 411.576
344 Structure, metal 319.875
345 Screw machine 433.193
346 Metal stamping 463.209
347 Metal service 1806.611
348 Fabricated wire 343.367
349 Fabricated metal 271.186
351 Engines, turbines 197.418
352 Farm machinery 320.704
353 Construction equipment 218.365
354 Metalwork, machinery 196.255
355 Special industry machinery 290.494
356 General ind. machinery 246.689
357 Office machines 138.025
358 Service ind. Machine 334.203
359 Miscellaneous machine 238.839
361 Elect. distr. product 272.001
362 Elec. ind. appart. 336.016
363 Home appliances 411.914
364 Light-wiring fixtures 369.592
365 Radio TV receiving 35.763
366 Communication equipment 86.270
367 Electronic comp. 203.289
369 Electric product 393.272
371 Motor vehicles 318.233
372 Aircraft and parts 154.769
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 8 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
373 Ship and boat building 166.074
374 Railroad equipment 238.798
375 Motorcycle, bike 414.859
381 Scientific instruments 181.007
382 Mechanical measure 237.021
384 Medical instrument 506.325
386 Photo equipment 120.253
387 Watches, clocks 164.815
391 Jewelry, silver 306.491
394 Toys, sport goods 213.907
396 Costume jewelry 423.124
398 Miscellaneous manufacturing 258.270
399 Miscellaneous manufacturing 258.270
5-3-4-1: CONNECTION CHARGES OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS
The charge for connection to either the Village's water or the sanitary sewer system for property
outside of the corporate limits shall be an amount equal to one hundred seventy five percent (175%)
of the charge or fee paid for a connection of like nature within the corporate limits; provided,
however, public schools. public libraries, forest preserve districts and other public, governmental
agencies serving the Village shall be required to pay only that amount which would be charged to a
public school or similar public body for a similar connection within the corporate limits of the
Village.
Anyone desiring to connect either to the Village's water or to the sanitary sewer system outside the
corporate limits shall file an application on a form provided by the Village. If the owner of record of
said territory is a land trust, the applicant will comply with the Land Trust Disclosure Ordinance of
the Village by filing concurrently with the application an appropriate land trust disclosure statement.
No such application shall be accepted for filing unless accompanied by a filing fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. The Village will then
review the application and all matters contained therein to determine the sufficiency and accuracy
thereof, and if in proper form and containing all required information the Village will then cause to
be prepared a contract providing for said sewer and water connection and the supplying of water and
sewer service to said real estate. Said contract must then be approved by the Board of Trustees, by
ordinance or resolution authorizing the execution of said contract. Such approval shall be at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees based upon the best interests of the Village at the time of said
application. (Ord. 89-1116-83)
In order for the Village to collect a fair and reasonable charge for connection to the water and
sanitary sewer systems of this Village, the parcels as set forth in Exhibit "A" shall pay to the Village,
prior to connecting to the systems of the Village, the sums as set forth in Exhibit "B" for each such
parcel. Such sums shall be in addition to, and not as a credit against, all other connection or hook-on
fees as may be imposed by other rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance of this Village, or shown by
its fee schedule, the connection fee hereby imposed being directly related to the costs to the Village of
constructing, expanding, and extending the existing systems to accommodate the parcels as set forth
in Exhibit "A". (amd. Ord. 94-1369-53 12/12/94)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 9 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
The allocation of connection fees as set forth in Exhibit "B" is based upon actually incurred as well as
estimated future costs to the Village of constructing, expanding, and extending the water and sewer
systems as determined as of the date of this ordinance. In the event costs as actually incurred by the
Village vary from those estimated, the Village reserves the right, for any parcel for which payment in
full of connection fees has not been received, to modify, alter or amend the allocation of connection
fees to such parcel to reflect the actual costs to the Village of constructing, expanding, and extending
the waterworks and sewerage systems. The Village further reserves the right to increase such
connection fees to reflect any financing and interest costs or other changes which the Village
reasonably determines are to be allocated to the construction, expansion, and extension of said water
and sewer systems.(amd. Ord. 94-1369-53 12/12/94)
The allocation of connection fees (Exhibit "B") is further based upon the presently existing or
anticipated future zoning of such parcels and the anticipated water and sewer requirements related
thereto. In the event any such parcel is zoned differently than anticipated at the time of request for
connection to the Village water or sanitary sewer system, the Village reserves the right to alter or
amend the connection fees for such parcel in order to reflect such change in zoning and water or
sewer requirements. (amd. Ord. 94-1369-53 12/12/94)
This ordinance shall further serve as notice to affected property owners of the additional connection
fees associated with connection of their parcels to the Village water and sewer systems. Affected
property owners must contact the Village in order to determine the adjustment, if any, to the
connection fee figures as set for the herein which will be applicable to any specific parcel, and arising
out of changes in costs, allocation of interest or other charges, changes in zoning, or other similar
costs related to the construction, expansion and extension of the systems.(amd. Ord. 94-1369-53
12/12/94)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 10 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
EXHIBIT A
INDIAN CREEK RECAPTURE MAP
THE REMAINDER OF THIS SHEET LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 5: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES
Page 11 of 11
Revised 11/11/2019
EXHIBIT B
INDIAN CREEK RECAPTURE CALCULATION
Indian Creek Watermain Loop
Actual Cost of Watermain Construction $262,603.04
Total lineal footage of project 6,064 lft
Portion attributed to School District 125 property:
1,801 lft $78,995.00
Remaining portion attributable to properties abutting the Indian Creek Road Watermain Loop:
4,263 lft $183,608.04*
*This amount will be divided among the remaining 33 single family residence properties
Cost per equivalent dwelling unit shall be $5,563.88.
THE REMAINDER OF THIS SHEET LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
SECTION 5-4-1
SECTION 5-4A - ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION 5-4B - PLUMBING CODE
SECTION 5-4C - THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION 5-4D - FIRE CODE
SECTION 5-4E - MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION 5-4F – PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION 5-4G – ACCESSIBILITY CODE
SECTION 5-4H – LIFE SAFETY CODE
SECTION 5-4I – ENERGY CONSERVATION DOE
SECTION 5-4J – FUEL GAS CODE
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Adoption of the Building Code
5-4-2: Conflict with Zoning Ordinance
5-4-3: Amendments to Codes
5-4-4: Additional Provisions
5-4-1: ADOPTION OF THE BUILDING CODE: Pursuant to the authority granted
by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and villages,1 and
further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the Village, there is
hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations of the Village the
2018 International Building Code, published by International Code Council,
Inc. and it shall be henceforth known as the Building Code for the Village,
except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly deleted, modified
or amended. At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference
have been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available
for public use, inspection and examination.
5-4-2: CONFLICT WITH ZONING ORDINANCE: In the event that any provisions
of this Code, or the codes adopted by reference in this Code, are in conflict
with any provision of the Lincolnshire Zoning Code or any amendment
thereto, the latter will prevail and the conflicting provisions of this Code shall
be of no effect. All other ordinances or codes in conflict with this Code are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 80-631-38)
5-4-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: These regulations shall be known as the
Building Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, hereinafter referred to as “this
code”.
1 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
B. Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. “International Plumbing Code” is removed and
replaced with “current Illinois Plumbing Code” The last sentence referencing
the International Private Sewage Disposal Code is deleted in its entirety.
C. Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. R-105.2 Work exempt from permit.
Items 1-13 after “Building” are deleted and replaced by the following;
1- Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar finish work
2- Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases rack, counters and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches in height
D. Section 105.5 Expiration. This section is removed and superseded by Village
Code 5-2-2-1, Building Permit Expiration.
E. Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems shall be deleted in its entirety
F. Section 1612.3 to follow the requirements prescribed by Chapter 7 of Title 5 of
the Village Code.
5-4-4: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS: The following provisions shall be required in
addition to the adopted Building Codes: (Ord. 91-1216-29)
A. The minimum livable floor area per dwelling shall be one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. If the building is more than one story, one
thousand (1,000) square feet of livable area shall be on the ground floor.
B. Deleted – See 104.9.1
C. Deleted – Outdated exterior finish (Ord. 84-816-30)
D. Deleted – See 716.2.6
E. The provisions of Chapter 7 of this Title "Flood Damage Prevention" be and
are hereby incorporated by reference as regulations governing all building
under this Code, and such provisions shall apply to the full extent as if set
forth at length herein. (Ord. 80-641-48)
F. Prohibiting Roof Top Equipment: The installation of all roof top equipment
and ground-installed mechanical equipment shall be in full compliance with
the provisions of Section 5- 1-10 of Title 5 of this Code. (Ord. 82-743-50)
G. Deleted – Outdated flue ordinance (Ord. 91-1216-29)
H. Building foundations required to be protected from the frost shall extend a
minimum of forty-two inches (42") below the final grade.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
I. Substantially improved or remodeled shall refer to all structures that are
remodeled, repaired, or altered, when more than fifty percent (50%) of the
current assessed value, in total, has been expended for such a change or
changes within a continuous ten year time frame.
J. All new construction or structures substantially remodeled, where there is an
occupiable level higher than twenty-five feet (25') or higher than two (2)
stories above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, whichever
is less, shall comply with International Fire Code Section 604.
K. The following requirements shall apply to all new construction or to
structures substantially remodeled, repaired, or altered, except Detached
One and Two Family Dwellings not more than three stories:
1. A manual alarm system (pull stations), shall be installed.
2. A fire department key box shall be installed.
3. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each of the following rooms and/or
spaces: mechanical equipment; electrical; transformer; telephone
equipment or similar use.
4. All smoke detectors and fire suppression systems shall have a
monitoring system for alarm, trouble and supervisory conditions tied to
the local fire dispatch center. The same detection and suppression
system shall have audio/visual alarms to warn occupants of a fire
emergency.
5. All required automatic fire alarm systems shall have alarm verification.
Alarms activated by smoke detectors required by this Section, shall be
activated by either two (2) cross zoned smoke detectors within a single
protected area or a single smoke detector monitored by an alarm
verification zone or an approved equivalent method.
6. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided and installed in compliance
with NFPA 10.
7. A fire hydrant, in compliance with the Lincolnshire Village Code
subsection 7-6-4-31, shall be installed within one hundred feet (100') of
any fire department supply connection for a fire suppression system.
8. Sprinkler control valves and water flow devices shall be installed on each
story of a sprinkled building and for all required or installed water
supplies of a small hose station.
9. All fire protection systems shall be maintained in an operative condition
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
at all times, except for required maintenance, repairs or alternations
where approved by the Village of Lincolnshire. Such systems shall be
periodically inspected and tested in accordance with the currently
adopted International Building Code and International Fire Code.
L. Except for building constructed under the International Residential Code,
and are not more than three stories, all smoke detectors and fire
suppression systems shall have a monitoring system for alarm, trouble and
supervisory conditions tied to the local fire dispatch center. The same
detection and suppression systems shall have audio/visual alarms to warn
the occupants of a fire emergency. (Amd. Ord. 10-3135-13, eff. 4/12/10)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Adoption of the Electrical Code
5-4A-2: Additional Provisions
5-4A-1: ADOPTION OF THE ELECTRICAL CODE: Pursuant to the authority
granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and
villages,2 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the
Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations
of the Village, the National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 70
2017, National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection
Association and it shall be henceforth known as the Electrical Code for the
Village, together with all appendices, except such portions thereof as are
hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or amended. At least three (3)
copies of the code adopted by reference have been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use, inspection and
examination.
5-4A-2: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS: The following provisions shall be required in
addition to the provisions of the National Electrical Code:
A. All new single-family residences must have two hundred (200) ampere
service.
B. Additions or improvements requiring additional circuits beyond the capacity
of existing panel must have a new two hundred (200) ampere panel and
service. (Ord. 77-496-30)
C. 2008 NEC 230.70(A)(1) is revised to read:
Readily Accessible Location. An exterior service disconnect shall be
installed, unless interior disconnecting means are provided immediately
inside of the service entrance location and approved by the Building Official.
2 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE B. PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Adoption of Plumbing Code
5-4B-2: Conflict with Zoning Ordinance
5-4B-3: Additional Provisions
5-4B-4: Abating a Nuisance
5-4B-5: Material and Construction Requirements
5-4B-6: Sanitary Sewers, Prohibited Connections and Flows
5-4B-7: Unauthorized Use of System
5-4B-8: Use of Potable Water Restricted
5-4B-9: Fountains
5-4B-10: Penalty
5-4B-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE: Pursuant to the authority granted by
the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and villages,3 and
further pursuant to exercise of home rule powers of the Village, there is
hereby adopted by reference the current Illinois State Plumbing Code
published by the State of Illinois Department of Public Health and shall be
henceforth known as the Plumbing Code for the Village, together with all
appendices, except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly
deleted, modified or amended. At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted
by reference have been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and are there
kept available for public use, inspection and examination.
5-4B-2: CONFLICT WITH ZONING ORDINANCE: In the event that any provisions
of this Article, or the current Illinois State Plumbing Code, as adopted by this
Article, are in conflict with any of the provisions of the Lincolnshire Zoning
Code, as heretofore or hereafter amended from time to time, the latter shall
prevail and the conflicting provisions shall be of no effect to the extent of
such conflict. All other ordinances or codes in conflict with this Article are
hereby repealed. (Ord. 73-317- 32)
3 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
5-4B-3: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS: The following provisions shall be required in
addition to the provisions of the aforesaid Illinois State Plumbing Code and
any future or superseding provisions or amendments of that Code.
A. All new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the
effective date of this Ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as
designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense
Program, or any designated successor), when such labeled fixtures are
commercially available. (Ordinance 16-3406-133A; effective 06/27/2016)
B. Storm Water: On all new construction, all systems designed to handle storm
water must be tied directly into a Village approved storm sewer system. If an
approved storm sewer system is not available, the storm water must be
directed into the rear yard or a drainage easement. It may not be directed
into the street or onto an adjacent property. Although existing properties can
discharge water into the street, in compliance with this code, they may not
discharge storm water directly onto an adjacent property.
5-4B-4: ABATING A NUISANCE: Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the
Building Official that the plumbing or drainage in any building has become a
nuisance, or is of faulty construction and liable to endanger the health of the
occupants, the owner, agent or occupant shall be notified of the changes
which are necessary to bring such plumbing or drainage into compliance
with the regulations of this Code. Said changes shall be made within the
time fixed in such notification. Should the owner, agent or occupant fail to
correct the defects called to his attention within such time as the Plumbing
Inspector shall deem to be adequate, said Inspector shall institute
proceedings in a court having jurisdiction over such matters, seeking to
compel compliance with said regulations and to secure such fine or other
punishment as the court may decree. (Ord. 73-317-32)
5-4B-5: MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any copper service line shall be one continuous piece from the roundway
stopcock to the structure it is serving. Joints in the water service line will
only be allowed with the approval of the Village Engineer or designee. (Ord.
73-317-32; amd. Ord. 90-1133-17)
B. WATERMAINS AND CONNECTIONS: Only persons authorized by the
Village shall be permitted to tap the street main, or alter the street main in
any way. The location of all service taps shall be approved by the Village,
prior to the tap occurring. No person shall uncover, make any connection(s)
with, or opening into, use, alter, disturb, molest, injure or in any manner,
whatsoever, interfere with any Village water main or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Village. Written application
for such permit shall be made to the Public Works Department of the Village
Village of Lincolnshire Page 9 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
on forms prepared and kept on file in the office of said Department. (Ord.
87-944-30)
C. Curbstop Location: Each water service pipe shall have a T handle roundway
curbstop installed within the Right of Way or the required easement. Each
curbstop shall be protected with a one and one-fourth inch (1-1/4") or more
cast iron service stop box with "water" cast on the cover. Stop box shall be a
"Minneapolis Pattern", screwed plumb and square over the curbstop and
level with the adjacent grade.
D. Meter Spreads: A meter spread, of the same size as the meter to be
installed, shall be placed on the water service pipe within one foot (1') inside
of the front building wall unless permission is received from the Village to
install it elsewhere. The meter spread shall be provided with two (2) shut off
“ball-type” valves, one on the supply and one on the house side of the meter
spread. The size of meters shall be prescribed by the Village. (Ord. 73-317-
32)
E. Based upon soil boring test results, to be furnished by the developer prior to
final engineering approval, the Village Engineer may specify additional
sump pump requirements. (Ord. 87- 952-38)
F. Water Meters. All new building construction shall be required to use water
meters purchased from the Village. All water meters shall be sized in
accordance to the currently adopted Illinois State Plumbing Code and
determined by the Village Engineer or designee. The charge for water
meters shall be as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set
forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Commercial water meters shall be
installed by a licensed plumber and approved by the Village Engineer or his
designee. (Ord. 90-1133-17)
The Village may make such tests and inspections of the Village
infrastructure system as it deems necessary in order to ensure there are no
violations of any applicable codes. The Village, at its option, may also
invoke other legal powers vested in it or implied by the Statutes for the
protection of the health and welfare of the public, or institute such legal
action as it deems necessary to discover and order the correction of any
violation that may exist.
G. DELETED
H. 5-4B-6: SANITARY SEWERS, PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS AND
FLOWS: Use of Sump Pumps: All residences or other structures whose
sump pumps presently discharge water into the Village streets either
through buried hose or above ground hose shall, during the period
commencing on November 1, and ending on April 1 of each year,
Village of Lincolnshire Page 10 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
disconnect such hoses, and shall discharge such sump pump water into the
rear or front yard of the property in such a manner that during these months,
no water is discharged into the Village streets. The failure on the part of the
property owner to comply with the provision requiring such discharge into
the rear or front yard during said months shall be considered a violation
which, upon conviction, shall be subject to the fine set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. Each day any
such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 76-
424-54) (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff.4/22/10)
5-4B-7: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SYSTEM: No one shall use the combined
waterworks (including fire hydrants) and sewage system for any use,
including but not limited to construction purposes, chlorination, testing,
flushing, or sampling, except as is expressly permitted by the applicable
regulations of the Village or unless special permission is obtained in
advance and in writing from the Village. If anyone uses or interferes with the
combined waterworks and sewage system in an unauthorized manner, the
Village will be entitled to reimbursement of all its expenses in relation to said
unauthorized use in addition to any penalty that may be assessed pursuant
to the provisions of this Code.
5-4B-8: USE OF POTABLE WATER RESTRICTED: No person, whether municipal,
private or not for profit, shall use or cause a potable water conduit, to be in
direct contact, with any part of the sanitary system for the purpose of
flushing and/or cleaning any portion of the sanitary sewers system within the
Village of Lincolnshire.
5-4B-9: FOUNTAINS:
A. No fountains are permitted in any pond within the Village.
B. A single aeration device which meets the following specifications is not a
fountain for purposes of this Chapter:
1. The structure shall not extend more than six inches (6") above the
normal water level established in the approved plans; and
2. No part of any portion extending above the normal water line shall be
more than twelve inches (12") from any other part extending above the
water line; and
3. The water spray shall not be higher than 12 inches (12") above the
normal water line;
4. Unless permitted through an annexation agreement, which has been
approved by the Village Board.(Ord. 03-1858-35, eff.8/11/03)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 11 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
5-4B-10: PENALTY: Whenever in this Article any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation
of any such provision shall be punished by the fine set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. Each day any
violation of any provision of this Article shall continue, it shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 73-317-32) (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 12 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE C. THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Adoption of the International Residential Code
5-4C-2: Conflict with Zoning Ordinance
5-4C-3: Additional Provisions
5-4C-1: ADOPTION OF ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE: Pursuant to
the authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to
cities and villages,4 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule
powers of the Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules
and regulations of the Village, the 2018 Edition of the International
Residential Code, published by the International Code Council and it shall
be henceforth known as the International Residential Code for one and two
family dwellings for the Village, including Appendix Chapters “A” through
“D”, “F”, and “M” , except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly
deleted, modified or amended:
C. R-101.1 is changed to read: “These provisions shall be known as the
Residential Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, and shall be cited as such
and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
D. R-105.2 Work exempt from permit. Items 1-10 after “Building” are deleted and
replaced by the following;
3- Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar finish work
4- Replacement of exterior cladding (siding, stucco, EIFS, etc.)
5- Replacement of existing windows or doors, provided size of opening(s)
is not changed
E. R105.5 Expiration. This section is removed and superseded by Village Code
5-2-2-1, Building Permit Expiration
F. R112.1 General. This section is deleted and replaced by the following; Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Village staff in the enforcement of
any terms or provisions of this Chapter may, within ten (10) days after the
4 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1, 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 13 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
date of the decision, appeal to the Mayor and Board of Trustees by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk. The notice shall set forth
concisely the decision and the reasons or grounds for the appeal.
Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be provided by the Village Clerk to
all affected parties. The Board may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision.
The decision of the Board shall be final, and no petition for rehearing or
reconsideration shall be available. The rules of evidence shall not apply to
an appeal hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in a manner which
affords reasonable due process.
G. R112.3 Qualifications. Section is deleted in its entirety.
H. Table R301.2 (1) is revised to read as follows;
GROUND
SNOW LOAD
WIND DESIGN SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
Speed (mph)
Topographic
effects, Special wind
region, Windborne
debris
Weathering Frost Line
Depth Termite
30 115 NO Severe 42 Moderate to
heavy
SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORY
WINTER
DESIGN
TEMP.
ICE BARRIER
UNDERLAYMENT
REQUIRED
FLOOD
HAZARDS
AIR
FREEZING
INDEX
MEAN
ANNUAL
TEMP.
A -4 YES NFIP#170378 1800 47.6
I. R302.5.1 Opening protection. Dimension 1-3/8” shall be deleted and replaced
by 1-3/4”
J. Table R302.6 Dwelling-Garage Separation. Separation from the residence
and attics shall be not less than 5/8” gypsum board or equivalent applied to
the garage side.
K. R302.13 Fire Protection of floors. Section is deleted in its entirety
L. Section R313.2, One and two family automatic fire sprinkler systems, is
deleted in its entirety.
M. Table N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2) is revised to read as follows, though at no time
shall values differ from the Illinois Energy Conservation Code requirements.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 14 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
Climate
Zone
Fenestration
U factor
Skylight
U
factor
Glazed
fenestration
SHGC
Ceiling
R
value
Wood
Frame
wall R
value
Mass
wall R
value
Floor
R
value
Basement
wall R
value
Slab
R
value
&
depth
Crawlspace
wall R
value
5 and
Marine
4 0.32 0.55 NR 49
20 or
13+5 13/17 30 10/13
10, 2
ft 15/19
N. N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) shall be revised to match the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code requirements, or not more than 5 Air Changes per Hour
(5/ACH)
O. Chapter 25 through 33 shall be deleted in their entirety, and replaced by the
current Illinois Plumbing Code.
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been filed in the office
of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use, inspection and
examination. (Ord. 92-1238-16)
5-4C-2: CONFLICT WITH ZONING ORDINANCE: In the event that any provisions
of this Code, or the International Residential Code as adopted, are in
conflict with any provision of the Lincolnshire Zoning Code or any
amendment thereto, the latter shall prevail and the conflicting provision of
this Code shall be of no effect. All other ordinances or codes in conflict with
this Code are hereby repealed.
5-4C-3: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
A. Deleted
B. Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall be constructed with not less
than two(2) number five (5) reinforcement bars placed at the top and bottom
of any concrete trench, belled, grade beam or formed foundation walls,
“minimum.”
C. Deleted
Village of Lincolnshire Page 15 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE D. FIRE CODE
SECTION:
5-4D-1: Adoption of Fire Code
5-4D-2: Conflict with Other Codes
5-4D-3: Above Ground Fuel Storage Tanks
5-4D-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE: Pursuant to the authority granted the General
Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and villages,5 and further pursuant
to the exercise of home rule powers of the Village, there is hereby adopted
by reference, as the rules and regulations of the Village, the 2018 Edition of
the International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council,
and it shall be henceforth known as the Fire Code for the Village, together
with all appendices, except such portions thereof as are hereinafter
expressly deleted, modified or amended:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: "These regulations shall be known as the
Fire Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as
'this code'.
B. Section 109.3 is change to read: “Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents of directive of the code official, or of a permit
certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of
misdemeanor, punishable by the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine
Schedule of the code described in 17-1. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offence.
(Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 4/22/10)
C. Section 111.4 is changed to read: “Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be liable to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the
code described in 17-1. Each day that such work continues shall be deemed
5 5 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 16 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
a separate offense. (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
D. An automatic fire suppression system, installed in accordance with the
International Building Code, International Fire Code and NFPA 13/13R/13D
(as applicable), is required for all new construction and for structures
substantially remodeled except: (i) detached single-family dwellings which
have at least 3' of Yard space (not including storage structures) around
exterior walls, and are not more than three stories; (ii) those portions of
buildings that comply with Section 406.5 (2018 International Building Code)
for open parking garage; and (iii) those structures which are completely
open on all four sides or are designed such that one side is completely
open, and the other sides have walls no greater in height than half the
distance from the ground plane to the lowest point of the roof. (Amd. Ord.
10-3135-13, eff. 4/12/10)
1. Deleted
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been
filed in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for
public use, inspection and examination. (Ord. 92- 1238-16)
5-4D-2: CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODES: In the event that any provision of these
Codes are in conflict with any other provision of other Village ordinances
and/or codes, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. (Ord. 77-505-39)
5-4D-3 ABOVE GROUND FUEL STORAGE TANKS: Above ground fuel storage
tanks (ASTs) shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshall (OSFM), Title 41
Illinois Administrative Code Part 160. When accessible to the public, ASTs
shall be protected against tampering and trespassing.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 17 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE E, MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-4E-1: Adoption of the Mechanical Code
5-4E-1: ADOPTION OF THE MECHANICAL CODE: Pursuant to the authority
granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and
villages,6 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the
Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations
of the Village, the 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code,
including APPENDIX “A”, published by the International Code Council, and
it shall be henceforth known as the Mechanical Code for the Village, except
such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or
amended:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: "These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, hereinafter referred
to as 'this code'."
B. Section 106.5.2 is changed to read: "The fees for mechanical work shall be
as indicated as follows: As established by the Lincolnshire Village Code,
Title 1-15"
C. Section 106.5.3 is deleted.
D. Section 108.4 is changed to read: "Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of an
approved construction documents or directive of the Code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine
Schedule of the Code described in 17-1 or by imprisonment not exceeding
six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
6 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 18 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
E. Section 108.5 is changed to read: "Upon notice from the code official that
mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property. or
to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state
the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work
on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine
Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. Each day that such work continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, 3/22/10)
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been filed
in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use,
inspection and examination. (Ord. 92-1238-16)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 19 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE F, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
5-4F-1: Adoption of the Property Maintenance Code
5-4F-2: Vacant Building and Property Regulations
5-4F-1: ADOPTION OF THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE: Pursuant to the
authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois cities and
villages,7 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the
Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations
of the Village, the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, as
published by the International Code Council and it shall be henceforth
known as the Property Maintenance Code for the Village, together with all
appendices, except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly
deleted, modified or amended:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: "These regulations shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois,
hereinafter referred to as 'this code'."
B. Section 103.5 is changed to read: “The fees for activities and services
performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this
code shall be as follows: As established by the Lincolnshire Village Code
Title 1-15.
C. Section 302.4 Weeds. Dimension of “Six inches” added to end of first
sentence
D. Section 304.14 is changed to read: "During the period from April 1 to
November 1 every door, window and other outside openings required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas,
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per
inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door used shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition."
7 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 20 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
D. Section 602.3 is changed to read: "Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, or sleeping unit,
on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to maintain
a temperature of not less than 68 degrees F (18 degrees C) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
E. Section 602.4 is changed to read: “Indoor occupiable work space shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain
a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities, including indoor loading docks
G. Deleted – See 404.4.1
H. Deleted – See 404.5
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been filed
in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use,
inspection and examination. (Ord. 92-1238-16)
5-4F-2: VACANT BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS:
A. Declaration of Policy: The purpose of this section 5-4F-2 is to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare by enactment of this section which:
1. Establishes a program for registration and regulation of buildings which
are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this section 5-4F-
2.
2. Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings.
3. Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of public
nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
This section 5-4F-2 shall be construed liberally to affect its purposes.
B. Other Ordinances: This section 5-4F-2 shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and
Village of Lincolnshire Page 21 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
regulations which prescribe standards other than are provided herein, and in
the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.
C. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the
context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this section 5-4F-2,
have the meanings indicated in this section:
BUILDING Any structure occupied or intended for
supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
BUILDING OFFICIAL The Building Official, as defined in this Title 5,
or his or her designee.
OWNER Any person, agent, operator, firm, or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest
in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county, or municipality as
holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if ordered to take possession of
real property by a court.
PERSON Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other
entity as well as an individual.
PREMISES A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any
structure thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE Includes the following:
1. The physical condition, or uses of any
building regarded as a public nuisance
at common law, under the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, or under this Code;
or
2. Any physical condition, use or
occupancy or any building or its
appurtenances considered an attractive
nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations, and unsafe
fences or structures; or
Village of Lincolnshire Page 22 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
3. Any building which has unsanitary
sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
4. Any building designated by the Building
Official as unsafe for human habitation
or use; or
5. Any building which is manifestly capable
of being a fire hazard, or manifestly
unsafe or insecure as to endanger life,
limb or property; or
6. Any building which is unsanitary, or
which is littered with rubbish or garbage,
or which has an uncontrolled growth of
weeds; or
7. Any building that is dangerous, in a
state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; open or
vacant and the doors, windows, or other
openings are boarded up or secured, by
any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the
building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by
fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure
and dangerous to anyone on or near the
premises.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING A building or portion thereof which lacks the
habitual presence of human beings who have a
legal right to be on the premises, including
buildings ordered vacated by the Building
Official pursuant to authority granted to him by
this Code.
In determining whether a building is
"unoccupied", the Building Official may
consider these factors, among others:
1. A building at which substantially all
lawful residential or business activity
has ceased.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 23 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
2. The percentage of the overall square
footage of occupied to unoccupied
space or the overall number of occupied
and unoccupied units shall be
considered.
3. The building is substantially devoid of
contents. The condition and value of
fixtures or personal property in the
building are relevant to this
determination.
4. The building lacks utility services, i.e.,
water, sewer, electric or natural gas.
5. The building is the subject of a
foreclosure action.
6. The building is not actively for sale as
part of a contractual agreement to sell
the building, the building lacks "for sale",
"for rent" or similar signage.
7. The presence or recurrence of
uncorrected Code violations.
VACANT BUILDING A building or portion of a building which is:
1. Unoccupied and unsecured; or
2. Unoccupied and secured by boarding or
other similar means; or
3. Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
or
4. Unoccupied and condemned by the
Building Official pursuant to applicable
provisions of this Code; or
5. Unoccupied and has multiple Code
violations; or
6. Unoccupied and the building or its
Village of Lincolnshire Page 24 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
premises has been the site of unlawful
activity within the previous six (6)
months; or
7. Condemned by the Building Official and
unlawfully occupied; or
8. Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty
(180) days and during which time the
Building Official has issued an order to
correct public nuisance conditions and
same have not been corrected in a
Code compliant manner; or
9. Unoccupied for over two (2) years.
10. An “abandoned residential property,” as
defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 is a
residential dwelling unit that has been
unoccupied by any lawful occupant or
occupants for at least 90 days, and for
which after such 90 day period the
Village has made good faith efforts to
contact the legal owner or owners of the
property or, if known, the agent of the
owner, and no contact has been made.
But not including:
Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and
which are in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations,
and for which construction, renovation or
rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion.
D. Obligation To Register; Owner’s Obligations: The owner of a building who
knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her
building is or has become a "vacant building" within the meaning of this
section 5-4F-2 after the effective date of this section 5-4F-2, shall take the
actions provided for in this section within fifteen (15) days after the
occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person to believe
that the building was a "vacant building". Registration does not exonerate
the owner from compliance with all applicable Codes and ordinances,
Village of Lincolnshire Page 25 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
including this section, nor does it preclude any of the actions the Village is
authorized to take pursuant to this section 5-4F-2 or elsewhere in this Code.
1. Registration Requirements:
a. Register the building with the Building Official, on a form provided
by the Building Official and pay the annual non-prorated vacant
building registration fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. The form
shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and
telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any
litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including
bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and telephone
number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the
premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural
person twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a
permanent address in Lake County, Illinois, to accept service on
behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the Building Official
sends pursuant to this section 5-4F-2 or service of process in any
proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of this section 5-
4F-2, and file with the Building Official on the registration form, the
name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street address
is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address.
b. File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change
in the information contained in the annual registration, including any
change in the status of the property that would cause a reasonable
person to believe that the building was no longer a "vacant
building.” A new registration is required for any change in
ownership whatsoever. There shall be no charge for an amended
registration.
c. Once a building is registered as a vacant building, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that it will remain a vacant building until an
amended registration is filed with the Building Official or a certificate
of occupancy is issued therefor.
2. Notice; Inspection:
a. The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance
of notice by posting," consenting to service of notices sent or
required to be sent, pursuant to this section 5-4F-2, by posting on
the building.
b. The owner of a vacant building shall allow for a Code compliance
Village of Lincolnshire Page 26 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
inspection of the interior of the vacant building and shall pay the
inspection fee therefore within thirty (30) days of the inspection as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Such inspection will determine
the extent of compliance with Village property, building codes,
health, fire, water and sewer codes. The Village shall send the
inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days.
3. Security Guard Service: On written notice of the Building Official, provide
bonded and insured security guard service at the building between the
hours of three o'clock (3:00) p.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. Such
service to remain in place until the Building Official gives written notice
that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required
when the Building Official makes a written determination that the vacant
building is involved in illegal or improper use or occupancy under such
conditions that boarding and securing the building are insufficient to
prevent the actual or threatened harm.
E. Other Enforcement: The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude
action by the Village to demolish or to take other action against the building
pursuant to other provisions of this Code or other applicable legislation,
including the activities authorized by Subsection F.
F. Property Maintenance:
1. Nuisance Abatement. The Village is authorized to perform or provide for
property maintenance activities to abate a nuisance caused by a vacant
building, including the following:
a. Cutting and removal of neglected weeds and grass, as authorized
by Section 4-1A-2 of this Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7;
b. Removal of infected trees as authorized by Sections 13-1-15 and
13-1-16 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12;
c. Removal of garbage, debris, and graffiti as authorized by Title 4,
Chapter 1 of this Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13, and
d. Removal, securing, and enclosing abandoned residential
properties, as authorized by Sections 5-4F-1, 5-4F-2, and 4-1-5 of
this Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
2. Charges for Nuisance Abatement. The Village shall have the authority to
collect from the property owner the costs incurred in performing the
property maintenance activities to abate the nuisances described in this
Village of Lincolnshire Page 27 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
subsection 5-4F-2.F. The Village shall send a bill for the cost to the
property owner, his agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal
possession or control of the premises.
3. Traditional Lien Procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to paragraph 2 is not
paid in full within 30 days of the date of the bill, the Village shall have the
authority to file and record a lien against the property, pursuant to
Section 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15. If,
for any one property, the Village engaged in any nuisance abatement
activity described in paragraph 1 on more than one occasion during the
course of one year, then the Village may combine any or all of the costs
of those activities into a single notice of lien, provided no costs may be
set forth on more than one notice of lien. The lien must be filed in
accordance with the lien procedure established by the specific Code
provision of which the property is alleged to be in violation or, if no such
procedure exists, then the following procedure shall apply:
a. Notice of Lien. The Village or the person performing the service by
authority of the Village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice
of lien in the office of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds. The
notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and
expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the Village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in Paragraph 2 on more
than one occasion during the course of one year, then the Village
may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien, provided no costs may be set forth on more than one
notice of lien. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting forth:
i. A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes the
parcel;
ii. The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for
the activities; and
iii. The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred
by the Village or someone working on behalf of the Village.
After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail
to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if
different, to the person who received the tax bill for the
preceding year.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 28 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
b. Release of Lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the
Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as
recording the notice of lien.
c. Foreclosure of Lien. Subsequent to the filing of the abovedescribed
lien, the Village may cause to be filed a complaint for
foreclosure of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a
pending lawsuit affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to
the complaint or in the nature of an intervening petition or crosscomplaint
the Village may proceed in its corporate name to
foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this Section
must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice
of lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this article shall
be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the monies owing the Village.
4. Priority Lien Procedure. The priority lien procedure described in this
Paragraph 4 shall apply only to costs incurred for activities performed on
abandoned residential properties, as defined in the definition for Vacant
Buildings under subsection 5-4F-2(C), and is an alternative to the
traditional lien authorized by paragraph 3. If a bill sent pursuant to
paragraph 2 is not paid in full within 60 days of the date of the bill, the
Village shall have the authority to file and record a priority lien against
the property, pursuant to Section 11-20-15.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, in the following manner:
a. Notice of Lien. The Village or the person performing the service by
authority of the Village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice
of a priority lien in the office of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds.
The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and
expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the Village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in paragraph 2 on more
than one occasion during the course of one year, then the Village
may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien, provided no costs may be set forth on more than one
notice of lien. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting forth:
i. A description of the abandoned residential property that
sufficiently describes the parcel;
ii. The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the activities;
and
Village of Lincolnshire Page 29 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
iii. The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the Village
or someone working on behalf of the Village; and
iv. A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or
more of the property maintenance activities described in
Paragraph 2 and authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(D), 65 ILCS
5/11-20-8(D), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(D), 65 ILCS 5/11- 20-13(E),
or 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable.
After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail
to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if
different, to the person who received the tax bill for the
preceding year.
The Village may not file a lien if the lender has provided notice
to the Village that the lender has performed, or will perform,
remedial actions; provided, however, that the remedial actions
must be performed or initiated in good faith within 30 days of
the lender’s notice to the Village.
b. Record keeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this paragraph 4, the
Village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a
minimum:
i. A dated statement of a finding by the Village that the property
has become abandoned residential property;
ii. The date when the property was first observed to be
unoccupied by any lawful occupant;
iii. A description of the actions taken by the Village to contact the
legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the
owner;
iv. A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner
or, if known, any agent of the owner;
v. A dated certification by a Village official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed;
vi. A copy of the agreement with the person or company
performing the work and the rates and estimated cost of the
work, if applicable;
vii. Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work;
Village of Lincolnshire Page 30 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
viii. A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so,
a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
c. Release of Lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the
Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as
recording the notice of lien.
d. Enforcement of Lien. A lien under this paragraph 4 is enforceable
by the Village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of
the Village, at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of
the abandoned residential property and is limited to a claim of
interest in the proceeds of the sale. The priority lien is superior to all
other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
G. Certification: A certificate of Code compliance for vacant buildings issued by
the Village and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this section 5-
4F-2 are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building and the
issuance of transfer stamps prior to the sale or transfer thereof, as required
by Section 3-1-6 of the Village Code.
H. Enforcement and Penalties:
1. Any person found to have violated any provision of this section 5-4F-2
shall be subject to the applicable range of fines set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule, Title 1, Chapter 17, in addition
to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the Village.
2. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this section 5-4F-
2.
3. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village from immediately
condemning as provided for in this Code a building or taking other
immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public
nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building,
or the public, health, safety and welfare.
(Amd. Ord. 10-3168-45, eff. 11/8/10)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 31 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODE
ARTICLE G. ACCESSIBILITY CODE
SECTION:
5-4G-1: Adoption of the Accessibility Code
5-4G-1: ADOPTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CODE: Pursuant to the authority
granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and
villages,8 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the
Village, there is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois Accessibility Code
published by the State of Illinois Capital Development Board and it shall be
henceforth known as the Accessibility Code of the Village, together with all
appendices, except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly
deleted, modified or amended. At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted
by reference have been filed in the office of the Village Clerk and are there
kept available for public use, inspection and examination.
8 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 32 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE H. LIFE SAFETY CODE
SECTION:
5-4H-1: Adoption of the Life Safety Code
5-4H-1: ADOPTION OF THE LIFE SAFETY CODE: Pursuant to the authority
granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and
villages,9 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the
Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations
of the Village, the National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 101 -
2006 Edition, Life Safety Code, published by the National Fire Protection
Association and it shall be henceforth known as the Life Safety Code for the
Village, together with all appendices, except such portions thereof as are
hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or amended: Only those provisions
of the Life Safety Code pertaining to existing structures are hereby adopted
and those provisions shall apply only to structures in existence at the date of
adoption of this Article and those structures for which an occupancy permit
has been granted on or before that date. At least three (3) copies of the
Code adopted by reference have been filed in the office of the Village Clerk
and are there kept available for public use, inspection and examination.
9 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 33 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE I. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
5-4I-1: Adoption of the Energy Conservation Code
5-4I-1: ADOPTION OF THE ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE: Pursuant to the
authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities
and villages,10 and further pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of
the Village, there is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and
regulations of the Village, the most current edition of the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code as required by State statute, shall be herein be known
as the Energy Conservation Code for the Village, together with all
appendices, except such portions thereof as hereinafter expressly deleted,
modified or amended:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: "This code shall be known as the
International Energy Conservation Code of the Village of Lincolnshire,
Illinois, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to as 'this code'."
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been filed
in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use,
inspection and examination. (Ord. 92-1238-16)
10 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 34 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE J. FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
5-4J-1: Adoption of Fuel Gas Code
5-4J-2: Conflict with Other Codes
5-4J-1: ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE: Pursuant to the authority granted the
General Assembly of the State of Illinois to cities and villages,11 and further
pursuant to the exercise of home rule powers of the Village, there is hereby
adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations of the Village, the 2018
Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International
Code Council, and it shall be henceforth known as the Fuel Gas Code for
the Village, together with all appendices, except such portions thereof as
are hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or amended:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read: “These regulations shall be known as the
Fuel Gas Code of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, hereinafter referred to
as 'this code'.”
B. Section 106.6.2 is change to read: “The fees for work shall be as indicated
as follows: As established by the Lincolnshire Village Code, Title 1-15.”
C. Section 106.6.3 Refunds, is deleted.
D. Section 108.4 is changed to read: “Persons who shall violate a provision of
this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code official, or of a permit
certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of
misdemeanor, punishable by the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine
Schedule of the Code described in 17-1 or by imprisonment not exceeding
six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
E. Section 108.5 is change to read: “Upon notice from the code official that
work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous
11 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1; 50 ILCS 220/1
Village of Lincolnshire Page 35 Title 5-4
Revised 07/30/2018
or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner’s
agent, or to person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions
under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the
code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping
the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after
having been served with stop work order, except such work as that person
is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code
described in 17-1. Each day that such work continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
5-4J-2: CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODES: In the event that any provision of these
Codes are in conflict with any other provision of other Village ordinances
and/or codes, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
At least three (3) copies of the Code adopted by reference have been filed
in the office of the Village Clerk and are there kept available for public use,
inspection and examination. (Ord. 92-1238-16)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
CHAPTER 5
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Compliance Required
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: Permit Requirements
5-5-4: Location Restrictions
5-5-5: Construction Requirements
5-5-5-3: Steps or Ladders
5-5-5-7: Walk Areas
5-5-6: Swimming Pool Barriers
5-5-8: Electrical Requirements
5-5-9: Safety Precautions
5-5-10: Inspection Requirements
5-5-11: Nonconforming Structures
5-5-12: Prohibited Pools
5-5-13: Spas and Hot Tubs
5-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED: Every private residential or public swimming pool
constructed, installed and maintained in the Village shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Chapter.
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL
SWIMMING POOL
A swimming pool maintained by an individual primarily for
the sole use of his household and guests and not for the
purpose of profit or in connection with any business
operated for profit.
PUBLIC SWIMMING
POOL
A swimming pool maintained by individuals for the use of
more than one household, or maintained by a club for the use
of its members, or maintained by a business for profit, or
maintained by a school, park district, municipality or other
public or not-for-profit organizations.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
SWIMMING POOL A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having
(POOL) a depth at any point of more than two feet (2'),
intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion
therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant
equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above
the ground inside or outside of a building.
SWIMMING POOL
BARRIER
A non-climbable fence, an existing building wall, or a
combination thereof, which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
(Amd. Ord. 11-3204-26, eff. 5/9/11)
SPA AND HOT TUB A hydromassage pool, or tub for recreational or therapeutic
use, not located in health care facilities, designed for
immersion of users, and usually having a filter, heater, and
motor-driven blower. It may be installed indoors or outdoors,
on the ground or supporting structure, or in the ground or
supporting structure. Generally, a spa or hot tub is not
designed or intended to have its contents drained or
discharged after each use.
5-5-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permits Required:
1. It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any pool unless permits shall have first been
obtained from the Village.
2. It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any public swimming pool within the Village
unless permits shall first have also been obtained from the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 73-305-20)
B. Drawings and Plans and Permits:
1. Each application shall be accompanied by four (4) sets of site plans,
grading plans, construction documents and specifications prepared by the
licensed design professional and must have his/her signature and seal; in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation.
2. All plans and drawings shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one eighth
of an inch to the foot (1/8" = 1') on paper or cloth, in ink or by some process
that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete showing the lot
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
lines, distance from the residence(s) and including information pertaining to
the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and
water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the pool.
Detailed plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided.
C. All pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be
constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
5-5-4: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in single-family
residential zones only. No portion of the pool shall be located less than fifteen
feet (15') from a side or rear lot line. Pools and appurtenant equipment shall
not be permitted in any front yard.
B. Public swimming pools shall be permitted in residential and business zones
except that any public swimming pool operated for the purpose of profit or
operated in connection with a business operated for profit shall not be operated
in a single-family residential zone. No portion of a public pool or its appurtenant
equipment shall be located less than fifteen feet (15') from a side or rear lot
line. Public pools shall not be located in a front yard. (Ord. 73-305-20)
5-5-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
5-5-5-1: All swimming pools and swimming pool barriers shall be designed and
constructed in conformance with the International Residential Code, Appendix
AG@, published by the International Code Council, Inc. most recently adopted by
the Village, as outlined in Section 5-4C-1, and the following sections: (Amd.
Ord. 11-3204-26, eff. 5/9/11)
5-5-5-3: STEPS OR LADDERS: Two (2) or more means of egress shall be provided.
The deep end shall be furnished with an anchored ladder equipped with hand
rails while steps or stairway shall be furnished at the shallow end.
5-5-5-7: WALK AREAS: An unobstructed walk area constructed of impervious
materials and smooth non-slip surfaces not less than thirty six inches (36") in
width shall be provided to extend entirely around any swimming pool. All pool
walk areas shall slope away from the pool walls so as to prevent drainage from
entering the pool or pool filter system. Walk areas shall not be located in an
easement. (Amd. Ord. 11-3204-26, eff. 5/9/11)
5-5-6: SWIMMING POOL BARRIERS:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
A. General Requirements: All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a
swimming pool barrier, as defined in Section 5-5-2, which is located on the
same property as the pool. Only one swimming pool barrier shall be permitted
on a zoning lot. Berms or mounds are not permitted adjacent or near to the
pool as a means of denying entry into the pool area. Swimming pool barriers
shall be constructed so that a finished side faces outward. All posts shall be
decay or corrosion resistant and shall be adequately braced below grade in
either a stone or concrete base. In the event a swimming pool is completely
removed and is no longer operational, the pool fence that is associated with
such pool shall be removed in its entirety, unless said fence fully complies with
all Yard Fence requirements as described in Chapter 15 of Title 6.
Where the wall of an existing structure acts as one or more sides of the
swimming pool barrier, it shall be subject to the Additional Requirements of
Section 5-5-6(H). However, it shall be exempt from the height, material, opacity
and color regulations contained herein.
B. Location: No swimming pool barriers shall be located in required front or
corner side yard setback areas; within drainage easements or on top of berms
or mounds. The barrier shall be no closer than five feet (5=) to the edge of the
pool at any point.
C. Height: A swimming pool barrier shall be a minimum of four feet (4=) and a
maximum of five feet (5=) in height. Any swimming pool barriers that are located
in a yard adjacent to Half Day Road and Riverwoods Road shall be permitted
to be a maximum of six feet (6=) in height, as measured from the crown of the
road, in accordance with Chapter 15 of Title 6, provided that such barriers are
located only in a yard located along the frontage to such arterial roads.
However, in no event shall a swimming pool barrier be permitted to be less
than 4= in height, as measured from the existing grade along the fence line.
Any swimming pool barriers that are located in a yard adjacent to incompatible
land uses, in accordance with Chapter 15 of Title 6, shall be permitted to be a
maximum of eight feet (8=) in height, as measured from the existing grade
along the fence line.
D. Materials:
1. Swimming pool barriers shall be constructed of wood or ornamental metal
materials. Neither material shall be subject to the review of the Architectural
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
Review Board.
2. Any swimming pool barriers that are located in a yard along the frontage of
Half Day Road shall be constructed of wood and have a natural wood finish
and be designed in the following:
a. Traditional style solid wood fence with post end caps.
b. A Traditional Board and Batten style solid wood fence with post end
caps.
c. A Traditional style solid wood fence with square lattice on top and post
and caps.
d. A Traditional style sold wood fence with diagonal lattice on top and
post end caps.
E. Color: Swimming pool barriers shall be a pre-finished black, dark brown, dark
green or white color.
F. Opacity: Swimming pool barriers and gates shall contain no greater than 60%
opaque materials, as measured horizontally along each foot of the length of the
fence facing each yard. However, those swimming pool barriers that are
located in a yard along the frontage of Half Day Road or Riverwoods Road as
well as swimming pool barriers adjacent to non-residential or incompatible land
uses, shall be permitted to be non-metal solid or having the opacity greater
than 60%, as measured horizontally along each foot of the length of the fence
facing each yard.
G. Fence Permit: A fence permit must be applied for at the time of application for
the swimming pool permit, or included for approval on pool plans. Without the
fence permit, no swimming pool permit may be issued. All applications for a
swimming pool or swimming pool barrier shall be accompanied by a plat of
survey which indicates the placement of the pool, swimming pool barrier, pool
walk, and all other accessories to be installed or constructed, in addition to
other requirements set forth in Section 5-5-3B and C thereof.
H. Additional Requirements: Swimming pool barriers shall comply with
Appendix G, Section AG105.2, of the International Residential Code, most
recently adopted by the Village, as outlined in Section 5-4C-1, with the
exception of Section AG105.2 (6) and Section AG105.2 (10).
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
I. Variations and Exceptions: In the event the Village Board authorizes a
variation for swimming pool barriers for a different pool barrier height,
materials, color or opacity, in accordance with Chapter 14 of Title 6, such relief
shall preempt any conflicting regulations contained in this Section. However, no
variation shall be granted to permit swimming pool barriers to be less than 4= in
height, as measured from the existing grade along the fence line; no variation
shall be granted from the swimming pool barrier safety regulations as
described in Section 5-5-6(H), and no variation shall be granted from the
swimming pool barrier location requirements as described in Section 5-5-6(B).
J. Conflicts: Except to the extent provided in subsection (I), in the event of any
conflicts, the regulations of this Section shall prevail. (Amd. Ord. 11-3204-26,
eff. 5/9/11)
5-5-8: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS: Where conductors are adjacent to pool or
moisture area they shall have proper insulation. No overhead electrical wires
shall be permitted within fifteen feet (15') of the pool.
5-5-9: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS: All pools shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition.
5-5-10: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS: The Building Official may periodically inspect
pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this Code regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with.
5-5-11: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES: Pool erected prior to the effective date of
this Code which do not meet the requirements of Sections 5-5-5-3, 5-5-5-7, 5-
5-6, 5-5-8 and 5-5-9, shall be made to conform to the provisions of said
sections within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Code with the
following exceptions:
A. Deleted by Ordinance 11-3204-26, eff. 5/9/11.
B. Previously constructed fences and gates of a minimum height of forty-two
inches (42") completely enclosing a pool area equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices placed as hereinbefore called for shall be allowed to
remain for a period of six (6) months after which time they must be brought into
compliance with the requirements of this Code. (Amd. Ord. 11-3204-26, eff.
5/9/11)
5-5-12: PROHIBITED POOLS: Inflatable pools and other portable or aboveground
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 5-5
Revised 05/09/2011
pools holding water to a depth of over one foot (1') are prohibited. (Ord. 73-
305-20)
5-5-13: SPAS AND HOT TUBS: The installation of any spa or hot tub shall follow the
same construction requirements as those which refer to pools, with the
following exception:
A. An approved locking device may be permitted in lieu of the fence requirements
for hot tubs or spas.
B. Hot tub and spa installations shall also be exempt from the requirements set
forth in section 5-5-12 of this code.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 5-6
Revised 08/13/2007
CHAPTER 6
WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-2: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-3: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-4: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-5: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-6: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
5-6-7: Deleted in it=s entirety and relocated to Chapter 2 of Title 8
(Amd Ord. 07-3000-28, eff. 8/13/07)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose
5-7-2: Interpretation, Conflicts
5-7-3: Compliance Required
5-7-4: Definitions
5-7-5: General Conditions
5-7-6: Maps and Profiles
5-7-7: Variances
5-7-8: Nonconforming Structures and Uses
5-7-9: Appeals of Administrative Decisions
5-7-10: Administration
5-7-11: Penalties for Violation
5-7-1: PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is to diminish threats to public health
and safety caused by floodwaters; reduce economic losses to individuals and the
community at large; protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources; and to comply with the guidelines for the National Flood Insurance
Program as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The
provisions of this Chapter further regulate, guide, and control:
A. The use, subdivision, layout, and improvement of lands located in floodplains.
B. The excavating, filling, and grading of lots and other land parcels or areas
located in floodplains and the storing of certain materials thereon.
C. The location, construction, and elevation of buildings and other structures or
parts and appurtenances thereof, and of sanitary and storm sewers and
appurtenances, located in floodplains. (Ord-80-623-30)
D. Golf courses located within the Village. (Ord. 80-637-44)
5-7-2: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICTS: All ordinances and parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are repealed to the extent of such conflict herewith. The regulations
contained in this Chapter 7 are hereby incorporated by reference into the Zoning,
Building and Subdivision Codes1 of the Village as fully as if set forth at length therein.
5-7-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED: Before starting any of the work regulated by this
1 See Titles 5, 6 and 7 of this Village Code
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
Chapter, an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable
ordinances with respect to the submission and approval of preliminary and final
subdivision pats, improvement plans, building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals
and similar matters, along with those set forth in this Chapter and as may be required by
Federal or State laws and the regulations of any department of the State of Illinois.
Where provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive than other requirements, this
Chapter shall apply.
5-7-4: DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are
adopted:
AREA OF SPECIAL The land which is subject to a one percent (1%)
FLOOD HAZARD chance of flooding annually. This area may also be
identified as that which is subject to the 100-year
flood. The area is designated as Zone A, A1-99, AH,
or AO on the maps provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
BASE FLOOD The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base
flood is also known as the 100-year flood. If the 100-
year flood information is not available, the base flood
shall be the flood of record.
BASE FLOOD AREA The land area subject to inundation by waters of the
base flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION The highest water surface elevation of the base flood.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE An artificially excavated volume of storage within the
base flood area used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures
are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated
loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site
floodwater elevations and flows.
DEVELOPMENT Any manmade change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to construction of
or substantial improvements to buildings or other
structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
FLOOD The condition existing when the waters of any
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
watercourse, pond, or depression temporarily rise to a
height above their normal levels and overflow the
boundaries within which they are ordinarily contained.
It also includes the unusual rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters.
FLOOD FREQUENCY A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be
expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE The higher portion of the floodplain, immediately
adjacent to and on either side of the floodway,
occupied by quiescent or slow-moving waters during
floods.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY An official map of the Village, issued or approved by
the MAP (FHBM) Administrator of the Federal
Insurance Administration, on which the areas having
special flood hazards have been drawn and
designated as Zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY An examination and evaluation of hydro- (FIS) logic
and hydraulic data sponsored by the Federal
Insurance Administration to determine base flood
flows, elevations, areas and floodways. The FIS also
determines flows, elevations and areas of floods
having lesser and greater frequencies of occurrence.
FLOOD OF RECORD An actual historical flood event for which sufficient
records are available to establish its extent. No
uniform probability of occurrence is associated with
floods of record. However, the probability of
occurrence may be determined for the event at
specific locations.
FLOOD PROFILE Graphical representations of the elevations of the
water surface of the 100-year flood along the
watercourses of the Village.
FLOOD PROTECTION The elevation to which uses regulated by this Chapter
ELEVATION are required to be elevated or floodproofed.
FLOOD RETURN PERIOD Same as Flood Frequency.
FLOODPLAlN The special flood hazard lands adjoining
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
a water course, whose surface elevation is lower than
the base flood elevation, that are subject to periodic
inundation during floods.
FLOODPROOFING Modifications to structures made to reduce flood
damages. These changes may be made to existing
structures or incorporated in the design of new
structures. In all instances, flood-proofing must be
watertight and must be adequate without the need for
human intervention.
FLOODWAY The channel of a watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains which are required to carry
and discharge the 100-year flood with no significant
increase in the base flood elevation.
FLOODWAY The lateral boundaries of the floodway which
ENCROACHMENT LINES separate it from the flood fringes.
FREEB0ARD An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties
in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave
actions and unpredictable effects such as may be
caused by ice or debris jams.
HYDROSTATlC PRESSURE The upward pressure exerted on floodslabs or an
entire structure by standing water or groundwater,
which tends to float a structure or crack the floor. It is
based on the difference in elevation between the
surface level of the water. Hydrostatic pressure may
also be horizontal, imposing forces on walls causing
them to crack or fail.
MOBILE HOME A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. It does not include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been
so designated and improved that it contains two (2) or
more mobile home lots available to the general public
for sale or rent and the placement thereon of mobile
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
homes for occupancy.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD A flood magnitude with a one percent (1%) statistical
of being equaled or exceeded during any year. A flood
this large would be reached once during a 100-year
period, on the average. However, the occurrence of
such an event does not diminish the chance of its
recurring again at any time.
RISK PREMIUM RATE ZONE Flood hazard areas designated according to the
degree of flooding they would experience during the
base flood. The symbols used to designate these
zones are as follows:
A Area of special flood hazard without water
surface elevations determined.
Al-99 Area of special flood hazard with water surface
elevations deter-mined.
AH Area of special flood hazards having a level
water surface (ponding) with water depths
between 1 and 3 feet.
AO Area of special flood hazards having a sloping
water surface (sheet runoff) with water depths
between 1 and 3 feet.
VO Area of special flood hazards having shallow
water depths and/or unpredictable flow paths
between 1 and 3 feet and with velocity.
B Area of moderate flood hazards.
C Area of minimal hazards.
RIVERINE Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, creek or brook.
STRUCTURE A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank,that is principally above ground, as well
as a mobile home.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
SUBSTANTIAL Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
IMPROVEMENT structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
either before the improvement or repair is started, or if
the structure has been damaged, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. The term does
not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a structure or site
documented as deserving preservation by the
Illinois Department of Conservation or listed on
the National Register of Historic Places.
WATERCOURSE Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch or other
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and
floodwaters flow either regularly or intermittently.
5-7-5: GENERAL CONDITIONS: General conditions which shall apply in Articles A, B,
and C of this Chapter include:
A. Floodways: In floodways which have been identified in Section 5-7-6 of this
Chapter as elements of floodplains associated with the flood having a 100-year
recurrence interval, fill, encroachments, and new construction and substantial
improvements of existing structures, which would result in any one-tenth foot
(0.1') increase in flood heights, shall be prohibited. The location of any portion
of a new mobile home park, of any expansion to an existing mobile home park,
and of any mobile home not in a mobile home park shall be prohibited in the
floodway (nothing herein shall be construed to permit mobile homes or mobile
home parks within the Village of Lincolnshire).
B. Flood Fringes: In flood fringes which have been identified in Section 5-7-6 of
this Chapter as elements of the floodplains associated with floods having a 100-
year recurrence interval, construction, filling or use of those low-lying lands may
be permitted under the conditions specified in Articles A, B and C of this
Chapter.
C. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced
by at least an equal volume of excavation taken from below the base flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost
above the existing 10-year flood elevation but below the base flood elevation
must be replaced above the existing 10-year flood elevation and below the base
flood elevation. In the case of streams or watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or immediately adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
All such excavations should be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
D. Watercourse Alteration: The Village shall notify the Illinois Division of Water
Resources and the Federal Insurance Administration prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse within the Municipality's jurisdiction by any person
or agencies. The Village shall assure that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of any watercourse be maintained.
E. Freeboard: All structures located in base flood areas shall be required to be so
sited on fill or be otherwise designed and constructed so as to include a
freeboard of at least two feet (2') between the lowest floor and the base flood
elevation, except as provided for in Section 5-7D-3 of this Chapter.(Ord. 03-
1834-11, eff. 4/14/03)
F. Base Flood: Wherever the areas expected to be inundated by the base flood
have been specifically identified, it is the intention of this Chapter to provide
protection in those areas against the high waters of that flood.
G. Historical Flood of Record: In the absence of specific information pertaining to
the base flood, it is the intention of this Chapter to provide protection in the lowlying
areas of this community against the high waters of the historical flood of
record.
H. Land Use Controls: This Chapter is not intended to reduce or eliminate existing
flooding, nor is it intended to impose a complete prohibition of construction in
base flood areas. On the contrary, these regulations are designed to guide and
control development in such a manner as to lessen the damaging effects of
floods on developments proposed for the low-lying areas of this community.
5-7-6: MAPS AND PROFILES:
A. Base Flood Elevations:
Des Plaines River Southern corp. limit 646*
Northern corp. limit 648*
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
Indian Creek Mouth at Des Plaines River 648*
About 2,150 feet upstream from
mouth (at corp. limits) 649*
Upstream corp. limits at State
Route 22 653*
About 350 feet upstream of State
Route 22 (upstream limit of
flooding affecting community) 655*
B. Certified HUD Flood Insurance Studies (FIS).
C. Illinois Department of Transportation - Division of Water Resources Regulatory
Floodplain Maps and Profiles.
D. HUD Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) and Approximate FIS Data.
E. USGS Maps of Flood-prone Areas.
F. USGS - NIPC Hydrologic Investigation Atlases (Floods of Record).
G. Village of Lincolnshire, IL, Community Number 170378
Date of Current Effective
Map (or Map Index)
Lake County DFIRM
Panel Number
Effective FIS Study
Date
September 18, 2013 17097C0254 K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0257K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0258 K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0259 K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0262 K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0266 K September 18, 2013
September 18, 2013 17097C0267K September 18, 2013
H. Flood Insurance Study, Village of Lincolnshire
a. Des Plaines River study dated September 18, 2013
b. North Branch Chicago River study dated September 18, 2013
I. Conflicts Between Maps and Profiles: In the event a conflict arises between the
information depicted by the official Village floodplain maps and the official
Village of Lincolnshire Page 9 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
Village profiles, and in the absence of any overriding information to the contrary,
the data prescribed by the profiles will govern.
J. Source Documents: Information pertaining to the base flood incorporated in this
Chapter, including maps and profiles, has been extracted from and is based on
the studies and reports prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
K. Official Elevations: The system of official bench marks and elevations already
established in the area by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey (first order level
network) or the U.S. Geological Survey shall hereafter be taken by engineers,
surveyors, architects, and contractors when making topographical surveys and
maps, and when setting grades and elevations of buildings, pavements,
drainage facilities, and other structures or works publicly constructed or
regulated by the Village.
L. Determination of Base Flood Area, Location and Elevations: The official maps
described in this Section shall be used as an aid in determining whether a
specific parcel of land lies within the base flood area. The final decision,
however, shall be based on the relation of the surveyed ground elevation and
the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this Chapter, the base flood
elevation applicable to a specific parcel of land, if not otherwise depicted by the
official maps and profiles described above, shall be that elevation established
for the adjoining stream or channel measured at right angles to the general
direction of flow in that stream or channel. In riverine situations where a bend in
the stream exists and more than one line can be placed at right angles to the
parcel of land, the highest base flood elevation determined shall prevail.
5-7-7: VARIANCES: The Village Board may grant variances from the regulatory
standards of this Chapter in accordance with the following requirements:
A. All Variance Requests: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant for
the variance can demonstrate that:
1. An exceptional economic hardship would result without the variance.
2. The relief granted is the minimum necessary.
3. There will be no additional threat to public safety or creation of nuisance.
4. No additional public expense will result.
Village of Lincolnshire
Title 5-7
Page 10
Revised 07/08/13
B. Variances to Lower Protection Levels: In addition to the requirements of
subsection A above, a variance from the requirements of Section 5-7D -3 of
this Chapter that would result in a structure not being protected to the elevation
of the base flood shall also meet the following requirements:
1. The structure is to be located on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level.
2. The Village Board notifies the applicant in writing that the variance will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage.
3. The Village Board notifies the applicant in writing that such construction
below the base flood level will increase the risks to life and property and
that the applicant proceeds with knowledge of these risks.
4. The Village Board notifies the applicant that if the variance is issued, it is
contingent upon the applicant obtaining approval from other agencies,
having jurisdiction, when the variance violates the requirements of such
agencies.
C. Variances to Increase Flood Heights: In addition to the requirements of
subsection A above, a variance from the requirements of Section 5-7A-1 or 5-
7A-2 of this Chapter that would significantly impede or increase the flow and
passage of floodwaters shall also meet the following requirements, except that
no variance will be granted that would result in an increased flood height
greater than one-tenth foot (0.1') within the designated regulatory floodway:
1. The resulting increase in the base flood elevation will not affect any
existing structures or utilities.
2. The owners of the properties affected by the increased base flood elevation
are compensated for the resulting effect on property values and give their
written agreement to granting the variance.
3. The resulting increased flood elevations will not affect any flood protection
structures.
D. Variances to Compensatory Storage Requirements: In addition to the
requirements of subsection A above, no variance from the compensatory
Village of Lincolnshire Page 11 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
floodplain storage provisions of this Chapter shall be granted which would
reduce the required volume of compensatory excavation to less than the
volume of space occupied by that portion of the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood elevation.
E. Historical Structures: Variances requested in connection with the
reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of preservation by the
Illinois Department of Conservation may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of subsections A or B above.
5-7-8: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Nonconforming Structures: Nonconforming structures may remain in use
subject to the following regulations:
1. Alterations: A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged, replaced or
structurally altered. A nonconforming structure accidentally damaged may
be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement value in which case it must thereafter conform to this Chapter.
The Building Commissioner shall determine the amount of damage.
2. Building Permit Issued Prior to Adoption or Amendment of the Zoning
Code: Proposed structures for which building permits have been issued
prior to their designation as nonconforming by adoption or amendment of
the Zoning Code1 may be completed and used as originally intended
subject to the nonconforming provisions of this Chapter.
B. Nonconforming Uses: Nonconforming uses may be continued subject to the
following regulations:
1. Extensions: A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or moved to
occupy any portion of the premises, either land or structure, which was not
originally occupied by the nonconforming use.
2. Discontinuance: Whenever a nonconforming use of any premises has been
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, it may not be reestablished.
3. Changes: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another or different
nonconforming use.
1See Title 6 of this Village Code.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 12 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
5-7-9: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS: Appeals to the to the
decisions of any administrative body of this Village in the interpretation of this Chapter
may be made to the Board of Trustees for approval or rejection by any aggrieved
person or governmental unit within thirty (30) days of approval or rejection.
5-7-10: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Responsibility: The administration of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of
the Village Manager; provided that:
1. Variances: No variance shall be issued without the prior concurrence of the
Village Board.
2. Special Use Permit: No special use permit shall be issued without the prior
concurrence of the Village Board.
3. Official Maps and Profiles: Responsibility for all changes to official maps
and profiles remains with the Village Board.
B. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, the
provisions expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and
shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes or adopted
pursuant to the home rule powers of the Village.
C. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this Chapter to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
D. Disclaimer of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical
records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur
or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
Chapter does not imply that areas outside the prescribed floodplain boundaries
or land uses permitted within such floodplains will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages which may result from
reliance on this Chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
E. Judicial Appeals: Any party shall have the right to appeal decisions of the
Village of Lincolnshire before the Circuit Court of Lake County.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 13 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
5-7-11: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
A. General: Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in
connection with variances or special use permits shall be subject to penalty
as herein provided. Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction, thereof, be subject to the
fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in
17-1, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
B. Corrective Actions: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. All such costs connected therewith shall accrue to and be paid by
the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 80-623-30)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 14 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE A. ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-7A-1: Floodways Not Identified
5-7A-2: Floodways Identified
5-7A-3: Open Storage of Materials
5-7A-1: FLOODWAYS NOT IDENTIFIED: In base flood areas where the floodways are
not identified, the following provisions shall prevail:
A. Encroachments: In the base flood area, no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or
increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the
base flood elevation.
B. Occupation and Use of Base Flood Area: Development in the use or filling of
the base flood area will be permitted if protection is provided against the base
flood by proper elevation, compensatory storage, and other provisions of this
Chapter. No use will be permitted which will adversely affect the ability of a
floodplain to convey the base flood, or the capacity of channels or drainage
facilities or systems. All uses and structures shall meet applicable zoning
requirements for the area.
5-7A-2: FLOODWAYS IDENTIFIED: In base flood areas where the floodways have
been identified, the following provisions shall prevail:
A. Occupation and Use of Floodways: In floodways which have been identified in
Section 5-7-6 of this Chapter as elements of the flood-plains of the base flood,
only those uses and structures will be permitted which will not impede or
increase the flow and passage of floodwaters. All such uses and structures
shall meet applicable zoning requirements for the area.
B. Occupation and Use of Nonfloodway Areas: Development in the use or filling of
nonfloodway areas including flood fringes will be permitted if protection is
provided against the base flood by proper elevation, compensatory storage,
Village of Lincolnshire Page 15 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
and other provisions of this Chapter. No use will be permitted which will
adversely affect the capacity of channels, the floodway, or drainage facilities or
systems. All uses and structures shall meet applicable zoning requirements for
the area.
5-7A-3: OPEN STORAGE OF MATERIALS:
A. Floatable Materials: Logs, wastes, lumber, lumber products, and other floatable
materials or containers shall not be placed, displayed, or stored in the floodway
and may be stored in flood fringes only upon the issuance of special use
permits.
B. Other Materials: The open storage or display on a flood fringe of inoperable
motor vehicles and similar nonmovable machinery and other nonfloatable
materials and products, where permitted by the regulations of the zoning district
applicable to such land, shall be considered the same as the placement of fill
on the floodplain and shall be subject to the regulations of this Chapter.
C. Hazardous Materials: The open storage of materials anywhere in the base
flood area which are flammable, explosive, toxic, or which could be otherwise
injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. (Ord. 80-623-30)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 16 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE B. SUBDIVISION, DEVELOPMENT AND
IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-7B-1: Required Information
5-7B-2: Subdivision Design
5-7B -1: REQUIRED INFORMATION: Accompanying the preliminary plans of each
proposed subdivision which involves any portion of a base flood area as described by
the official maps of this Village, there shall be furnished the following information and
data to the best knowledge of the applicant:
A. Contour Map: A topographic map with one foot (1') interval contours of the land to
be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or
drainage of the subdivision. On such a map, there shall be shown the following:
1. The location of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, their normal
channels, the extent of their floodplains at the established highwater
elevations, and the limits of the floodway, all properly identified.
2. The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins, their
floodplains and lines of inflow and outflow, if any.
3. The location of farm drains and their inlets and outlets.
4. Storm, sanitary, and combined sewers and any sewer outfalls.
5. Septic tank systems and outlets, if any.
6. Seeps, springs, and flowing and other wells.
7. Location of existing structures that will remain.
B. 100-year flood elevation and limits, including floodway data for that portion of a
subdivision or development which is in the base flood area having greater than fifty
(50) lots or five (5) acres whichever is the lesser.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 17 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
C. Channel Profiles: Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond, and basin
showing elevations of the following:
1. The streambed.
2. Channel banks, if any.
3. Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within six hundred sixty
feet (660') of the tract.
4. Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the stream channel or
basin.
5. The base flood elevations established by this Chapter.
5-7B -2: SUBDIVISION DESIGN: The following rules shall govern the design of land
improvements with respect to the floodplain fringe:
A. General: All proposed subdivision and other developments within the base flood
area shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage, that all public utilities and facilities (such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems) are located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided.
B. Design: Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner whenever possible as to preserve and utilize
natural streams, channels, and detention basins. Wherever possible, the larger
streams and floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
C. Channel Straightening: Sharply meandering streams or channels may be partially
straightened and minor changes made in other channels, subject to the approval of
the Village Board, provided: (1) the Hydraulic capacity of the floodway is
maintained, (2) provision is made to stabilize the banks of the modified channel to
control erosion, and (3) any permits for this work that are required by the Illinois
Department of Transportation and the Corps of Engineers are obtained.
D. Lots in Base Flood Area: Land lying wholly or partially in the base flood area may be
laid out and platted as building lots or parcels, provided that a building site not lower
than the base flood elevation (see Section 5-7D-2) plus one foot (1'): (1) exists on
the high part of the lot or parcel, or (2) will be built up during execution of the
subdivision improvement plan through general excavation or filling, or (3) can be
provided with excavation taken from within the area of the lot or parcel.
E. Compensatory Storage: Such filling as may be required or permitted by this Chapter
Village of Lincolnshire Page 18 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
for a building site, or as may otherwise be done in a floodplain shall be
compensated for and balanced by at least an equal volume of excavation taken
from below the highwater elevation. In the case of streams and channels, such
excavation shall be made opposite or immediately adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied and shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
F. Streets and Roads: When failure or interruption of service of streets or roads would
endanger public health or safety, streets and roads shall be protected to one foot
(1') above the base flood elevation. In other instances, protection shall be provided
to the extent practical.
G. Drainageways: Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or storage of surface
runoff or excess stormwater on lots, the grading of all such lots shall be prescribed
and established as part of the subdivision plat, The areas so designated for the
passage and/or storage of such waters shall not be obstructed. The horizontal limits
of the high water levels resulting from the passage and/or storage of surface runoff
or excess stormwater on lots shall be recorded on the plat of record and shall be
covered by an easement.
H. Manholes: All sanitary sewer manholes constructed in a floodplain must have a rim
elevation of a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or be
provided with a locking, watertight manhole cover. (Ord. 80-623-30)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 19 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE C. WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-7C-1: Design
5-7C-1: DESIGN: The design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems to be
located in the floodplain shall minimize or eliminate the discharges from the system
into the floodwaters and the infiltration of floodwaters into the system. On-site waste
disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination
from them during or subsequent to flooding. (Ord. 80-623-30)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 20 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE D. BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-7D-1: Permits
5-7D-2: Building Site
5-7D-3: Design Criteria
5-7D-1: PERMITS: Building permits are required for all proposed construction,
substantial improvements, or other development, including the placement of
mobile homes, within floodplain areas having special flood hazards. Such permits shall
assure that all other necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law. The building permit
applications will be reviewed to assure that any proposed construction is:
A. Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
B. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
C. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. At the time of
issuing a building permit, the following information will be noted and recorded by the
Village:
1. Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
2. Where the elevation of the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides,
the elevation of the floor immediately above.
3. Where a structure has been floodproofed, the elevation to which the structure
was floodproofed.
5-7D-2: BUILDING SITE: Each main building or structure that is built on fill shall have
or shall be provided with a site, area, or yard that is not lower than the established base
flood elevation plus one foot (1') and which shall extend beyond the outside walls for a
distance of at least five feet (5'). The finished grade or surface of this area beyond the
aforesaid five foot (5') distance shall be graded or surfaced so as to drain away from the
walls over a distance of not less than five (5) additional feet.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 21 Title 5-7
Revised 07/08/2013
5-7D-3: DESIGN CRITERIA: The following general design criteria shall apply to all
new construction and substantial improvements which may be authorized in floodplains:
A. Residential Structures: The lowest floor, including the basement, of residential
structures must be at an elevation not less than that of the Flood Protection
Elevation, unless they are adequately floodproofed and the Village has been
granted an exception from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) for placing
the lowest floor of the structures at a lower elevation. Within any A, AE, or AO
Zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the crown of the
nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the Village's FIRM.
B. Nonresidential Structures: The lowest floor, including the basement, of
nonresidential structures must be elevated or floodproofed to an elevation not less
than that of the Flood Protection Elevation. Within any AO Zone, all new
construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: (1)
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the crown of the
nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM, or (2)
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be completely
floodproofed to or above that level to Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
standards.
C. Walls: The walls, foundations, and other features which may be authorized for
construction or installation at an elevation below that of the Flood Protection
Elevation must be designed to resist appropriate hydrostatic pressures.
D. Anchoring: All authorized structures, including underground and aboveground
tanks, shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation. Anchoring materials should be
rust resistant.
E. Service Facilities: To the maximum extent feasible, all service facilities, such as
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, shall be
located at or above the Flood Protection Elevation. Water supply and wastewater
collection and treatment systems shall be designed and constructed so as to
prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
F. Floodproofing: Where the lowest floor elevation (including basement) is below the
Flood Protection Elevation, the structure, with the attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall be floodproofed to the Flood Protection Elevation. Where
floodproofing is required, a registered professional engineer or structural engineer
shall certify that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand
the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the base flood and a record of such certificates indicating the
specific elevation to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained
by the Village. (Ord. 03-1834-11, eff. 4/14/03)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
CHAPTER 8
SITE GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL
SECTION:
5-8-1: General
5-8-2: Required Permits
5-8-3: Plan Requirements
5-8-4: Waiver of Permit
5-8-5: Grading Plan Waiver Conditions
5-8-6: Fees
5-8-7: Certification
5-8-8: Violation and Enforcement of Regulations
5-8-1: GENERAL:
A. Objective: The objective of this Chapter is to prevent drainage problems to
trees as a result of construction, site grading, landscaping, or other site
improvements to real property.
B. Stormwater Management Regulations: The Lake County Watershed
Development Ordinance, as most recently amended by the County of Lake
on June 11, 2013, is hereby adopted by reference and is in full force and
effect within the Village of Lincolnshire and is found in its own compilation.
5-8-2: REQUIRED PERMITS:
A. Major Grading Permit: A major grading permit is required prior to starting any
work which will change the existing grade, whether by addition, removal, or
repositioning materials, soil or other, including landscaping, where the
disturbed area is 5,000 square feet or greater.
B. Minor Grading Permit: A minor grading permit is required prior to starting
any work which will change the existing grade, whether by addition, removal,
or repositioning materials, soil or other, including landscaping, where the
disturbed area is greater than 1,000 square feet and less than 5,000 square
feet; or where the disturbed area is less than 1,000 square feet but where the
work will occur within the drip line of a tree.
C. Exemptions:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
1. Site grading or landscape work undertaken as part of the original
conditions of improvement for a subdivision or planned unit development
and done in accordance with plans approved by the Building Official,
shall not be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
2. No permit will be required prior to starting any change to the existing
grade, including landscaping, where the disturbed area is less than
1,000 square feet, provided that the proposed work does not create a
drainage problem and is not located within the drip line of a tree as
defined elsewhere in the Code.
Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of any new structure or
modification or addition to an existing structure until a finalized grading plan or revision
to an existing grading plan is approved by the Building Official.
D. Permit Extensions and Terminations:
1. Work is authorized under a permit for a period of eighteen months from
the date of issuance, or one year after the commencement of work,
whichever is later, unless an extension has been granted in writing by the
Building Official. The permit holder must request an extension in writing
no sooner than 30 days nor less than 14 days prior to the termination of
the permit.
2. Any planned site grading or landscaping to a developed property that is
designed to cause a material change in the existing topography of the
land or, to drainage patterns must be discontinued until a grading plan or
revision to an existing grading plan approved by the Building Official
unless waived pursuant to the terms of this Chapter.
3. Failure to comply with any condition of the permit or failure to fully
disclose all relevant facts at any time shall be grounds for revocation of
the permit or denial of a permit extension.
5-8-3 PLAN REQUIREMENTS: A grading plan will be required for a major or minor
grading permit.
A. Minor Grading Permit: The applicant shall submit three paper copies of the
grading plan.
B. Major Grading Permit: In addition to three paper copies of the grading plan,
the applicant shall submit an electronic copy of the grading plan in
accordance with the “Lincolnshire Drawing Data Delivery Specification.”
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
C. All Grading Plans: The required grading plan shall be prepared by either a
registered engineer or a registered land surveyor licensed by the State, shall
be presented in a form acceptable to the Building Official, and shall include
the following minimum requirements:
1. The plan shall show the name, address, and telephone number of the
plan preparer.
2. The plan shall show the address of the property where the work will
occur.
3. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals twenty
feet (1" = 2O'), except for properties exceeding two (2) acres where a
smaller scale maintaining clarity may be accepted at the discretion of the
Building Official.
4. The drawing size of the plan shall be no less than eight and one-half
inches by eleven inches (8-1/2" x 11") and no larger than seventeen
inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22"), except for properties exceeding
ten (10) acres where drawing size can be increased to twenty four inches
by thirty six inches (24" x 36").
5. The plan shall contain a north arrow.
6. The plan shall show all easements, building setbacks, and Conservancy
Rights and Areas.
7. All elevations shall be on the USGS Datum and bench marks used shall
be indicated.
8. The plan shall show spot elevations of all critical locations.
9. The plan shall show spot elevations at lot corners and at twenty five foot
(25') intervals along the property lines or along the perimeter of the area
to be regraded or landscaped.
10. The plan shall show the elevations and location where drainage courses
cross the property lines.
11. The plan shall show existing contours for the entire tract on one foot (1')
contour intervals or one-half foot (0.5') contour intervals if the average
slope of the tract is two percent (2%) or less.
12. The plan shall show proposed driveway location and gradients.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
13. The plan shall show the top of wall, bottom of wall, and construction
details of a retaining wall, if applicable. The plan shall also indicate the
presence of a rail, if applicable.
14. Where driveway culverts are required, the plan shall show proposed
location, size and type of culvert, and shall show gradients at twenty five
foot (25') intervals, one hundred feet (100') upstream and downstream
from the proposed culvert, including inverts of existing upstream and
downstream culverts. Calculations shall be provided to justify the size of
the culvert.
15. The plan shall show proposed contours and spot elevations of critical
points.
16. The plan shall show proposed building top of foundation, elevations of all
entries, and elevations of proposed finished ground grade at all
significant points around the proposed building.
17. The plan shall indicate the Flood Zone Designation and the Flood
Insurance Rate Map Panel Number for the subject property.
18. The plan shall show floodplain elevation, in conformance to the
Lincolnshire floodplain regulations if said floodplain elevation is within
three feet (3') of the elevation of the lowest floor of the existing or
proposed structure.
19. The plan shall show conformance to the Lincolnshire floodplain
regulations.
20. The plan shall show all proposed connections to public sewers and shall
include invert elevations, size and location of said public sewers. (Ord.
83-770-24)
21. The plan shall show conformance to all erosion and water management
regulations. An erosion control plan shall be included with the site
grading and utility plan for review by the Building Official. Erosion control
shall conform to the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance,
latest edition.
22. The plan shall include provisions and a time schedule for restoring grass
and lawns or for other erosion control measures.
23. A minimum of three (3) copies of the plan shall be submitted. Additional
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
copies shall be supplied as requested by the Building Official.
24. The plan shall show location and disposition of downspout, footing drain
and sump pump discharge.
25. The plan shall include information on adjacent properties to show
contours, drainage courses, structure locations, and foundation
elevations, within fifty feet (50') of the subject property.
D. Copy Maintained by Property Owners: A reproducible copy of the original
plan shall remain in the possession of the property owners and shall be
available at the site for inspection.
5-8-4: WAIVER OF PERMIT: A waiver of a separate minor grading permit may be
approved by the Building Official in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit
only on property previously improved with the principal use or structure, where the
project consists only of minor additions to existing dwellings or structures, the
construction of accessory buildings, tennis courts, swimming pools, or minor
landscaping., and where said work is not contemplated within the drip line of a tree
which is to remain.
The waiver request shall be made in writing and shall include a description and address
of the property, a brief description and site plan of the work to be performed, and a
statement signed by the property owner as follows:
“The applicant certifies that he is the owner of the property described above,
and certifies upon investigation that the above described project will not
disturb existing topography within three feet (3') of adjacent properties or will
not create adverse drainage problems on adjacent property. The applicant
further agrees to assume all responsibility for any drainage problems that
may be caused directly or indirectly by any action involving the above
described project, and further absolves the Village of Lincolnshire of any
responsibility for problems or actions that may result from the granting of the
waiver of the site grading permit requirements.
Date_____________
Signed_____________________________”
5-8-5: GRADING PLAN WAIVER CONDITIONS:
A. Conditions: A minor grading permit may be waived by the Building Official
when the following conditions are present:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
1. No major watercourse crosses the buildable area of the property.
2. No portion of proposed building or site grading is within the floodplain.
3. No filling, grading, paving or construction of auxiliary building or
structures is located within ten feet (10') of side or rear lot lines.
4. The principal structure is located twenty feet (20') or more from any side
or rear lot lines.
5. A contour map of the area or property at no more than two foot (2')
intervals and of scale no less than one inch equal to two hundred feet
(1"= 200') must be on file in the office of the Building Official, or one must
be submitted.
6. No addition, removal, or repositioning of materials, soil or other, is within
the drip line of a tree, unless suitable protection measures are to be
taken as approved by the Village Forester.
B. The request for grading plan waiver shall include the following:
1. Legal description of property.
2. Brief description of project.
3. Plot plan of project showing dimensions from lot lines, height of
foundation, location of driveway, provisions for roof drainage and
proposed grading limits.
4. A notarized statement signed by the property owner as follows:
“The applicant hereby certifies that he/she is the owner of the previously
described property and certifies that the described project will conform to the
conditions for plan waiver stated in this Section, and to the best of his/her
knowledge will not create adverse drainage problems on adjacent property.
The applicant further agrees to assume all responsibility for any drainage
problems that may be caused directly or indirectly by any action involving the
above described project, and takes full responsibility for problems or actions
that may result.
5-8-6: FEES: The fee for a grading permit shall be as prescribed in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule as set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Where
an existing grading plan is to be revised, a new grading permit shall be requested for a
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 5-8
Revised 07/08/2013
fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1
of this Code.
5-8-7: CERTIFICATION:
A. Upon completion of the proposed site grading, construction and/or
landscaping, the applicant shall certify that said site grading, construction,
and/or landscaping has been completed according to the grading plan
approved. If no grading plan was required, the applicant shall make a
certification that the waiver conditions continue to apply to the property after
the work was completed.
When changes are made from the original plan, the applicant shall note and
certify to compliance with the changed plan.
Certification shall be indicated by a note on one copy of the original plan or, if
revised, on the revised plan, as follows:
"I, _____________________________________________________ do
hereby certify that this plan is a reasonable depiction of the topography of the
described property as existed on this date, and essentially conforms to this
plan, filed with the Village of Lincolnshire Director of Public Works as Permit
No. ___________________ dated ___________, 20__, or to revisions of
said plan as noted and approved by the undersigned.
Date_____________
Signed_____________________________”
B. Additional Requirements: Major Grading Permits
The applicant shall prepare and submit a record drawing of the construction.
The record drawing shall be made upon a copy of the approved set of plans.
If so required, the record drawing shall also be submitted in electronic format
in accordance with the “Lincolnshire Drawing Data Delivery Specification.”
5-8-8: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS: Violations and
enforcement of this Chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions set
forth in
Article 5-1-8 of the Building Regulations.
(Amd. Ord. 02-1797–07, eff. 4/8/02)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
6-1-1: Title
6-1-2: Purpose and Intent
6-1-3: Interpretation
6-1-4: Separability
6-1-5: Penalties
6-1-1: TITLE: This Title, consisting of the Zoning ordinance of the Village and all
amendments thereto, THE LINCOLNSHIRE ZONING CODE.1
6-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT: This Zoning Code is adopted for the purpose of:
A. Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and
general welfare;
B. Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers;
C. Conserving the taxable value of land and building throughout the Village;
D. Dividing the entire Village into districts and restricting and regulating therein
the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings,
structures, and land, whether for residence, business, manufacturing, or
other specified uses;
E. Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets;
1 Ordinance 75-415-45, passed November 11, 1975, re-enacted the Lincolnshire Zoning Code, by stating in part
"The Lincolnshire Zoning Code, as amended, be and is hereby re-enacted and repassed pursuant to the home rule
powers of the Village of Lincolnshire, Lake County, Illinois,...".
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 2
F. Preventing the overcrowding of land by regulating and limiting the height;
G. Establishing, regulating, and limiting the building or setback lines on or along
streets, alleys or property lines;
H. Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and regulating
and determining the area of open spaces within the surrounding buildings;
I. Establishing standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
J. Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of the
residence, designated districts, business, manufacturing, farming, or other;
K. Preventing additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
L. Providing for the gradual elimination of business, commercial and
manufacturing uses, buildings, and structures which are incompatible with the
character of the districts in which they are located; including, without being
limited thereto:
1. Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lots when the existing
rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated or when the
uses to which they are devoted are discontinued.
2. Elimination of uses to which such buildings and structures are devoted, if
they are adaptable for permitted uses.
3. Elimination of such buildings and structures when they are destroyed or
damaged in major part, or when they have reached the age fixed by the
corporate authorities of the Municipality as the normal useful life of such
buildings or structures.
M. Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided hereinafter; and
N. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Code, or
of any amendment thereto.
6-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 3
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall
be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, and welfare.
B. Where the condition imposed by any provision of this Zoning Code upon the
(1) use, (2) floor area requirements, (3) bulk, (4) lot area requirements, (5)
yard requirements, or (6) signs, are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Zoning
Code or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any duly
constituted public agency, having jurisdiction, the regulation which is more
restrictive or which imposes higher standards of requirements shall govern.
C. This Zoning Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this Zoning
Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than
such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of
this Zoning Code shall govern.
D. No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption
of this Zoning Code shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the
adoption of this Zoning Code; and to the extent that, and in any manner that,
such unlawful building structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of
this Zoning Code, such building, structure, or use, remains unlawful
hereunder.
6-1-4: SEPARABILITY: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and
Board of Trustees of the Village that the several provisions of this Zoning
Code are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Zoning Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision
of this Zoning Code not specifically included in said judgment; and
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any
provision of this Zoning Code to a particular property, building, or other
structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to
any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 4
6-1-5: PENALTIES:
A. Except as provided below, a person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of the provisions of this
Zoning Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the fine set
forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1.
Each day such a violation or failure to comply is continued, or permitted to
exist, after notification thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. Amd.
10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
B. The penalties provided in this Section shall not apply to any person,
corporation, or association who neglects to file an affidavit or an application
for a zoning exemption certificate to claim a lawful non-conforming use as
required under Section 6-13-4-3. (Ord. 65-138-15)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 1 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Rules of Word Construction
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION
The language set forth in the text of this Zoning Code shall be interpreted in accordance with the
following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present;
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter;
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Zoning Code, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof; and any word appearing in
parenthesis, between a word and its definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as
that word;
F. All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a fraction is
one-half foot (½') or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken;
G. Words contained in this Code and not defined hereinafter shall assume definitions as set forth in
Merriam-Webster's dictionary (website edition; www.merriam-webster.com);
H. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
I. Graphic illustrations are used herein to demonstrate the intent of the definition language. In any
case of conflict between a graphic illustration and the text definition, the text shall prevail.
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Zoning Code shall be defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE A structure detached from the Principal Structure located on the same
lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal building or
use, in terms of size, area, extent or purpose.
ACCESSORY USE A use of land, structure or a portion thereof customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the land or building, in terms of
intensity or purpose, and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ADVERTISING DEVICE Any advertising sign, billboard, or poster panel which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively
related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed; but does not include those advertising signs, billboards, or
poster panels which direct attention to the business on the premises or
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 2 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
to a brand name of a product or commodity with which the business is
specifically identified and which is sold on the premises.
ADJACENT Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
ADJOINING Touching or contiguous to; or to be in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT
A cultivation center, craft grower, processing organization, infuser
organization, dispensing organization or transporting organization, all
as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410
ILCS 705/1-10, but not including a medical cannabis cultivation center
or a medical cannabis dispensary organization.
AGRICULTURE The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal
and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation
of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities. Included are truck-farming, growing of nursery
stock, raising of fruit and berries, bee-keeping, and the retail sale of
products grown or raised on the premises through one growing season.
Agriculture shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal
to swine or other animals or operating for the disposal of garbage,
sewerage, rubbish, or offal. Also, excluded from agriculture are
mechanized industrial animal farms, commercially operated
greenhouses, commercial milk farms, and commercial dog kennels.
The land area (farm) necessary to constitute an agricultural use is five
(5) acres.
AIRCRAFT A contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, for use in or designed
for navigation of or flight in the air.
AIRPORT Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are
used or intended for use for airport buildings or other air-port facilities
or rights of way, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie
down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
AIRPORT (LANDING STRIP
HELIPORT or HELISTOP)
Any premises which are used, or intended, for use, or for the landing
and take-off of aircraft; and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use as airport buildings or other airport structures or rights
of way, together with all airport buildings and structures located
thereon.
ALLEY A right of way, with a width not exceeding twenty four feet (24') which
affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a building or
structure.
AMENDMENT Any addition to, deletion from, or change, including text and/or map.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 3 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
ANIMAL CLINIC/HOSPITAL An establishment for the diagnosis and medical and surgical treatment
of small domestic animals by persons qualified and authorized by
appropriate licensing to treat injuries, illnesses and diseases of animals.
All activity associated with animal clinics/hospital operations shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL A structure where animals or pets are given medical or surgical
treatment. Use as a kennel, or for other boarding purposes, shall be
limited to short-time and fully enclosed boarding and shall only be
incidental to such hospital use. Also a "veterinary clinic”.
ANTENNA Any device or array that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic
signals for voice, data or video communication purposes including, but
not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone,
personal wireless services and similar forms of communications.
APARTMENT One or more rooms in a multi-family dwelling arranged, intended or
designed as living quarters for an individual, group of individuals, or a
family.
ASSEMBLY USE The use of a non-government owned building, or part thereof, by a
gathering of persons principally for civic, literary, arts, music, political,
transportation, religious, or similar purposes. Examples include, but are
not limited to Fraternal Lodges, Private Club which shall not include
any Sexual Oriented Business as defined in Section 6-7B-3 of this Title,
Veterans’ membership organizations, civic organizations, conference
centers, banquet halls, and meeting rooms and ballroom facilities which
are principal uses or accessory to hotels/motels.
ATTIC The space between the ceiling beams of a top habitable story and the
roof rafters.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY A building or portion thereof containing facilities for (Car Wash)
washing motor vehicles, using automatic production-line methods with
a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical
devices; or providing space, water, and equipment for the hand washing
of autos, whether by the customer or the operator.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR
FACILITY
The general repair, including engine rebuilding or reconditioning, of
motor vehicles; collision service such as body, frame and fender
straightening and repair, and painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE
FACILITY
Any building or premises used for the sale and installation of tires,
batteries and other minor accessories and services for automobiles, but
not including Automotive Repair Facility services; and may include
washing of automobiles where no production line methods are
employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels
or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall
be classified as a public garage.
AUXILLARY USE Retail and/or service use within the Office/Industrial (O/I) Districts,
incidental to and to service the principal use for the convenience of the
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 4 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
employees.
AWNING A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a
building and which may overhang the public way.
BASEMENT (CELLAR) The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BASEMENT, ENGLISH The portion of a building located partly underground, but having less
than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground and which is finished for living space.
BERM A hill of land that acts as a visual barrier between a lot and adjacent
properties, alleys or streets.
BLOCK A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of one or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead
lines or shore lines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BREWERY A business which holds a Class 3, 10 or 11 manufacturer’s license and/or
a brewer warehouse permit from the State of Illinois.
BUILDABLE AREA The area of the lot remaining after the minimum open space and/or
yard requirements of this Code have been complied with.
BUILDING Anything constructed for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently
affixed to the land.
BUILDING/COMPLETELY
ENCLOSED
A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from
other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior
walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or
exit doors.
BUILDING/DETACHED A principal building surrounded by open space on the same lot. (Ord.
86-885-22)
BUILDING HEIGHT The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of
the roof of a building or the highest point of the roof including rooftop
equipment screens, but excluding residential chimneys. The established
grade shall be determined by taking the mean elevation of the finished
lot grade at the front of the building. In residential districts, the
established grade for any new dwelling units associated with the
replacement or reconstruction, for any reason, of a previous dwelling
unit shall be determined by taking the mean elevation of the lot grade at
the front of the proposed building, prior to any new site grading.
Established grade for development of a previously-vacant lot shall be
determined by reference to the mean existing grade at the front yard
setback line. (Amd. Ord. 04-1934-50, eff. 11/8/04)
BUILDING/RESIDENTIAL A principal building arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for
residential occupancy by one or more families.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 5 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
BUILDING SIDE SETBACK
PLANE
Defines the planes within which, except for permitted encroachments,
all portions of a building must remain. The planes begin at specific
points directly above the established grade at the side lot lines and run
at a 45 degree angle toward the interior of the lot until they reach the
maximum building height permitted on the lot. (Amd. Ord. 04-1934-
50, eff. 11/8/04)
BUILDING/TEMPORARY A building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it
is, or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK A composite characteristic of a given building or structure as located
upon a given lot-not definable as a single quantity but involving all of
these characteristics:
A. Size and height of building or structure.
B. Location of exterior walls at levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or
to other buildings or structures.
C. Floor area ratio.
D. All open spaces allocated to the building or structure.
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor, and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited,
bought or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
CANOPY A roof-like structure projecting from a wall and supported in whole or in
part by vertical supports from the ground, and erected primarily to
provide shelter from the weather.
CARGO or FREIGHT
TERMINAL
A building or premises in which cargo or freight is received or
dispatched.
CARPORT An open sided (on at least 2 sides), roofed automobile shelter, usually
formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building.
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT An establishment for commercial on-site food preparation specifically
for off-site delivery and consumption of food.
CEMETERY A permanent or semi-permanent burial place or receptacle for human
remains, regardless of whether the remains are composed of the whole
body or parts thereof and irrespective of the vessel in which the remains
are held, encased or entombed. For illustrative purposes only, and not
intended to be an exhaustive list, Cemetery includes a catacomb,
cinerarium, columbarium, crypt, mausoleum, ossuary, sepulcher,
sepulture, tomb, or vault. (Ord. 08-3070-53)
CERTIFICATE, OCCUPANCY The written approval of the Zoning Administrator certifying that the
building or structure, as constructed, conforms to the applicant's
approved plans and drawings as authorized through the zoning
certificate and is ready for occupancy.
CERTIFICATE, ZONING The written approval of the Zoning Administrator certifying that the
applicant's plans and drawings comply with all applicable provisions of
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 6 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
this Code. The "zoning certificate" may consist of a standardized
independent form bearing the signature of the Zoning Administrator or
it may be represented as a part of the building permit application.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING
COMPLIANCE
The written confirmation certifying compliance with the regulations set
forth in Title 6, Zoning, including but not limited to any decisions,
conditions or special requirements for any use or occupancy of a parcel
of land.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER An institution or place in which are received three (3) or more children,
not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardian, for part
or all of a day but not later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. This term
includes but is not limited to nursery schools, child care centers, and
day nurseries.
COMMON OPEN SPACE Land or water unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights of way
and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a planned unit development. Common open
space may contain walks, patios, and structures for recreational use.
Area used for individual open space, such as private courtyards, and not
available to all residents of the planned unit development shall not be
included as common open space. (Ord. 86-885-22)
COMMUNICATIONS
SUPPPORT BUILDING
A structure for the protection and security of communications
equipment associated with one or more antennas, where access to
equipment is gained from the interior of the structure.
COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT
CABINETS
A casing or console used for the protection and security of
communications equipment associated with one or more antennas,
where direct access is provided from the exterior.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL
HOME
A dwelling unit owned or leased and operated to provide a living
environment for twelve (12) or fewer unrelated residents who operate as
the functional equivalent of a family unit and who receive support
services and are under the supervision of a sponsor or support staff due
to their developmental, physical or mental disability.
A community residential home shall not be construed to include a
medical or nursing facility. A community residential home shall not
include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to
incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason
for placement is substance abuse or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a
communicable disease. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
COMPATIBLE USE A property, use, or service which is capable of direct association with
certain other uses because it is complimentary, congruous, or otherwise
non-detrimental.
CONCRETE RECYCLING,
STORAGE AND SALES:
The process whereby previously manufactured concrete, without
protruding metal bars, is received, stored, segregated, processed and
remixed for sale to end markets in the form of raw materials or
products.(Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 7 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
CONFORMING BUILDING or
STRUCTURE
Any building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of the Zoning Code or of any
amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which
such building or structure is located, or,
B. Is designed or intended for a conforming use.
C. Example: An office building in a Business District.
CONTIGUOUS In contact, adjoining, or touching another object or item, as
distinguished from being adjacent.
CONVALESCENT, NURSING or
REST HOME
An establishment for the care of the aged or inform, or a place of rest for
those suffering bodily disorders. Such home does not contain
convalescent equipment for surgical care or for more than the incidental
treatment of disease or injury.
CURB LEVEL The level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the
center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
pavement elevation at the street center line similarly measured, or the
mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately adjacent to a
building shall be considered the "curb level".
DAY As used in this Code, "day" shall mean one calendar day. If a projected
day falls on a weekend or holiday, the next following working day or
week day shall fulfill requirements.
DAY SPA An establishment that provides State licensed, professionally
administered massage and body treatments. For the purposes of
explanation, and not intended to an exhaustive list, day spa services
may include body wraps, skin exfoliation, electrolysis, body toning,
waxing, aromatherapy, and facial treatments. Full service beauty
shops/salons, makeup consultation and applications, manicure and
pedicure services, and body tanning may be provided as accessory
services to a day spa.(Ord. 09-3103-26, eff. 06/22/09)
DECIBEL A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level
meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels".
DETENTION The temporary on-site restraining of storm water. (Ord. 86-885-22)
DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITY
A severe or chronic disability of a person which:
A. Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of
mental and physical impairments.
B. is manifested before the person attains age twenty two (22).
C. is likely to continue indefinitely.
D. Results in substantial functional limitation in three (3) or more of
the following areas of major life activity: 1) self-care, 2) receptive
and expressive language, 3) learning, 4) mobility, 5) self-direction,
6) capacity for independent living, and 7) economic self sufficiency.
E. Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special
care, treatment, or other services which are lifelong or of extended
duration and are individually planned and coordinated, (Ord. 90-
1182-66)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 8 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
DISTILLERY A business which holds a Class 1 or Class 9 manufacturer’s license
and/or a craft distiller tasting permit from the State of Illinois.
DISTRICT A portion of the corporate area of the Village, within which certain
uniform regulations and requirements; or various combinations thereof,
apply under the provisions of this Title.
DRIVE-THROUGH
RESTAURANT
Any business where food or beverages are sold and delivered to the
consumer while the consumer is in an automobile or other motorized
vehicle.
DRIVEWAY A pathway for motor vehicles from a street to a structure used for
service purposes or for access to the structure only.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT Establishments primarily engaged in preparing and serving alcoholic
beverages for immediate consumption; commonly known as bars,
taverns, nightclubs, or drinking place; and may also provide limited
food services.
DWELLING A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels or
motels.
DWELLING/ATTACHED A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by
party walls.
DWELLING/DETACHED A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING/MULTI-FAMILY A building, or portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling
units, originally constructed for said purpose. (Ord. 86-885-22)
DWELLING/SINGLE-FAMILY A building containing one dwelling unit only and that is occupied by one
family as defined in this Title. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
DWELLING/TWO FAMILY A building containing two (2) dwelling units only, designed for two (2)
families to live independently of each other, and that is occupied by not
more than two (2) families. (Ord. 86-885-22)
DWELLING UNIT A group of contiguous rooms which include facilities which are used for
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, constituting all or part of a
dwelling or hotel, and arranged, designed or intended for use
exclusively as living quarters for one family or a community residential
home maintaining a single and separate housekeeping unit, except as
provided in Section 6-3-9 of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION A public, parochial, private or charitable, or nonprofit school, junior
college, college or university, trade or business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses. An Educational Institution is
distinguished from a Tutoring Center by the scale of the facilities,
number of students and the style of presenting academic instruction.
EFFICIENCY UNIT A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room together with
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 9 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, and/or dining room alcove directly
off the principal room, provided such dining alcove does exceed one
hundred twenty five (125) square feet in area. An efficiency unit created
after the effective date of this Zoning Code shall contain at least three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
ELEEMOSYNARY
INSTITUTION
A building or group of buildings devoted to and supported by charity.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS A place of business carrying on operations, the ownership and
management of which are separate and distinct from those of any other
place of business located on the same zoning lot. Direct access to each
"business establishment" shall be separate and distinct from direct
access to any other business establishment, and in no case shall there be
access to one such establishment from within another such
establishment.
FAMILY A. One person, his or her spouse, their offspring, legally adopted
children.
B. Plus not more than six (6) other persons who are foster children or
related to said person by blood, marriage or legal adoption such as
mother or father, sister or brother, and mother-in-law or father-inlaw,
except that the total shall not exceed eight (8) unless it consists
entirely of persons included under A as listed above. (Ord. 86-885-
22)
C. A family may also be composed of not to exceed three (3) persons
not so related, provided that such unrelated persons live in a single
dwelling and maintain a common household and a single
housekeeping unit, including persons of a community residential
home as defined in this Title.
A family includes any domestic servants and not more than one
gratuitous guest residing with said family; such servants or guests shall
be included in the unrelated persons attained by this definition, and
shall not be in addition thereto. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
FARMERS MARKET A designated area where home-grown or home-made products are sold
directly to the public from open or semi-open facilities.
FENCE A structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, NATURAL A fence made of natural growth, such as trees, deciduous shrubs,
evergreens, etc.
FENCE, OPEN A fence, including gates, which contains no greater than 60% opaque
materials, as measured horizontally along each foot of the length of the
fence facing each yard.
FENCE, SOLID A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining
properties, streets, or alleys activities conducted behind it.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 10 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
FLOOD A temporary increase in normal water level (surface water elevation)
that results in water inundating areas adjacent or near to the usual
channel or lake.
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION Six hundred forty five feet (645') above mean sea level which is the
elevation of the highest flood on record for the Des Plaines River at
Highway 22.
FLOOD-CREST ELEVATION The elevation equal to the flood-crest level of record designated by the
Village Engineer or other governmental official or body having
jurisdiction as applicable to the property for which a zoning certificate is
being requested.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA That continuous area adjacent to a stream or stream bed, or any storm
water retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to or
lower than the flood-crest elevation including also land less than ten
(10) acres in area having an elevation higher than flood-crest elevation
and which is surrounded by land in a flood plain area, or land, less than
five (5) acres in area, having an elevation equal or higher than floodcrest
elevation and bordered on three (3) sides by land in a flood plain
area.
FLOOD TABLE LAND The area up to one thousand feet (1,000') adjacent to the flood plain but
which is lower than the flood base elevation. Areas protected by an
existing dike or natural ridge are not considered flood table land.
FLOOR AREA (GROSS FLOOR
AREA)
For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, the minimum floor
area and conversions of existing structures. The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, including the English
Basement floor but not including a basement floor, measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls. The "floor area" of a building shall
also include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor space used
for mechanical equipment, except equipment, open or enclosed, located
on the roof; penthouses; finished attic space having headroom of five
feet (5') or more; unfinished garage attic space, with or without flooring,
having headroom of five feet (5') or more from the top of the lowest
garage ceiling rafters; provided however that porches and any space
devoted to accessory off-street parking or loading shall not be included
in "floor area, and, in residential zoning districts, the area of a garage
shall be included, with the exception that the first 400 square feet of the
total garage area shall be excluded. Further, for that portion of any open
two-story element, which consists of an interior space which has a clear
height of sixteen feet (16') or more from the floor elevation, that floor
area shall be counted twice in calculating the floor area ratio. (Amd.
Ord. 04-1934-50, eff. 11/8/04)
FLOOR AREA (FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING
OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING REQUIREMENTS)
The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building
or portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or
loading as required in this Zoning Code. This area shall exclude such
floor areas used for accessory off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities and such basement floor areas that are devoted exclusively to
uses accessory to the operations of the building. All horizontal
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 11 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of the wall.
FLOOR AREA (OF A
DWELLING UNIT OR A
LODGING ROOM)
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the room constituting the
dwelling unit or lodging room, including closets, baths, utility rooms,
hallways when accessible only to the occupants of said dwelling unit or
lodging room and not accessible to other occupants of the building or to
the general public, and only when such rooms, halls or other areas are
an integral part of said dwelling unit or lodging room. Floor area shall
be measured from the interior faces of the outer-most walls defining the
dwelling unit or lodging room but shall not include any unfinished
space or finished space having a headroom of less than five feet (5').
FLOOR AREA (RATIO) The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a
building or buildings by the lot area on which such building or buildings
are located.
FOOTCANDLE A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface, equal to
one lumen per square foot and originally defined with reference to a
standardized candle burning at one foot from a given surface. (Ord. 08-
3049-32, eff. 08/11/08)
FREE-STANDING ANTENNA
POLE
A free-standing monopole-design structure that is constructed solely for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. This definition does
not include towers that require additional support, such as guyed towers
or lattice towers.
FRONTAGE The length of all the property fronting on one side of a street between
the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the
street, or if dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT The length of all the property of such zoning lot fronting on street,
measured between side lot lines.
GARAGE/PRIVATE An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building,
which is intended for and used for storing of privately owned motor
vehicles, boats and trailers of the family or families resident upon the
premises and in which no business, service, or industry connected
directly or indirectly with motor vehicles, boats and trailers is carried
on; provided that not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the parking spaces
therein may be rented for the storage of motor vehicles, boats and
trailers of persons not resident on premises, except that all the parking
spaces in a garage of one (1), two (2) or three (3) car capacity may be so
rented.
GARAGE/PUBLIC A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or
used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, storing, or
parking motor-driven vehicles. The term repairing shall not include an
automotive body repair shop or the rebuilding, dismantling, or storage
of a wrecked or junked vehicle, unless expressly authorized.
GARAGE SALE The occasional sale of used or surplus household goods, wares and other
items of personal property owned by the occupier of the residence on
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 12 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
the premises where such sale is held, or owned collectively by a group of
persons including the occupier of the residence on the premises where
such sale is held. Also includes sales commonly known as yard sales,
basement sales, house sales, yard sales, attic sales, rummage sales,
estate sales or other similar occasional sales conducted on an infrequent
and unscheduled basis from residentially zoned premises.
GARAGE/STORAGE A building or premises used for housing of motor vehicles, and where
no equipment or parts are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced,
repaired, hired or sold, except that fuel, grease, or oil may be dispensed
within the building to vehicles stored therein.
GAZEBO A freestanding roofed Accessory Structure open on all sides, affording
shade and rest.
GLARE A distinct light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter
than the ambient level of brightness to which the eyes are adapted to
cause a visual disturbance or nuisance. (Ord. 08-3049-32, eff.
08/11/08)
GRADE The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
GRADING Reshaping natural land contours, using natural land materials such as
soil, gravel, sand, black dirt, etc., for the purpose of eliminating erosion
or sedimentation problems, creating or improving surface drainage,
providing for the natural aesthetic contouring of property, or to
accommodate a building plan by making minor changes in land
elevation.
GROSS FLOOR AREA All the floor area contained within a building or buildings, without
exception.
GROUND FLOOR That level of a building on a sloping or multi-level site which has its
floor line at or not more than three feet (3') above exit grade.
GROUND FLOOR AREA The lot area covered by a building, measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls, but excluding open terraces and carports.
GUEST/PERMANENT A person who occupies or has the right to occupy, a residence
accommodation for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
HEDGE A row or fence of bushes. (Ord. 86-885-22)
HISTORIC DISTRICT Any parcel of land, use or structure which has been determined by the
Village Board or National Trust to be of historic significance and which
is identified as such on a recorded plat, plan or any other appropriate
document. (Ord. 87-954-40)
HOME OCCUPATION An occupation or profession practiced by, a member of the family
residing on the premises, and which occupation is clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling; and in connection with
which there is no indication from the exterior, that the building is being
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 13 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
utilized in whole or in part for any purpose than that of a dwelling. No
commodity is sold upon the premises and no commodity intended for
sale or use elsewhere is stored on the premises; no more than one
person is employed other than members of the family residing on the
premises; and no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except
such as is permissible for purely domestic or household purposes. A
professional person may use his residence for consultation, emergency
treatment, or performance of religious rites. No accessory building shall
be used for such home occupation. Home occupations, further, shall not
utilize more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor area of any
one story.
HOSPITAL A medical institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, and care of
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other
abnormal physical condition.
HOTEL or MOTEL An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction
to a boarding, rooming or lodging house, and is commonly known as a
hotel in the community in which it is located; and which provides
customary hotel services such as maid services, the furnishing and
laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use
and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy service.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACE A surface which does not allow water to be absorbed so it may percolate
into deeper ground. Such surfaces are those constructed of Portland
concrete, bituminous concrete, composed stone or gravel, or any other
surface that allows little or no water penetration.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE Any man-made area that alters the natural surface course for or does
not allow for the natural rate of absorption or retention of storm water.
Such areas may include, but are not limited by reason of exclusion from
the following list of examples, roofs, parking and driveway areas,
graveled areas, sidewalks and bike paths, paved recreational areas,
swimming pools, porches, decks and patios. (Amd Ord. 07-2973-01B,
eff. 1/22/07)
INCOMPATIBLE LAND USE A non-residential use adjacent to a residential zoning district or a
Special Use in a residential zoning district. (Amd. Ord. 12-3233-03, eff.
1/23/12)
LABORATORY A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing.
Manufacturing of product or products is not to be permitted within this
definition.
LANDSCAPE WASTE All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and
other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees.(Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
LIBRARY-PUBLIC A facility owned and operated by a unit of local government for the
collection, storage, use and dissemination of educational and
recreational materials in various formats and which provides space for
uses that support the efficient and effective operation of a public library
system. (Ord. 92-1228-06)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 14 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT With respect to any restaurant, bar, tavern or other place of public
accommodation, any public artistic, musical or dramatic performance
which is the principal purpose for the audience to be present, regardless
of whether a fee is charged. (Ord. 13-3282-08, eff. 3/11/13)
LOADING BERTH A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principal
building providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and
with access to a street or alley.
LOT A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot may consist of any of
the following, provided that in no case of division or combination shall
any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the
requirements of this Zoning Code:
A. A single lot of record;
B. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record
and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
A lot occupied by, or intended for occupancy by, one principal building
or principal use and shall have frontage upon a street as defined by this
Zoning Code. Notwithstanding the above requirements, a lot shown on
a plat properly recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Code even though not meeting the
requirements of this Zoning Code as to width or area may be used as a
zoning lot if it complies with conditions as set forth in Section 6-3-3A of
this Zoning Code.
LOT AREA, GROSS The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot
lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly
recorded lake or river.
LOT/CORNER A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of
such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE/BUILDING The ratio between the ground floor area of all buildings or structures on
a lot and the total area of the lot.
LOT COVERAGE/GROSS The ratio between the ground floor area of all buildings and structures
plus all areas used for off-street parking facilities, loading areas,
vehicular access ways of driveways, and the total area of the lot.
LOT DEPTH The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT LINE A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or alley.
LOT LINE/FRONT A lot line which is a street lot line. Any street lot line of a corner lot may
be established by the owner as the front lot line, but once established,
shall not be altered.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 15 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
LOT LINE/REAR That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within
the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from, the front lot line.
LOT LINE/SIDE Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line. On a corner
lot a side lot line may be a street lot line.
LOT LINE/STREET A lot line dividing a lot from a street.
LOT/REVERSED CORNER A corner lot where the street side lot line is substantially a continuation
of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT/THROUGH A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both
street lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT/WIDTH The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at
the narrowest width within the first thirty feet (30') of lot depth
immediately in back of the required front yard.
LOT, ZONING A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the time of
filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a
tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
LUMINAIRE A complete lighting unit, including the lamp, reflectors, globes, lenses,
shields, or other components designed to block, diffuse or distribute
light. (Ord. 08-3049-32, eff. 08/11/08)
MARQUEE A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from a wall
of a building. (Ord. 86-885-22)
MEDICAL CANNABIS
CULTIVATION CENTER
A facility operated by an organization or business registered by the
Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide
only registered medical cannabis Dispensary Organizations with usable
medical cannabis. No available parcels in the Village of Lincolnshire
permit Cultivation Centers to exist due to the separation requirements
of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS
103/1, et seq.).
MEDICAL CANNABIS
DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION
A facility operated by an organization or business registered by the
Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire
medical cannabis from a registered Cultivation Center for the purpose
of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
MEMORIAL ASSEMBLY
FACILITY
A type of cemetery comprising an area and/or structure (i.e.
columbarium) intended as a memorial for deceased persons and used
for the burial, inurnment or internment of only cremated human
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 16 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
remains. For the purpose of this Chapter, an outdoor Memorial
Assembly Facility shall include the area and/or structure wherein the
cremated human remains are buried, inurned or interned and the
adjoining improvements intended for memorials, services or private
reflection. (Ord. 08-3070-53)
MEMORIAL GARDEN An area and/or structure intended as a memorial for deceased persons
but which shall not be used as a CEMETERY. (Ord. 08-3070-53)
MENTAL DISABILITY An individual or group of disorders that cause severe disturbances in
thinking, feeling, and relating that can result in a substantially
diminished capacity for coping with the ordinary demands of life. (Ord.
90-1162-66)
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR A mobile vendor that transports and sells food and/or drinks from a
designated vehicle or cart, which may include facilities for storage,
preparation and cooking of food and/or drinks, for immediate public
consumption.
MOBILE SERVICES A mobile operation providing on-site services, including but not limited
to car wash, product pick-up/distribution, and general vehicle
maintenance and service, but not including major automotive repair
and service.
MOTOR VEHICLE Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
MULTI-USER BUILDING An office/industrial building that is occupied, or operated, by two or
more business users or business tenants. (Ord. 09-3106-39, eff.
7/13/09)
MULTIPLE-FAMILY
STRUCTURE
A residential structure with more than one dwelling unit with interior
common habitable areas. (Amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff. 1/9/95)
NO IMPACT The term “no impact” personal wireless service facility shall be defined
as a facility which is:
1. Designed so as to completely conceal all components of the personal
wireless service facility within a new or existing structure that is
architecturally compatible with its surroundings; including, but not
limited to, an antenna behind louvers, or in a false roof on a
building, or inside a steeple, clock tower, flagpole (with a maximum
diameter of 15 inches), campanile or bell tower; or
2. Camouflaged so as to blend into its surroundings to such an extent
that it is no more obtrusive to the casual observer than the structure
on which it is (a) placed, such as a rooftop, lighting standard or
existing tower; or (b) replacing, such as a school athletic field light
standard, or other similar structure.
NONCONFORMING/USE
STRUCTURE, LOT
Any Use, Structure or Lot which was lawfully established, either by right
or by reason of a variance or special use, and becomes noncompliant
with this Title by reason of an amendment to this Title that becomes
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 17 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
effective following the attachment of vested rights to such use, structure
or lot.
NOXIOUS MATTER Material which is capable of causing injury or malaise to living
organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental
effects upon the health, or the psychological, social, or economic wellbeing
of human beings.
NURSING HOME
(CONVALESCENT HOME,
SHELTERED CARE HOME)
An establishment for the care of children or the aged or infirm. Such a
home shall not contain equipment for or provide care in maternity cases
or for psychotics or other unruly mentally deranged persons nor for
surgical or medical cases commonly treated in hospitals.
OCTAVE BAND A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order
to classify sound according to pitch.
ODOROUS MATTER Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way.
(Ord. 86-885-22)
OFFICE A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical
operations. An office shall not include a physician’s office or the
production, distribution or sales of goods or commodities which are
physically located on the premises.
OPEN SALE LOT Any open space used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
merchandise, passenger cars, trucks, commercial trailers, motor
scooters, motorcycles, boats and monuments, or for the storing of same
prior to sale. (Ord. 86-885-22)
ORNAMENTAL METAL FENCE A fence constructed of wrought iron, aluminum or steel materials and
designed with horizontal rails and other decorative elements, such as
balusters, rings or finials, but which does not contain woven metallic
materials in the style typical of chain link or cyclone fences. (Ord. 12-
3233-03, eff. 1/23/12)
OUTDOOR STORAGE The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material,
merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty four
(24) hours. (Ord. 90-1163-47)
PARKING AREA One or more parking spaces, and may also include access drives, aisles,
ramps, and maneuvering area.
PARKING LOT An area reserved or used for parking motor vehicles, hauling trailers or
trailer-mounted boats on premises on which there is not a principal
building.
PARKING SPACE An accessible area used or intended for use for temporary storage of one
motor vehicle, hauling trailer or trailer-mounted boat which parking
space may be located in a private or storage garage, or in the open. In
this definition, temporary storage shall be further limited to include
only the storage of vehicles which are fully capable of legal operation on
the public streets. Any other storage of vehicles shall be considered as
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 18 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
the storage of goods and shall be prohibited except where specifically
permitted by this Zoning Code.
PARTICULATE MATTER Material which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a
finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric temperature and
pressure.
PARTY WALL A wall which is common to but divides contiguous buildings. (Ord. 86-
885-22)
PERFORMING AND VISUAL
ARTS STUDIO
A business that provides instruction in various types of art, which
includes, but is not limited to, music, dance, theater, painting,
sculpture, photography, and provides performances and/or exhibits for
an audience as an accessory use.
PERSON Any corporation, partnership, individual, or group of individuals,
associations, or agent, so that any entity who would be subject to the
Zoning Code would be defined as a person. (Ord. 86-885-22)
PERSONAL RECREATION
FACILITY
An Accessory Structure intended for the purpose of private recreation
activity conducted on a purpose-built court or field, including but not
limited to basketball court, tennis court, volleyball court, etc.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICE/PERSONAL
WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITIES
A personal wireless service facility shall mean any facility of whatever
kind or nature, except a small wireless facility, that receives, transmits
or relays radio or microwave signals for cellular, PCS or other similar
service. This shall include any installation or mounting structure or
equipment and any appurtenant electronics necessary for the operation
of the facility. This definition shall be inclusive of the definition of
personal wireless service facility set forth in 47 USC 332(c)(7)(C), as
amended now or in the future.
PET DAYCARE A facility that provides temporary boarding, grooming, training and
care for any combination of three (3) or more dogs, cats and other
domestic animals. This shall not include breeding or sale of animals or
veterinary services customarily offered at an Animal Clinic/Hospital.
PHYSICAL DISABILITY A disability that may have been caused by a head injury, severe arthritis,
stroke, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, and
other causes that can substantially limit an individual's capacity to
function in society. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
PHYSICIAN’S OFFICE Establishment for the practice of general or specialized medicine;
including but not limited to, offices of one or more physicians, dentists,
clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, professional counsellors,
acupuncturists, chiropractors, massage therapists, naprapaths,
optometrists, estheticians, electrologists, occupational and physical
therapists, dietitian nutritionists, and similar licensed professionals
that does not include overnight care facilities.
PLAY STRUCTURE An Accessory Structure intended for the purpose of children’s play,
including but not limited to playhouse, jungle gym, swing set, or
trampoline.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 19 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
PREMISES A distinct portion of real estate, land or lands with or without buildings
or structures. It may or may not have the same meaning as "lot",
"building", or "structure".
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
(BUILDING)
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it
is located.(Amend Ord. 95-1397-27)
PROPERTY LINE The line bounding a zoning lot, as defined herein.
PUBLIC WAY Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
RECORDING (OF A
DOCUMENT)
Officially record a document in the office of the Lake County Recorder.
RECREATION FACILITY,
PUBLIC
A facility operated as a commercial business and open to the public for a
fee, offering indoor party facilities and/or fitness/recreational sports
featuring exercise and other active physical fitness conditioning or
recreational sports activity, and which may include food service and/or
the sale of alcoholic beverages to patrons, provided it is secondary and
incidental to the primary recreational activity. Such facility shall not
operate any Sexual Oriented Business, as defined in Section 6-7B-3 of
this Title, or any establishment commonly known as a gun, shooting or
firing range.
RECREATION FACILITY,
PRIVATE
A facility offering fitness and/or recreational sports featuring exercise
and other active physical fitness conditioning or recreational sports
activity for members paying monthly and/or annual dues, and which
may include food service and/or the sale of alcoholic beverages,
provided it is secondary and incidental to the primary recreational
operation. Such facility shall not operate any Sexual Oriented Business,
as defined in Section 6-7B-3 of this Title, or any establishment
commonly known as a gun, shooting or firing range.
POOL HOUSE An Accessory Structure that serves and solely used in conjunction with
an in ground swimming pool.
RECYCLING COLLECTION
POINT
An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for
temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items
would be allowed. This facility would generally be located in a parking
lot or in other public/quasi-public areas. (Ord. 90-1163-47)
RESEARCH and
DEVELOPMENT
LABORATORY
A building or group of buildings with facilities providing scientific,
medical or product research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
but excluding manufacturing or sale of products. (Ord. 15-3372-99)
RESERVOIR The term "reservoir" is commonly applied to waters held in storage in
either artificial or natural basins and impoundments primarily for a
source of water for power, Municipal, industrial, domestic, or flood
control uses. (Ord. 86-885-22)
RESTAURANT, TABLE
SERVICE
Unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in
individual servings where food is served to the customer and the
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 20 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
customer generally consumes these foods while seated at tables or
counters located within, or immediately adjacent to, the building. Carryout
business shall be permitted at these establishments as a subsidiary
use. (Ord. 02-1818-28) (Amd. Ord. 07-2983-11, eff. 5/14/07)
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD An establishment that is commonly referred to within the restaurant
industry as a “QSR”, or quick service restaurant. Characteristics
common to a Fast Food Restaurant include one or more of the
following: offers quick food service, a limited menu, food items preprepared
or prepared quickly, orders are not taken at the customers
table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
This type of establishment often times includes a drive-up or drivethrough
service facility. (Ord. Amd. 07-2983-11, eff. 05/14/07)
RESTAURANT,
CONVENIENCE
An establishment commonly referred to within the restaurant industry
as a “fast casual” restaurant. Characteristics common to a Convenience
Dining Restaurant include: (a) the principal business model of the
restaurant is to serve food at the patrons table; (b) limited menu items
are made-to-order and are prepared only upon being ordered by the
patron; and (c) the décor is more similar to a Table Service Restaurant
than a Fast Food Restaurant. (Ord. Amd. 07-2983-11, eff. 05/14/07)
RETENTION The permanent on-site maintenance of storm water.
RINGELMANN CHART One which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines information
Circular 8333, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of grey for
use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke density.
ROADSIDE STAND A structure for the display and sale of agricultural products, with no
space for customers within the structure itself.
ROOF-MOUNTED ANTENNA
POLE
Any structure that supports one or more antennas, and is designed and
constructed to be attached, at its base, to the roof of an existing
building.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION
ANTENNA
Any dish-type satellite signal receiving station or disc antenna, whether
flat or concave which is designed for receiving television, radio, data,
microwave or other signals from satellites or other sources. (Amd. Ord.
95-1380-10, eff. 2/13/95)
SCREEN Any permanent barrier comprised of natural or man-made materials
which conceals from view all or any part of a deck or patio. (Amd. Ord.
12-3233-03, eff. 1/23/12)
SCREENING A structure erected or vegetation planted for concealing from viewers
the area behind it.
SELF-SUPPORTING FENCE A fence made of rigid or semi rigid materials, capable of maintaining its
shape without sagging or having significant deflection between support
posts. (Amd. Ord. 12-3233-03, eff. 1/23/12)
SETBACK The distance required between any Lot Line and the Structure or the
nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot. See Figure 1.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 21 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
SETBACK, FRONT The required distance measured from the front lot line to the nearest
member of the Structure, extending between the side and/or corner side
lot lines. See Figure 1.
SETBACK, SIDE The required distance measured from the side lot line to the nearest
member of the Structure, extending between the front and rear
setbacks. See Figure 1.
SETBACK, REAR The required distance measured from the rear lot line to the nearest
member of the Structure, extending between the side and/or corner side
lot lines. See Figure 1
SETBACK, CORNER SIDE The required distance measured from the side lot line adjoining a street,
extending between the front and rear setbacks. See Figure 1.
Figure 1: Setbacks
SHORT-TERM RENTAL The accessory use of a residential dwelling under a written or oral
agreement providing for occupancy of all or part of the dwelling by any
person other than the owner thereof in exchange for consideration
therefor.
SIGN Any visual device or representation designed or used for the purpose of
communicating a message or identifying a product, service, person,
organization, business or event, with the use of words or characters,
visible from outside the premises on which such device is located.
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED
STRUCTURE
A residential structure with more than one dwelling unit with an
independent means of egress and with no interior common habitable
areas. (amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff. 1/9/95)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 22 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet
in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility
is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
SOUND LEVEL The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured in decibels.
SOUND LEVEL METER An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for
measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPECIAL USE A "special use" of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted
herein, is a use subject to special provisions and which because of
unique characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.
(Ord. 86-885-22)
SPONSOR or SUPPORT STAFF Any person licensed or similarly authorized by an agency of the State of
Illinois to operate a community residential home. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
STORAGE STRUCTURE A fully enclosed roofed structure used solely for storage.
STORY That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor above; or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling above. An English Basement shall be
counted as a story, but a basement or cellar shall not be counted as a
story.
STORY/HALF A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection for roof
decking and wall below the ceiling level of the top floor.
STREAM Any natural, artificial, or channelized watercourse that transports
continuous or periodic flowing water.
STREET A publicly dedicated right of way not less than fifty feet (50') in width or
a permanently reserved easement of access approved by the Board of
Trustees, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS Any change, other than incidental repairs in the supporting members of
a building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns,
beams, or girders; or any substantial change in the roof or exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground. An advertising or business sign, if detached or
projecting from a building, shall be construed to be a separate structure.
Accessory Structures shall be considered Structures notwithstanding
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 23 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
whether they are permanently affixed or mounted to one location on the
ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground. (Amd. Ord. 06-2011-02, eff. 1/23/06)
STRUCTURE, SEASONAL An Accessory Structure located on residential property used for
temporary seasonal use, including but not limited to, shade structures,
and temporary ice rinks.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY A structure located on non-residential property for temporary use and is
removed when the permitted time period, activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
SUPERVISION The act of assuming responsibility for the day-to-day operation of a
community residential home that includes, without limitation, the
performance of any act that requires licensing, certification or such
similar authorization by an agency of the State of Illinois of competent
jurisdiction.
SUPPORT SERVICES Those services provided to residents in order to facilitate their
integration into the community and to improve their level of
functioning and independence. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
SURFACE WATER ELEVATION The normal water level elevation of a lake, stream, or stream bed as
depicted on the United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) flood plain
topographic maps. If "surface water elevation" datum specified by the
Illinois Department of Transportation - Division of Water Resources is
more current than U.S.G.S. flood plain topographic maps, Division of
Water Resources information may be used.
TEMPORARY EVENT An organized occasion, activity, or gathering for public attendance on
private property, which may be conditioned upon participant
registration, for a fixed, short time period.
TEMPORARY SALES Temporary sales of overstock and similar products manufactured,
warehoused or distributed in the normal business operation of the
principal use.
TENT, PERMANENT An enclosure or shelter with walls and roofing constructed of pliable
and non-pliable materials, installed on a permanent foundation, and
intended for assembly use.
TENT, TEMPORARY An enclosure or shelter with walls or roofing constructed of pliable
materials and intended for seasonal use.
THREE-COMPONENT
MEASURING SYSTEM
A complement of instruments or seismograph which can record,
simultaneously, vibration vectors in three (3) mutually-perpendicular
directions.
TOXIC MATERIAL Any substance (liquid, solid, or gaseous) which by reason of an inherent
deleterious property when emitted in any amount, is injurious to plants,
animals, or human beings.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 24 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
TRAILER Any vehicle, house, car, camp car, recreational vehicle, or any portable
or mobile vehicle on wheels, jacks, horses, skids, or blocks, and with or
without motive power; which is used, adapted, or designed for living,
sleeping, business, trade, occupation, or storage purposes. A permanent
foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure
meets Village Building Code regulations.
TRANSIENT GUEST A tenant who does not have a lease and occupies an apartment, lodging
room, or other living quarters on a month to month, week to week, or
day to day basis.
TREE CHIPPING The process whereby parts of trees, and no other forms of landscape
waste, are received, stored and processed for sale to end markets in the
form of raw materials or products.(Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
TUTORING CENTER An office or classroom-style space where students receive assistance in
either a personal or small group setting to become more successful
academically.
URGENT MEDICAL CARE
CENTER/CLINIC
An establishment comprised of physicians and other medical staff
engaged in providing surgical services or emergency care services on an
outpatient basis.
USE The purpose or activity for which the land, building or structure
thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or
maintained.
USE, PERMITTED Any building, structure, or use which complies with the applicable
regulation of this Code governing permitted uses in the zoning district
in which such building, structure or use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL The main use of land, building or structure as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
USE, TEMPORARY A use permitted for a limited duration and is discontinued upon the
expiration of the approved time period.
VARIANCE A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Code where such relaxation will
not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the direct result of the actions of the
owner, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in unnecessary
hardship.
VEHICLE FUELING STATION Any building or portion thereof or premises used primarily for
dispensing or offering for sale at retail to the public, vehicle fuels,
gasoline, petroleum products, and other permitted retail goods. (Ord.
97-1494-18 eff. 6/9/97)
VEHICLE REPAIR
(AUTOMOBILE REPAIR)
The general repair, engine, rebuilding or reconditioning of vehicles,
collision service such as body, frame and fender straightening and
repair, and painting of motor vehicles. (Ord. 97-1494-18 eff. 6/9/97)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 25 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
VEHICLE SERVICE STATION
(AUTOMOBILE SERVICE
STATION)
Any building or portion thereof or premises used primarily for the
dispensing or offering of vehicle fuels, petroleum products, and other
permitted retail goods. Light maintenance and service activities such as
tire repairs, battery replacement, lubrication, engine tune-ups, and
minor repairs may be conducted within the completely enclosed
building on the site. Vehicle Service Stations shall not include vehicle
repairs other than as stated in this definition. (Ord. 97-1494-18 eff.
6/9/97)
VEHICLE WASH
(AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY)
A completely enclosed building or portion thereof containing equipment
or providing space or water for cleaning vehicles defined in the Illinois
Vehicle Code as first division and Class B vehicles up to, and including
8,000 pounds, as a special accessory use to another principal permitted
or special use in the zoning district. (Ord. 97-1494-18 eff. 6/9/97)
WAREHOUSE A structure, part thereof, or area used principally for the storage of
goods and merchandise.
WATCHMAN'S QUARTERS Working facilities for an owner/operator or employee to provide twenty
four (24) hour security in any zoning district where such
accommodations are a permitted use. Watchman's quarters shall not
serve as a primary residence for a watchman.
WHOLESALE
ESTABLISHMENT
A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers
rather than consumers.
YARD An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except by natural features and as otherwise
permitted in this Zoning Code. No yard provided for any building and
required for the purpose of complying with this Zoning Code shall again
be used as a yard for any other building.
YARD/CORNER SIDE A side yard which adjoins a public street. See Figure 2.
YARD/FRONT A yard extending from the abutting roadway to the front of the
Structure and extending the full width of the lot. See Figure 2.
YARD/REAR A yard extending from the rear lot line to the rear of the Structure and
extending for the full width of the lot. See Figure 2.
YARD/SIDE A yard extending from a side lot line to the side of the Structure,
extending between the front and rear yards. See Figure 2.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 26 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
Figure 2: Yards
YARD/TRANSITIONAL A yard which serves as a buffer between two incompatible zoning
districts, when such yard of a non-residential zoning lot adjoins a
residential zoning district. See Figure 3.
Figure 3: Transitional Yard
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 2: DEFINTIONS
Page 27 of 27
Revised 11/25/2019
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR The officer and assistant designated by the Village Board of Trustees as
the officer responsible for enforcing and administering all requirements
of this Zoning Code.
ZONING EXCEPTION
CERTIFICATE
Refers to the written approval of the Zoning Administrator which
indicates granting of relief from any of the provisions of this Code due
to establishment as a lawful nonconforming building, structure or use,
establishment as a lawful special use, the granting of a variation by the
Board of Trustees, or court action granting the zoning exception. (Ord.
86-885-22)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 1 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Buildings on a Lot
6-3-2: Allowable Uses of Land and Buildings
6-3-3: Controls Established
6-3-4: Building Height
6-3-5: Accessory Structures and Uses
6-3-6: Temporary Structures and Uses
6-3-7: Special Uses
6-3-8: Yards
6-3-9: Floodplain Regulations
6-3-10: Occupancy of Dwelling Units
6-3-11: Conversion of Existing Structures for Residential Uses
6-3-12: Heating Requirements
6-3-13: Construction and Installation of Exterior Satellite Earth Station Antennas
6-3-14: Sales Activities; Vending and Ice Machines
6-3-15: Outdoor Lighting
6-3-16: Adult Use Cannabis Business Establishments
6-3-1: BUILDINGS ON A LOT
Except in the case of planned developments, special uses, Master Development plans for Mixed
Use Developments in the R5-Mixed Use General Residence District, and personal wireless
service facilities subject to the provisions of Chapter 16, not more than one principal structure
shall be located on a lot in any zoning district. In addition to the principal structure, detached
accessory structure(s) may be located on a lot as permitted in Section 6-3-5 of this Title.
Carports are specifically prohibited. (Amd. Ord. 97-1534-58, eff. 11/10/97)
6-3-2: ALLOWABLE USES OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
The following uses of land and buildings and no others are allowed in the districts established
hereinafter under the requirements specified in this Zoning Code.
A. Permitted uses listed in this Zoning Code.
B. Special uses listed in this Zoning Code only with the approval of the Mayor and Board of
Trustees in each case and only in accordance with all the provisions and procedures as set forth
in Chapter 14.
C. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Zoning Code are subject to all provisions
on Chapter 13.
D. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior
to the date of this Zoning Code and where construction has been started within one hundred
eight (180) days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted completion, said building or
structure may be completed accordance with approved plans on the basis of which the building
permit was issued; and, further may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of use and
occupancy for the use original designated; subject to the provisions of Chapter 13 of this Zoning
Code.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 2 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
6-3-3: CONTROLS ESTABLISHED
A. Control Over Use: No lot, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and
no building, structure or premises or part thereof shall be erected, razed, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations and
requirements herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter
provided. In residence districts, a lot shown on a plot properly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code which does not meet the
requirements of this Zoning Code as to width or area, may be used for single-family detached
dwelling purpose if it conforms to other requirements of this Zoning Code. However, said
recorded nonconforming lot may not be used if it was held in common ownership with one or
more adjoining lots at any time subsequent to the effective date of this Zoning Code and if such
lots held in common ownership together meet the requirements of this Zoning Code, when used
as a single parcel. Where two (2) or more adjoining lots shown in a plot properly recorded with
the office of County Recorder have been held in common ownership at any time subsequent to
the effective date of this Zoning Code and the use of such use of such adjoining lots as a single
parcel would meet the requirements of this Zoning Code, the ownership of said lots shall not be
separated nor shall any of the lots be used in any way to conflict with the regulations of this
Zoning Code. No building permits shall be issued for the use of any lot or portion of said lot,
transferred, or conveyed in violation of the provisions of this Section.
B. Control Over Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the bulk regulations
established herein for the district in which each building or structure is located. No existing
building or structure shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted, or
relocated in such a manner as to conflict or to further conflict with the bulk regulations of this
Zoning Code for the district in which such building or structure is located.
6-3-4: BUILDING HEIGHT
In R1, R2, and R3 Districts, an allowable nonresidential building may be erected to a height not
to exceed sixty feet (60') when the required front and rear yards are increased in depth, and side
yards are increased in width, one foot (1') for each foot of height that such building exceeds the
building height regulations of the district in which it is located.
6-3-5: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
No accessory structure or use shall be established, erected, altered or moved onto a lot unless it
is specifically conforms to the requirements of this Section.
A. General Requirements
1. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum size shall not exceed 10% of the gross square feet of the
Principal Structure on the lot, except as further regulated in Section 6-3-5(B).
2. Height: The maximum height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, except as further
regulated in Section 6-3-5(B).
3. Location: Shall meet the minimum required Setbacks applicable to the Principal
Structure on the lot, except as otherwise permitted in Section 6-3-5(B).
4. Relationship to Principal Structure: No portion of an Accessory Structure shall extend
beyond the front façade of the Principal Structure on the lot.
5. Tree Removal: Any tree removal related to the installation of an Accessory Structure
shall be subject to the tree removal requirements of Section 13-1-3(I).
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 3 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
6. Quantity: A maximum of two Accessory Structures shall be permitted on a lot. No two
Accessory Structures shall be the same, with the exception of Play Structures. These
restrictions shall not apply to permanent tent structures or small wireless structures.
7. Establishment: An Accessory Structure shall not be erected, altered or moved onto a lot
prior to the establishment of a permitted Principal Structure on the same lot. Accessory
Structures to any non-residential use or structure shall require Architectural Review
Board approval prior to establishment.
8. Appeal: Any person or entity aggrieved by Staff determination regarding the application
or interpretations of these requirements may submit a written appeal, as specified in
Section 6-14-12 of the Lincolnshire Village Code, to the Architectural Review Board or
Zoning Board, for final decision by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Specific Requirements: The following Accessory Structures and Uses shall be permitted subject
to the additional specific regulations set forth below:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 6-3-5(B) P = Permitted
S = Special Use
Flagpole & Flags R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P P P P P
• Flagpoles shall not exceed a height of fifteen feet (15’) or 75% of the height of the Principal Structure, whichever is greater.
• Flagpoles may be located beyond the front façade of the Principal Structure and shall comply with all required building setbacks or
setbacks shall be equal to the pole height, whichever is greater.
• Flagpoles shall be exempt from the Quantity requirement of Section 6-3-5(A)(6). In addition, Flagpoles in single-family residential
lots shall be limited to one (1) flagpole per lot.
Gazebo R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P P P P
• Shall incorporate traditional/classical architectural detailing and ornamentation in the pillars, railings, walls, eave brackets,
structural members, roof and/or similar elements
• Shall have a shape of six (6) or more sides, with a maximum diameter of fifteen feet (15').
• Shall be open sided, with no more than 50% of any exterior side of the structure consisting of a solid wall surface.
• Installation of natural gas, water supply or sanitary sewer service; plumbing fixtures; hot tubs; whirlpool tubs or similar equipment
is prohibited.
• Permanent or temporary windows or other installations are prohibited. The installation of screens to control insects and ceiling
fans are permitted.
• Storage is prohibited.
• Shall be constructed of wood materials erected upon concrete piers or a structural foundation
• Permitted within the required rear yard setback, provided the Gazebo is no closer than ten feet (10’) from the nearest property
line(s).
Greenhouse R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P
• At least two walls and the roof of the structure must be glass or similar transparent materials.
• Storage of materials other than plants shall not be visible from adjacent properties and public ways
Memorial Garden R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P
• As defined in Section 6-2-2
Memorial Assembly Facility R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
S S S S S S
• Shall only be permitted as an accessory use to an assembly use, including but not limited to religious institutions or schools.
• Shall be permitted inside the principal structure on the lot.
• If located outside as an accessory structure, the following shall apply:
1. Shall be located not less than 100 feet from any Lot Line where there is Frontage.
2. Shall maintain a minimum distance of 135 feet from any Lot Line where there is no Frontage.
3. Shall be located not more than 20 feet from the principal structure on the lot.
4. Shall comprise an area no greater than 600 square feet.
5. The structure shall have a height not greater than 3 feet.
6. The structure shall be concealed from the adjacent right-of-way and contiguous residential Lots with vegetation which
provides complete screening during the entire year and shall be a minimum of 6 feet tall at the time of planting (such
vegetation shall not be considered part of the permitted area).
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 4 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
7. The face of the structure into which cremated human remains are interned must substantially face towards the principal
structure on the Lot.
Parking Garage Structure R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
S S S S S
• Refer to permitted zoning districts for specific regulations.
Permanent Tents R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P
• Permitted on properties measuring 100 acres or greater.
• Permitted for assembly purposes only.
• Shall include a permanent foundation.
• Shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25’) feet from the established grade.
• Shall have a maximum gross floor area no greater than 10% of the gross floor area of the Principal Structure on the lot or
15,000 square feet, whichever is less.
• Storage of materials is prohibited except for limited storage of tables and chairs used in the tent.
• May be located within the required side and rear yard setbacks, provided they are no closer than ten (10’) from the side and
rear property lines.
Personal Recreation Facility R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P
• Recreation courts/facilities which do not require a foundation, concrete slab, or impervious surface floor shall not require a
building permit.
• Permitted within the required rear yard setback, provided they are no closer than ten feet (10’) from the nearest property line(s).
• Lighting shall be positioned and operated to minimize the amount of light and glare cast onto any adjacent property or street to not
be a nuisance.
Play Structure R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P
• Structures which do not include a foundation or concrete slab shall not require a building permit.
• Playhouses shall not exceed 8 feet in height and a maximum floor area of sixty (60) square feet.
• Storage of materials is prohibited.
• Permitted within the required rear yard setback, provided they are no closer than ten feet (10’) from the nearest property line(s).
Private Residential Swimming Pools & Pool
Houses
R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P
• Private Residential Swimming Pools – Refer to Chapter 5 of Title 5 for specific requirements.
• The combination of a Private Residential Swimming Pool and Pool House shall be classified as one Accessory Structure/Use and
exempt from the Quantity requirement of Section 6-3-5(A)(6).
• The use of a Pool Houses as a Second Residential Unit is prohibited.
• Pool Houses shall be constructed with the same materials used on the Principal Structure.
• Pool Houses shall be permitted only in conjunction with an in-ground swimming pool. Installation of natural gas, water supply or
sanitary sewer service; plumbing fixtures; heating/air conditioning is permitted.
Second Residential Unit R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
S
• Refer to Section 6-5A-2(H) for specific requirements.
Small Wireless Facility R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
S S S S S S P P P P
• Small Wireless Facilities which require a special use must also meet the definition of a “no impact” facility, as described in Section
6-2-2.
• The maximum height of a small wireless facility collocated on an existing structure shall be limited to 10 feet above the structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
• The maximum height of a new small wireless facility which is not collocated on an existing structure may not exceed: (i) 10 feet in
height above the tallest existing utility pole that is in place on the date the application is submitted, that is located within 300 feet
of the small wireless facility and that is in the same right-of-way within the Village; or (ii) 45 feet above ground level.
• A small wireless facility collocated on an existing structure shall not count toward the floor area ratio and shall be exempt from
Section 6-3-5(A)(1).
Short-Term Rental
• Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing a residential dwelling in any Residential zoning district (R1 through R5, inclusive) for
less than three (3) months shall be prohibited.
• The term of any lease which has satisfied the minimum term required by these rules may be extended on a month-to-month basis
so long as the tenant(s) remain the same.
• Residential dwellings shall not be leased more than two (2) times during any consecutive twelve (12) month period unless the rental
agreement has been terminated by reason of a tenant default.
• The rental premises may comprise all or a part of the principal structure.
• The rental premises shall not count toward the limit of accessory structures otherwise permitted by this Chapter.
• The form of consideration exchanged for the rental premises does not affect whether it is treated as a short term rental for the
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 5 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
purposes of this Chapter.
• The property owner shall remain responsible for compliance with all Village Codes during the term of any rental agreement unless
the owner can show by clear and convincing evidence that the tenant caused the violation despite good faith efforts by the owner to
abate the violation.
• No Temporary Structure shall be permitted to be used for short term rental.
• The prohibition on short term rentals for less than three (3) months shall not apply when the immediately preceding owner
maintains possession of the dwelling unit after closing and leases it from the successor owner under a written lease agreement.
Storage Structure R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P
• Shall be located in one of the following locations:
Rear Yard: Within five feet (5’) of the Principal Structure (see figure below)
Side Yard: Within two feet (2’) of the Principal Structure (see figure below)
• Shall have a maximum floor area of 100 square feet.
• Shall not exceed a height of ten feet (10’) from the established grade.
• Shall be placed on a hard surface, including but not limited to a concrete pad, cement blocks or similar materials.
• Shall be screened by plant material that provides visual relief throughout the year from both the public way and adjacent
properties.
• Plastic, corrugated metal, fiberglass and dryvit/stucco are prohibited unless they are the primary material(s) on the principal
structure.
END OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES LIST 6-3-5(B)
C. Existing Non-Conforming Accessory Structures: Accessory structures existing as of July 10, 1995
shall be considered Non-Conforming and may be preserved, maintained and used subject to the
restrictions in Chapter 13 of this Title.
1. Detached garages located within the Stonegate Circle Subdivision, as defined in
Ordinance No. 62-000-70, shall not be subject to the restrictions in Chapter 13 of this
Title, but shall be subject to flood plain and flood way regulations and are permitted to
perform normal maintenance and incidental repair, reconstruction and restorations but
may not increase the existing garage floor area.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 6 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
6-3-6: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
No temporary structure or use shall be established or erected on a lot unless it is specifically
permitted by the requirements of this Section.
A. General Requirements
1. Authorization: Except as set forth in 6-3-6(B), a Temporary Use Permit shall be required
from the Department of Community & Economic Development prior to the
establishment of any temporary structure or use.
2. Location: All Temporary Structures shall meet the minimum required setbacks
applicable to the Principal Structure on the lot, except as otherwise permitted in Section
6-3-6(B).
3. Temporary Use Permit: Application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be submitted to
the Department of Community & Economic Development and shall be issued upon full
compliance with the standards and submittal requirements set forth below:
a. An accurate site plan of the property to be used for the Temporary Use or
Structure, including all information necessary to accurately locate and portray
the Temporary Use or Structure on the premises. Sufficient information to
determine compliance with yard requirements, availability of off-street parking,
and adequate traffic circulation to service the proposed Temporary Use or
Structure shall also be provided, as determined by the Department of Community
& Economic Development.
b. A detailed written description of the proposed Temporary Use and/or depiction
or illustration of building elevations for any proposed Temporary Structure.
c. Consent from the property owner or legal representative of the land owner shall
be obtained in writing. A copy of such authorization shall be included with the
Temporary Use Permit.
d. Such other data and/or certifications as may reasonably be required by the
Director of Community & Economic Development for the purpose of enforcing
the regulations set forth in this Title.
4. Conditions: A Temporary Use Permit may be subject to such special conditions and
restrictions on the location and operation as deemed reasonably necessary by the
Director of Community & Economic Development to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in consideration of site specific conditions.
5. Revocation: A Temporary Use Permit shall be revoked if any of the standards and
conditions imposed pursuant to this Section, or permit, are violated.
6. Length of Permit: A Temporary Use Permit is valid for one (1) year from the date of
issuance and shall be renewed each year, except as further regulated by Section 6-3-6(B).
A permit fee in the amount outlined in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be
collected for the permit.
7. Appeal: Any person or entity aggrieved by Staff determination regarding the application
or interpretations of these requirements may submit a written appeal, as specified in
Section 6-14-12 of the Lincolnshire Village Code, to the Zoning Board, for final decision
by the Village Board of Trustees.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 7 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
B Specific Requirements: The following Temporary Structures and Uses shall be permitted
and are further subject to the specific regulations set forth below:
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
6-3-6(B)
TUP = Temporary Use Permit Required
P = Permitted (No Permit Required)
BP = Building Permit Required
Construction/Contractor
Trailer/Office
R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
BP BP BP BP BP BP BP BP BP BP
• Refer to Section 5-1-8(7), Temporary Trailers, for specific requirements.
Farmers Market R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/Ia M
TUP TUP TUP TUP
• Permitted a maximum of one (1) day within a consecutive seven (7) day period. The hours of operation are limited to a maximum
six (6) hour period, which includes vendor set-up and removal, subject to the approval of the Director of Community & Economic
Development.
• All products sold by vendors must be home-grown or home-made, and sold by the producer(s), family member(s), employee(s), or
designated representative(s). In the event a vendor is deemed not to meet these criteria, but is determined the vendor adds material
value to the market, the Director of Community & Economic Development has authority to make exceptions to such criteria.
• Other related activities, special programs and events may be conducted on the premises subject to the review and approval of the
Director of Community & Economic Development.
• A Market Manager shall be designated by the Applicant to serve as the principal person responsible for overseeing the operations of
the market. The Market Manager shall ensure all waste, debris, or any other evidence of the market is removed from the premises
no later than two (2) hours after closing time.
• All vendors shall have a valid Illinois State Sales Tax License, except when a temporary (daily) sale is assigned, and shall abide by
all food, safety, and health regulations of the Village of Lincolnshire and the Lake County Department of Health and the State of
Illinois at all times.
Garage Sales R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
TUP TUP TUP TUP TUP
• Shall be permitted up to three (3) consecutive days between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. each day. Not more than two (2)
garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises within a calendar year with a minimum thirty (30) days between each sale. In
the event of rain during the three (3) day sale period, such sale period may be extended one additional day within the subsequent
seven (7) days for each day of rain.
• A Temporary Use Permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community & Economic Development not less than 48 hours
prior to the start of any garage sale.
• Signage shall be in compliance with Section 12-13-1, Temporary Signs, of the Lincolnshire Sign Control.
Holiday Decoration Sales Lot R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/Ia M
TUP TUP TUP
• Shall be permitted during the months of October, November and December.
• All items to be displayed and sold shall consist of natural materials (for example; pumpkins, holiday trees and wreaths, etc.).
• Adequate vehicular access and off-street parking provisions shall be provided on-premises of the operation, subject to the
determination of the Director of Community & Economic Development.
• Daily operations shall conclude at 9:00 PM.
• One temporary structure shall be permitted for office, sales, or storage uses and shall comply with all yard requirements of this
Title.
• Outdoor lighting as described in Section 6-3-15 shall apply, regardless of location.
• All vendors shall have a valid Illinois State Sales Tax License, except when a temporary (daily) sale is assigned, and shall abide by
all food, safety, and health regulations of the Village of Lincolnshire Health Code, the Lake County Department of Health and the
State of Illinois.
Mobile Services R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
TUP TUP TUP TUP
• Shall be located entirely on private property and shall only provide service to the owner, tenants and their respective employees or
customers with a scheduled appointment window of less than thirty (30) minutes. Consent from the property owner or legal
representative of the property owner must be obtained in writing in advance, and a copy of such authorization shall remain on file
with the Community & Economic Development Department.
• All services and product storage shall occur within a fully enclosed facility, which may include a mobile facility. All waste, including
fluids, shall be contained within the facility and properly disposed pursuant to local, state, and federal guidelines/regulations.
Minor services may be permitted outdoors, as authorized by the Department of Community & Economic Development.
• Permitted a maximum of three (3) days in a consecutive seven (7) day period.
• All signage, product and service information must be securely attached to the mobile facility. Directional signs may be permitted to
ensure proper traffic circulation and access, as authorized by the Department of Community Economic Development.
• The location of the operation shall not interfere with vehicle ingress and egress to the premises, nor impede traffic circulation in
any way.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 8 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
• Set-up and removal of the Mobile Services must occur within the same day of operation. Overnight storage and parking of
equipment is prohibited.
• A separate Temporary Use Permit shall be required for each individual location of operation, regardless if all services are
performed by the same owner/operator.
• All vendors shall have a valid Illinois State Sales Tax License, except when a temporary (daily) sale is assigned, and shall abide by
all food, safety, and health regulations of the Village of Lincolnshire Health Code, the Lake County Department of Health and the
State of Illinois.
Mobile Food Vendor North Park, Spring Lake, Public Schools R5 B E O/I M
TUP TUP TUP TUP TUP TUP
• Shall possess a valid license for operation from the Lake County (IL) Health Department. A copy must be submitted to the
Department of Community & Economic Development prior to operation.
• Parking or standing in any public right-of-way for the purpose of preparing, cooking, serving or selling products shall be prohibited,
with the exception of ice cream vending.
• All of the proprietor’s activity associated with a Mobile Food Vendor must occur within the vehicle.
• Consent from the property owner or legal representative of the land owner, either written or verbal, must be obtained prior to
operation.
• All signage, product and menu information must be securely attached to the mobile food vehicle.
• Operation shall be permitted for a maximum of four (4) hours at any single location.
Model Sales Office/Unit/Trailer R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
BP BP BP BP BP BP
• Shall be permitted upon the recording of a final plat of subdivision for sales or marketing of any residential development and shall
not be used for general office purposes.
• Shall be located on the same premises as the development site and must be securely affixed to the ground and meet all applicable
codes and regulations of the Village, including building setbacks, light, ventilation, egress, and space for the occupancy of a
structure.
• Must be removed upon the sale of the last unit of the development.
• Shall not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations, unless located in a model unit.
Seasonal Structure R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P
• Only one (1) Seasonal Structure shall be permitted at any one time.
• Shall be permitted for a portion of the year for seasonal use only, and shall not remain for an uninterrupted period longer than six
(6) months within any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
• Shall not include a permanent foundation.
• Shall not exceed a height of fifteen feet (15’) from the established grade.
• Shall have a maximum floor area ratio no greater than 10% of the gross square feet of the Principal Structure on the lot.
• Storage of materials is prohibited.
• Installation of natural gas, water supply or sanitary sewer service, plumbing fixtures or similar utilities is prohibited.
• May be located within the required side and rear yard setbacks, provided they are no closer than ten feet (10’) from the side and
rear property lines.
Temporary Event R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
TUP TUP TUP TUP TUP
• Event hours are limited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
• Permitted a maximum of three (3) consecutive days.
• No more than two (2) temporary events shall be permitted on the same premises in any calendar year.
• An Event Manager shall be designated to serve as the principal person responsible for overseeing the operations of the event. The
Event Manager shall ensure all waste, debris or any other evidence of the event is removed from the premises no later than two (2)
hours after the closing time.
• Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on the premises of the temporary event, as determined by the Department of
Community Development. Off-premises parking locations may be permitted, subject to the authority of the Department of
Community Development.
• Signage shall be in compliance with Section 12-13-1, Temporary Signs, of the Lincolnshire Sign Control.
Temporary Sales R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
TUP TUP TUP
• Shall be associated with an existing permitted use or Special Use.
• Products to be sold shall be manufactured, warehoused or distributed in the normal business operation. No products shall be
brought from other sources for the purposes of the temporary sale.
• All temporary retail sales, including the display of products, shall take place within the fully enclosed building associated with the
principal use.
• No more than three (3) temporary sales events shall be permitted on the same premises in any calendar year.
• Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on the premises of the temporary sale, as determined by the Department of
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 9 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
Community Development.
• Signage shall be in compliance with Section 12-13-1, Temporary Signs, of the Lincolnshire Sign Control.
Temporary Tents R1 R2 R2A R3 R4 R5 B E O/I M
P P P P P P P P P P
• Shall be permitted for a portion of the year for seasonal use only.
• Shall not remain for an uninterrupted period longer than six (6) months in non-residential districts and 30 days in residential
districts within any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
• Shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25’) from the established grade.
• Shall have a maximum gross floor area ratio no greater than 10% of the gross floor area of the Principal Structure on the lot or
5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
• Storage of materials is prohibited.
• Installation of natural gas, water supply or sanitary sewer service, plumbing fixtures or similar utilities is prohibited.
• May be located within the required side and rear yard setbacks, provided they are no closer than ten feet (10’) from the side and
rear property lines.
End of Temporary Structures and Uses List 6-3-6(B)
6-3-7: SPECIAL USES
Where a lawful use exists on the effective date of this Zoning Code or an amendment thereto and
it is classified as a special use in the district in which it is located by this Zoning Code, it shall be
considered as a lawful special use.
6-3-8: YARDS
A. General
1. For the purposes of this Section, “Required Yard” shall mean any yard subject to building
setbacks.
2. No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces become less than
required by this Zoning Code.
3. On a vacant corner lot, any street lot line may be established as the front lot line; except
where two (2) or more contiguous lots have duly established a front lot line, the same
street lot line shall thereafter be deemed the front lot line. On a through lot, a front yard
shall be provided along both street lot lines.
B. Permitted Obstruction in Any Required Yard Setback
1. Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces, and awnings adjoining the principal
building, provided they do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the depth or width of the
yard.
2. Ornamental light poles and fixtures.
3. Landscaping as regulated in Sections 8-3-4(B); Parkways; and 13-2-5; Landscape
Requirements in Pubic Right-of-Ways, provided that on corner lots, no obstruction
higher than thirty inches (30") above curb level shall be located within twenty feet (20')
of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) right-of-way lines.
4. Fences and Screens as regulated in Chapter 15 of Title 6.
5. Off-street Parking and Loading Improvements as regulated in Chapter 11 of Title 6.
6. Paved surfaces provided they are no closer than five feet (5') from any Property Line.
7. Signs as regulated in Title 12.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 10 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
8. Cable satellite antennas or SESA no larger than twenty-four inches (24”) in diameter.
9. Underground lawn irrigation systems as regulated in Section 8-3-9.
10. Electric dog fences as regulated in Section 8-3-9.
C. Permitted Obstructions in Required Front Yard Setback
1. Mailboxes
2. Decorative walls subject to the following requirements:
a. A maximum overall height of three and one half feet (3'-6").
b. A maximum of two (2) columns per wall segment and a maximum of two (2) wall
segments per frontage or primary curb cut.
c. Columns shall not exceed an overall height of five feet (5’) and have a maximum
square width of twenty-four inches (24”).
d. The total length of the decorative wall, including columns, shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the lot’s frontage.
e. Decorative walls and columns shall be finished in the same exterior materials as
the Principal Structure.
f. A light element is permitted atop columns and shall not exceed eighteen inches
(18”) in overall height in addition to the overall height of the columns.
3. Decorative columns subject to the following requirements:
a. A maximum height of five feet (5’) and have a maximum square width of twentyfour
inches (24”);
b. Shall be finished in the same exterior materials as the Principal Structure.
c. A light element is permitted atop columns and shall not exceed eighteen inches
(18”) in overall height in addition to the overall height of the columns.
D. Permitted Obstructions in Required Side Yard Setback
1. Fences as regulated in Chapter 15 of Title 6 provided that no portion of a fence shall be
constructed within a dedicated conservancy area/ easement, which extends continuously
between adjacent lot lines.
2. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas, as regulated in Chapter 5 of Title 5.
3. Seasonal Structures, provided a minimum ten foot (10’) setback from the side property
line is established.
E. Permitted Obstructions in Required Rear Yard Setback
1. Play Structures, provided a minimum ten foot (10’) setback from any property line is
established.
2. Laundry Drying Equipment.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 11 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
3. Arbors and Trellises.
4. Gazebo, provided gazebo is no closer than ten (10’) feet from the nearest property line(s).
5. Personal Recreation Facility, provided they are no closer than ten (10’) feet from the
nearest property line(s).
6. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, as regulated in Chapter 5 of Title 5.
7. Seasonal Structures, provided they are no closer than ten (10’) feet from the nearest
property line(s).
8. Fences as regulated in Chapter 15 of Title 6 provided that no portion of a fence shall be
constructed within a dedicated conservancy area/ easement, continuously between
adjacent lot lines.
6-3-9: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
The provisions of Title 5 Chapter 7 entitled "Flood Damage Prevention" be and are hereby
incorporated by reference as regulations governing all development under this Zoning Code, and
such provisions shall apply to the full extent as if set forth at length herein. (Ord. 80-643-50)
6-3-10: OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNITS
A. No dwelling units shall be occupied by more than one family as defined by this Zoning Code,
except as hereinafter provided.
B. No dwelling unit which contains less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square feet
of floor area shall be used to provide living quarters for roomers, servants or permanent guests.
C. Where a dwelling unit is not occupied by a family as provided in A or B above, said dwelling unit
may be occupied by not more than three (3) unrelated persons; provided that said dwelling unit
contains not less than five hundred eighty three (583) square feet of floor area for each such
occupant.
Fence permitted along
property lines
(No Conservancy Area)
Illustration for 6-3-8-E(8)
CONSERVANCY
AREA
Fence not permitted into
Conservancy Area
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 12 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
D. Where the floor area of a dwelling unit exceeds one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square
feet, and the "family" occupying said dwelling unit does not consist of unrelated persons, said
dwelling unit may be used for living quarters for not more than two (2) servants, roomers, or
permanent guests, provided that said living quarters are located within and are physically an
integral part of the dwelling unit.
6-3-11: CONVERSION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
A. No building may be converted to a use or in a manner not allowed by the regulations of the
zoning district within which said building is located.
B. Every conversion must comply with the regulations of the Building Code, Title 5 of this Code,
and all other applicable regulations of the Village.
C. Where a building is nonconforming in respect to height, bulk, lot area per dwelling unit,
required yards or off-street parking (See Chapter 13 of this Title), no conversion shall be
permitted, unless said building is brought into conformity with all applicable requirements of
this Zoning Code (Ord. 65138-15).
6-3-12: HEATING REQUIREMENTS
All primary heating units shall be operated by electricity, gas, oil or solar energy. (Ord. 82-744-
51)
6-3-13: CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF EXTERIOR SATELLITE EARTH
STATION ANTENNAS
A. Village Policy: It is the stated policy of the Village that installation of satellite earth station
antennas (SESA) and equipment can, unless controlled, adversely affect health, safety and
aesthetic values and objectives of the Village and its residents in all zoning districts. The Village
considers the rural ambience and residential character to be an extremely important aspect of
the community's quality of life. Great care is taken to protect these aesthetic values through
preservation of natural resources and protection of the visual environment. One of the very
important means by which this goal can be achieved is by recognizing that satellite earth station
antennas of all sizes, shapes, varieties and uses constitute physical additions and potential
hazards to the Village of such character that their construction, placement, installation and use
requires close examination and constant review by the Village. Satellite earth station antennas
are structures quite different in appearance from typical structures anticipated by the Codes of
the Village and the installation of satellite earth station antennas may not be compatible with
existing structures and land uses in the Village. The appearance of this SESA from neighboring
properties and the removal of desirable vegetation to allow placement of the SESA are major
negative consequences of such systems. In addition, it is extremely important that all safety
aspects be addressed to protect persons and property including wind loads, attractive nuisances
to children, site lines on roadways and other factors.
In every case the entire installation must be compatible with the character of the surrounding
area of the Village and shall not have an adverse impact on the health, safety or aesthetic values
and planning objectives of the area.
In view of the foregoing, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Village and to
provide for reasonable regulation, all exterior satellite earth station antennas, including all
forms of receivers of satellite transmissions, shall be considered structures subject to the terms
of the Village Code and shall be subject to all ordinances relating to structures.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 13 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
B. General Regulations: The construction and installation of the satellite earth station antenna
must strictly conform to all Village Ordinances.
1. Appearance: The installation must exhibit architectural quality.
a. Location
(1) All portions of the satellite earth station antenna shall be located only in
rear yards and not within a required rear or side yard setback as defined
in the Zoning Title, unless otherwise provided for in this Section.
(2) Installations shall not be permitted in, or be permitted to extend into that
portion of a lot between any front facade of a building and a public way.
(3) Consideration shall be given to protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of children as in the case of an attractive nuisance.
(4) No satellite antenna shall be installed on a vacant lot.
b. Height
(1) Installation on poles (other than the mount), masts and towers is
prohibited.
(2) Installation shall be subject to the specific regulations for type of antenna:
ground, roof, wall-mounted.
c. Materials
(1) The satellite earth station antenna shall be constructed of noncombustible
and corrosive resistant materials.
(2) The reflector element of the SESA shall be mesh construction unless
otherwise specifically allowed by these regulations.
d. Color: All parts of the satellite earth station antenna and appurtenant equipment
shall be of a color that will blend with the surroundings and any immediately
adjacent structure.
e. Miscellaneous: Advertising names and logos shall not be permitted on the
structure except when the removal of such name or logo would interfere with
adequate reception.
2. Installation: All systems shall be installed strictly in accordance with all codes adopted
by the Village, shall exhibit structural integrity at all times, and shall comply with the
manufacturer's requirements.
a. Method of Attachment: The permanent foundation or mounting for the antenna
shall be adequate for anticipated wind loads. Fixed elevation antennas shall be
installed to withstand 125 m.p.h. winds, while adjustable installations must be
designed to withstand 100 m.p.h. winds.\
(1) Ground Mounted: The supporting structure for the SESA is to be
permanently ground mounted and embedded in, or an integral part of a
monolithic concrete footing to a depth below the frost line. The SESA or
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 14 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
supporting structure shall not be attached to any building or structure on
the lot.
(2) Roof Mounted: Installation of an antenna on a roof must accommodate
both live and dead load requirements.
(3) Wall Mounted: The mast and foot assembly shall be in accordance with
the manufacturer's requirements based on the material to which the
structure is to be mounted.
b. Safety: The unit shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct
lightning strike or accidental electrical energizing of the unit.
3. Maintenance: All portions of the SESA and required screening shall be maintained in a
safe, clean and attractive condition by the property owner.
4. Miscellaneous: The exterior display of samples, models or facsimiles of an SESA used by
any business establishment such as a company, firm, installer or contractor for the
purpose of promoting the sale thereof, shall be subject to all of the applicable
requirements of this Section. Experimental or temporary installations, inferior materials
and questionable stability shall not be permitted.
C. Specific Regulations
1. Ground Mounted Antenna
a. Location: Located a minimum of 10' from any building or structure on the lot and
entirely behind the rear building facade.
b. Height: The height of a ground mounted SESA or any portion thereof, shall not
extend more than the diameter of the satellite reflector element plus two feet (2')
from ground level.
c. Size: The diameter of the satellite earth station antenna reflector element shall be
the smallest practical size and in no instance shall exceed 10'.
d. Material: The reflector element shall be constructed of mesh materials unless
otherwise provided for in this Section, or if the size of the reflector element is 24"
or less in diameter.
e. Color: A color which blends with the natural surroundings of the site or
immediately adjacent structure.
f. Quantity: Not more than one ground mounted satellite earth station antenna
shall be installed on a single zoning lot or building site.
g. Screening: An earth berm, fence, walls, arbors or other appropriate landscaping
(and also natural woodland vegetation), including trees, shrubs, and hedges
approved by the Village Forester shall be installed and maintained to screen the
SESA as completely as possible without preventing reception to said antenna.
The SESA shall be screened so as to obscure views of the system from adjoining
properties and public ways at all times.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 15 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
2. Roof Mounted Antenna
Single Family Detached Residential Structures
The installation of the SESA shall be permitted on a peak, pitched, sloped, flat roof or
chimney provided the design of the system is in keeping with the Village Policy for the
Construction and Installation of Exterior Satellite Earth Station Antennas and in
accordance with the following regulations:
a. Location: The SESA shall be located on a side of the principal structure which
does not face a public way.
b. Height: The maximum height of the SESA and all appurtenant equipment shall
not exceed the maximum building height for the applicable zoning district.
c. Size: The diameter of the SESA shall not exceed 24".
d. Material: Unrestricted.
e. Color: A color which blends with the natural surroundings of the site or
immediately adjacent structure.
f. Quantity: No more than one (1) SESA shall be permitted per principal structure.
g. Screening: The SESA shall be so located that views of the system are obscured
from public ways.
All Other Structures
Flat Roof: The SESA must be screened in full compliance with rooftop equipment
screening requirements of the Village Code.
Peak, Pitched, Sloped Roofs: Installation on a peak, pitched, or sloped roof shall require
an Architectural Review recommendation and Village Board approval.
3. Wall Mounted: Wall mounted antennas shall be permitted for a single family detached
residence only as regulated below.
a. Location: Any facade of a building which does not face a public way.
b. Height: The maximum height of the SESA and all appurtenant equipment shall
not exceed the maximum building height for the applicable zoning district.
c. Size: Maximum size of the reflector element shall be 24" in diameter.
d. Material: May be of solid construction.
e. Color: A color which blends with the adjacent wall to which it is attached and
shall otherwise blend with the natural surroundings of the site. In no instance
shall the wall mounted antenna be of a contrasting color with the wall to which it
is attached.
f. Quantity: Not more than one (1) wall mounted antenna shall be allowed per
principal structure.
g. Screening: Not required.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 16 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
D. Permit Requirements
1. Application: Any person wishing to install a satellite earth station antenna shall submit a
complete application for a building permit on a form provided by the Department of
Community Development for review, approval and issuance prior to installation. Said
application shall be accompanied by three (3) complete sets of the documents and plans
outlined below. No building permit shall be granted for a satellite earth station antenna
unless all regulations pertaining to the installation are in compliance with the applicable
Village Code regulations.
2. Plat of Survey or Rooftop Equipment Plan: An accurate plat of survey of the lot in
question indicating the proposed location of the satellite earth station antenna, all
structures on the subject property, location and name of all immediately adjacent streets,
location of the principal structure on immediately adjacent properties and existing
vegetation on the subject property or a rooftop equipment plan drawn to scale.
3. Reflector Element Projections: The projections of the reflector element at extremes of
the satellite band to be viewed in order to depict the reception lanes. This requirement
will be satisfied by drawing radial lines from a point representing the pivot point of the
SESA to each end of the satellite band and then drawing a line perpendicular to each
radial at a distance between the rim of the reflector element to the pivot point. Each
perpendicular line should be scaled to the diameter of the reflector element to show its
maximum projection on the plan at the extremes of its satellite scan. Compass directions
will be adequate for this requirement.
4. Plans/Specifications/Cut Sheets
a. Plans and specifications for the entire installation including elevations, SESA
configuration, mount, foundation, electrical wiring and any motorization, or
other proposed housing. Plans and specifications must be certified by the
preparer to comply with all applicable Village Codes and must be drawn to scale.
b. Manufacturer's installation instructions and requirements.
c. Structural Engineer Design Criteria Drawings and Calculations stamped by an
Illinois Licensed Structural Engineer must be submitted if required by the
Department of Community Development for rooftop installations.
5. Landscape Plan: Landscape plan for screening the installation from the view of
neighboring properties and public and private streets as required for ground mounted
installations.
E. Variations
1. Administrative Variations: Where there are practical difficulties in carrying out the
requirements of this Section which prevent reception, the applicant may submit a
written request for consideration of an Administrative Variation to the requirement(s).
Said request shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development and shall
detail the specific code requirement(s) and how reception is prevented. The Department
of Community Development shall review the request.
In the event a hardship occurs in meeting the strict application of these regulations as
they pertain to adequate reception only, the Department of Community Development
shall be authorized to grant an administrative variation provided the following is
substantiated:
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 17 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
• The specific hardship that exists.
• The requested variation is in keeping with the spirit of this Section and the public
health, welfare, and safety.
The Department of Community Development may, at the applicant's expense, choose to
hire an independent consultant to verify that adequate reception would not be possible if
the strict application of the requirements were applied.
Specific reasons for granting an Administrative Variation shall be provided in writing
and shall be attached to the permit issued for the applicable antenna. The Administrative
Variation shall be identified by the appropriate Village Code Section and the specific
allowance shall be indicated on the permit.
2. All Other Zoning Variations: In the event the person charged with administering the
provisions of this Section determines that a requested variation is not based solely on the
provision for adequate reception, a recommendation from the Zoning Board and a
zoning variation approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees must be granted prior to
a building permit being issued to install said antenna.
F. Appeals: The Village Board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the person charged with the enforcement of
this Section. (amd. entire section 6-3-13 Ord. 95-1380-10, eff. 2/13/95)
6-3-14: SALES ACTIVITIES; VENDING AND ICE MACHINES
All sales activities conducted in all zoning districts, including sales from vending machines and
ice machines, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. In addition, no vending
machine or ice machine shall be stored or displayed outside a completely enclosed building in
any zoning district. The restrictions of this Section shall not apply to news racks which are
covered by the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 8 of this Code. (Ord. 90-1178-62) The restrictions
of this Section shall not apply to Temporary Uses which shall be regulated by the provisions of
Section 6-3-6 of this Code.
6-3-15: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
A. Application: These regulations shall govern the design and operation of all outdoor luminaires
in all nonresidential zoning districts and by all non-residential uses in all residential zoning
districts. However, to promote safety in the ordinary and intended use of rights-of-way these
regulations shall not apply to any luminaires owned and operated by a State or local highway
authority for the purpose of illuminating the right-of-way.
B. Light Intensity: Any permitted outdoor luminaire shall be so designed, arranged and operated
so as to mitigate the amount of light and glare being cast onto any adjacent property or street.
No outdoor luminaire, regardless of the zoning lot onto or from which it causes illumination,
shall produce an intensity in excess of one-half (0.5) footcandles, as measured at the property
line at a height of 60 inches above grade in a plane at any angle of inclination.
C. Installed Luminaire Height: The installed height of any luminaire used for outdoor lighting on
any zoning lot shall not exceed 25 feet from the established grade. (Ord. 08-3049-32, eff.
08/11/08)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Page 18 of 18
Revised 11/25/2019
6-3-16: ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
A. All Adult Use Cannabis Business Establishments, as defined in Section 6-2-2 of this Title, are
prohibited. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated, aide, abet, or assist
in the operation of an Adult Use Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village’s corporate
limits. Adult Use Cannabis Business Establishments do not include Medical Cannabis
Cultivation Centers or Medical Cannabis Dispensary Organizations as set forth in Section 6-2-2
of this Title.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-4: ZONING DISTRICTS
Page 1
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Establishment of Districts
6-4-2: Map
6-4-3: Interpretation of District Boundaries
6-4-4: Annexed Territory
6-4-5: Uses Permitted in all Districts
6-4-6: Vacated Territories
6-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: In order to carry out the purposes and
provisions of this Zoning Code, the Village is hereby divided into districts
classified as follows: (Ord. 65-138-15)
A. Residence Districts
R1 Single-Family Residence
R2 Single-Family Residence
R2A Single-Family Residence
R3 Single-Family Residence (Ord. 77-470-4)
R4 Single-Family Attached Residence
R5 Mixed Use General Residence
B. Business Districts
B1 Retail Business
B2 General Business
E Small Scale Office (Ord. 86-885-22)
C. Planned Development Districts
PD Planned Development (Ord. 73-309-24)
D. Manufacturing Districts
M1 Restricted Manufacturing (Ord. 65-138-15)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-4: ZONING DISTRICTS
Page 2
E. 0ffice/Industrial Districts
0/Ia
0/Ib
O/Ic
0/Id (Ord. 86-817-01)
F. Farming Districts
F1 Farming
6-4-2: MAP: The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Zoning
Code areshown on the District Map, dated: December 7, 1965, which is
incorporated herein and hereby made a part hereof. The said District Map,
together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be
as much a part of this Zoning Code as though fully set forth and described
herein. Certified copies of said District Map shall be filed with the office of the
Village Clerk, and shall be open to public reference at all times during which
these offices are open for business. No later than March 31 of each year
hereafter, a District Map shall be published clearly showing the location and
boundaries of the zoning districts for the preceding calendar year; except
that, if in any calendar year there are no changes in the location and
boundaries of zoning districts, no map shall be published for such calendar
year.
6-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT B0UNDARIES: When uncertainty exists
with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the District
Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroad rights of way,
highways, streets, alleys or easements; tract or lot lines; or such lines
extended, unless otherwise indicated.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated
as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street, highway, or railroad, the depth
of such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the Map
measured at right angles from the center line of a street, highway, or railroad,
and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on
the Map from center lines of streets, highways or railroad rights of way unless
otherwise indicated.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-4: ZONING DISTRICTS
Page 3
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single owner-ship, the
regulations applicable to either portion of the lot may, in the owner's
discretion, extend to the entire lot, but for not more than twenty five feet (25')
beyond the boundary line.
6-4-4: ANNEXED TERRITORY: Any additions to the incorporated areas of the
village shall be automatically classified as an R1 Single Family Residence
District until otherwise classi-fied by amendment, except when annexed
pursuant to a pre-annexation agreement which provides for other
classification.
6-4-5: USES PERMITTED IN All DISTRICTS:
A. The following public utility uses are permitted in all districts: poles, wires,
cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or any other similar
distributing equipment; provided, that installation shall conform with rules and
regulations of the applicable administrative authorities, and other applicable
Village codes and ordinances.
B. Any governmental or proprietary function, owned or operated by a
municipality, is a permitted use in any district but such use must conform with
other requirements herein set forth for the district in which it is located.
6-4-6: VACATED TERRITORIES: Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is
vacated by Official action of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, the zoning
district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in
the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 65-138-15)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Exemptions from Certain Yard Requirements
6-5-2: Certain Structures, Uses Prohibited
6-5-3: Home Occupations
6-5-4: Fences and Other Obstructions
6-5-1 Exemptions from Certain Yard Requirements
A. Certain Exemptions for Lots Platted Prior to February 12, 1988
Except as set forth in Subsection B below, the provisions of the following
subsections of the Lincolnshire Village Code shall not be applied to any lot, the
platting of which was approved by the Village pursuant to Section 7-4-3 of Title 7
of the Village Code prior to February 12, 1988:
Subsection 5A-3(A.3)
Subsection 5A-3(B.2)
Subsection 5A-4(A.3)
Subsection 5A-4(B.2)
Subsection 5B-5(A.3)
Subsection 5B-5(B.2)
Rather, the restrictions that were in existence immediately prior to February 12,
1988 shall be applied to such platted lots.
B. Maintenance of Record
Solely for the convenience of Village residents, the Village shall maintain, in the
Department of Community Development, a record of those platted lots which are
subject to the various exceptions set forth in this Section 6-5-1. Because that
record is for convenience only, if there is a conflict between that record and the
Village Code, the Village Code shall prevail.
(Ord. Amd. 99-1619-03, eff. 1/11/99)
6-5-2: CERTAIN STRUCTURES, USES PROHIBITED: No structure of a temporary
character, trailer, basement, tent, shack, garage, barn or other building shall be used on
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
any lot at any time as a residence, either temporarily or permanently, and no structure
other than a completed single-family dwelling shall be used at any time as a residence.
6-5-3: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Any gainful activity which is not a permitted home occupation as defined in this
Zoning Code shall be considered as business use and is prohibited in a
residence district. Any such use existing on the effective date of this Zoning
Code shall be subject to provisions of Chapter 13 for the elimination of
nonconforming use.
B. Home occupations which involve teaching or other type of instruction shall be
limited to six (6) pupils at a time except for occasional seminar groups. (Ord.
65-138-15)
Day care homes/baby-sitting services are permitted as home occupations
subject, however, to the following restrictions:
1. Any person wishing to operate a day care home/baby-sitting service is
required to obtain a license from the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services before commencing the operation of such service.
2. Day care homes/baby-sitting services are limited to no more than six (6)
children at any one time.
3. Any person wishing to have more than six (6) children at any one time must
first obtain a special use permit for such additional children, pursuant to
Section 6-14-14 of Title 6.
4. Day care homes/baby-sitting services may only care for children under
eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 88-987-19)
C. The following home occupations are prohibited:
1. Any wholesale, jobbing, or retail business unless it is conducted entirely by
mail and/or telephone and does not involve the receipt, sale, shipment,
delivery or storage of merchandise on or from the premises,
2. Any manufacturing business,
3. A repair shop or service, establishment operating on or from the premises,
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
4. A clinic or hospital,
5. A barber shop or beauty parlor,
6. A stable, animal hospital, dog kennel, or dovecote,
7. A restaurant,
8. Any activity that produces noxious matter or employs or produces
flammable matter,
9. Any occupation which employs persons not residing on the premises, and
10. Any occupation which involves the use of any mechanical equipment other
than what is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes.
D. Exterior displays and signs are prohibited except those permitted by the sign
regulation of this Zoning Code for residence districts. 1 Displays and signs so
located inside as to be viewed through a window from outside the building are
also prohibited.
E. The outside storage of equipment or materials used in home occupations, or
used in an occupation or business conducted elsewhere is prohibited. (Ord.
65-138-15)
6-5-4: FENCES AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS: Repealed Ord. 92-1248-26 eff.
5/11/92)
1See Chapter 12 of this Title
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R1, R2 AND R3 SlNGLE-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Permitted Uses
6-5A-2: Special Uses
6-5A-3: R1 Single-Family Residence District
6-5A-4: R2 Single-Family Residence District
6-5A-5: R3 Single-Family Residence District
6-5A-6: Off-Street Parking
6-5A-1: PERMITTED USES:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Home occupation - as regulated in Section 6-5-3.
C. Signs - as regulated in Title 12.
D. Uses and buildings accessory to single-family detached
dwellings. (Ord. 65-138-15)
E. Dog runs - as regulated in Section 6-5-4b. (Ord. 74-358-34)
F. Community residential homes of less than four (4) persons.
(Ord. 90-1182-66)
G. Memorial Garden, as an accessory use to an assembly use, including, for
example, religious institutions or schools; provided the memorial garden is not
located in any required yards. (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
H. Short-Term Rental – as an accessory use to residential dwelling units and as
regulated in Section 6-3-5 of this Title.(Amd. Ord. 15-3379-106, eff. 11/09/15)
6-5A-2: SPECIAL USES:
A. Art galleries, libraries and museums not operated for profit.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
B. Automobile parking lots open to the public or accessory to a use not permitted
in the district.
C. Churches.
D. Golf courses - but not including commercially operated driving ranges or
miniature golf courses.
E. Parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings.
F. Public schools, elementary and high and private schools having a curriculum
equivalent to a public elementary and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping purposes; provided, however, no private kindergarten or
nursery school shall be permitted except as otherwise provided in this Zoning
Code.
G. Public utility uses, including outside telephone pay booths and public
transportation facilities such as shelters, terminals, parking areas, service
building and turnarounds.
H. Where a single-family detached dwelling with not less than four thousand
(4,000) square feet of floor area is located on a lot not less than eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet in area, a second dwelling unit located in an
existing building accessory to the principal dwelling may be allowed for
domestic help and provided that such second dwelling unit shall not contain
living quarters for roomers, lodgers, or permanent guests.
I. Temporary building and uses for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed one year. (Ord. 65-138-15)
J. Indoor Tennis Club.
K. Nursery schools, when accessory to the use of a church or public school
permitted under this Article, provided that the number of children in attendance
at any one time is not in excess of twenty five (25), the building used for the
nursery school meets the State requirements for such school and is located on
a site of a minimum of four (4) acres with direct access to a major thoroughfare
and adequate off-street parking. (Ord. 70-221-3)
L. Planned Development, R3 Single-Family Residence District:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
1. Land Area: An area of not less than three (3) acres of which not less
than thirty percent (30%) when fully developed will be devoted to
commons. The commons area may not include paved surfaces.
2. Permitted Uses and Special Uses: As in R1, R2, and R3 Single-Family
Residence Districts.
3. Lot Area: No requirement.
4. Frontage: No requirement.
5. Floor Area Ratio: No requirement.
6. Floor Area:
a. General: Not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet.
b. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling: One-story dwelling - not less than
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. More than one -
story dwelling -not less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
7. Building Height: As in R1, R2, and R3 Single-Family District.
8. Yards:
Front No requirement.
Side No requirement.
Rear No requirement.
9. Density: See subsection 6-14-l4M of this Zoning Title. (Ord.
89-1042-09)
M. Detached garage only in Historic District as defined herein. (Ord. 87-956-42)
N. Memorial Assembly Facility: (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
1. Shall only be permitted as an accessory use to an assembly use,
including, for example, religious institutions or schools.
2. Shall be permitted
a. inside the principle structure on the Lot, or
b. as an accessory structure subject to compliance with the
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
following design and setback standards:
i. Shall be located not less than one-hundred feet (100=)
from any Lot Line where there is Frontage;
ii. Shall maintain a minimum distance of one hundred
and thirty-five feet (135=) from any Lot Line where
there is no Frontage;
iii. Shall be located not more than twenty feet (20=) from
the principle structure on the Lot;
iv. Shall comprise an area no greater than six hundred
(600) square feet;
v. The structure shall have a height not greater than
three feet (3=);
vi. The structure shall be concealed from the adjacent
right-of-way and contiguous residential Lots with
vegetation which provides complete screening during
the entire year and shall be a minimum of six feet (6=)
tall at the time of planting, but which vegetation shall
not be considered part of the Memorial Assembly
Facility for the purpose of measuring the permitted
area thereof; and
vii. The face of the structure into which cremated human
remains are interned must substantially face towards
the principal structure to which it is accessory.
6-5A-3: R1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. Site and Structure Provisions
1. Minimum Lot Area. The lot area for each dwelling unit shall not be less
than 80,000 square feet.
2. Setback. The distance between the front lot line and the nearest
supporting wall or portion of the structure on the lot shall not be less than
50 feet nor more than 1/3 the depth of the average of the side lot lines.
3. Frontage. The lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than 150 feet.
If the frontage of a lot is on a cul-de-sac, as defined in Section 7-1-4 of
Title 7 of this Code, the frontage shall not be less than 55 feet. *(Refer to
Section 6-5-1).
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
4. Floor Area Requirement. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed
0.25 and the minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than
1,750 square feet. The ground floor area of one story dwellings shall not
be less than 1,750 square, or for dwellings with more than one story, the
ground floor area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet.
5. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 22 stories or 40
feet whichever is lower. Public buildings, churches, temples, colleges, or
schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet. However if
such building is located in any residence district it shall be set back from
each property line at least one foot per each foot of additional building
height above the limit for the district, in addition to the other requirements
of this Zoning Code. This clause shall not be construed as modifying the
other provisions of this Zoning Code limiting the use of property in any
other district.
6. Maximum Impervious Surface. The maximum impervious surface may
not exceed 30% of the Gross Lot Area, notwithstanding whether the
calculation of the Buildable Area for the subject Lot results in a larger area
for permitted structures and uses. (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
7. Where a setback greater than the minimum required front yard setback
has been maintained for existing buildings on lots having frontage of
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the total frontage of that block, the
front yard setback for any new principal building, attached accessory
building or building addition shall be no closer than the front yard setback
established by the existing principal building on that side of that portion of
that street with the least front yard setback, excluding existing principal
buildings permitted by virtue of a variance to this regulation; provided that
this regulation is not to be interpreted to permit a setback less than that
required in the designated zoning district. Further, this regulation shall not
apply to any building in a new subdivision for the first five (5) years from
the approval of the Final Plat of Subdivision. (Amd Ord. 07-2977-05, eff.
3/12/07)(Amd. Ord. 07-2999-27, eff. 7/23/07)
B. Yard Requirements
1. Front Yard. In the R1 District, the front yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
2. Side Yards. Two side yards, each a minimum of 30 feet in width, shall be
provided. *(Refer to Section 6-5-1)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
3. Rear Yard. In the R1 District, the rear yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
4. Corner Side Yard. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 20
feet in width.
(Ord. Amd. 99-1619-03, eff. 1/11/99)
5. Building Side Setback Plane. For all new single-family residential dwelling
units and additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, a
ABuilding Side Setback Plane must be calculated, inside which said
dwelling unit must be contained. The Building Side Setback Plane shall be
measured beginning at ten feet (10') directly above the established grade
on the Side Lot Line. (Ord. Amd. 07-2973-01B, eff. 22/07)
6-5A-4: R2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. Site and Structure Provisions
1. Minimum Lot Area. The lot area for each dwelling unit shall not be less
than 40,000 square feet.
2. Setback. The distance between the front lot line and the nearest
supporting wall or portion of the structure on the lot shall not be less than
40 feet nor more than 80 feet.
3. Frontage. The lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than 120 feet.
If the frontage of a lot is one a cul-de-sac, as defined in Section 7-1-4 of
Title 7 of this Code, the frontage shall not be less than 55 feet. *(Refer to
Section 6-5-1)
4. Floor Area Requirements. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed
0.25 and the minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than
1,750 square feet. The ground floor area of one story dwellings shall not
be less than 1,750 square, or for dwellings with more than one story, the
ground floor area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet.
5. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 22 stories or 35
feet whichever is lower. Public buildings, churches, temples, colleges, or
schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet. However if
such building is located in any residence district it shall be set back from
each property line at least one foot per each foot of additional building
height above the limit for the district, in addition to the other requirements
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
of this Zoning Code. This clause shall not be construed as modifying the
other provisions of this Zoning Code limiting the use of property in any
other district.
6. Maximum Impervious Surface. The maximum impervious surface may not
exceed 35% of the Gross Lot Area, notwithstanding whether the calculation
of the Buildable Area for the subject Lot results in a larger area for
permitted structures and uses. (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
7. Where a setback greater than the minimum required front yard setback has
been maintained for existing buildings on lots having frontage of
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the total frontage of that block, the
front yard setback for any new principal building, attached accessory
building or building addition shall be no closer than the front yard setback
established by the existing principal building on that side of that portion of
that street with the least front yard setback, excluding existing principal
buildings permitted by virtue of a variance to this regulation; provided that
this regulation is not to be interpreted to permit a setback less than that
required in the designated zoning district. Further, this regulation shall not
apply to any building in a new subdivision for the first five (5) years from the
approval of the Final Plat of Subdivision. (Amd. Ord. 07-2977-05, eff.
3/12/07)(Amd. Ord. 07-2999-27, eff. 7/23/07)
B. Yard Requirements
1. Front Yard. In the R2 District, the front yard shall not be less than 40 feet.
2. Side Yards. Two side yards, each a minimum of 20 feet in width, shall be
provided. *(Refer to Section 6-5-1)
3. Rear Yard. In the R2 District, the rear yard shall not be less than 40 feet.
4. Corner Side Yard. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 20
feet in width. (Ord. Amd. 99-1619-03, eff. 1/11/99)
5. Building Side Setback Plane. For all new single-family residential dwelling
units and additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, a
ABuilding Side Setback Plane must be calculated, inside which said
dwelling unit must be contained. The Building Side Setback Plane shall be
measured beginning at ten feet (10') directly above the established grade
on the Side Lot Line. (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
6-5A-5: R3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. Site and Structure Provisions
1. Minimum Lot Area. The lot area for each dwelling unit shall not be less
than 20,000 square feet.
2. Setback. The distance between the front lot line and the nearest
supporting wall or portion of the structure on the lot shall not be less than 30
feet nor more than 80 feet.
3. Frontage. The lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than 100 feet.
If the frontage of a lot is one a cul-de-sac, as defined in Section 7-1-4 of
Title 7 of this Code, the frontage shall not be less than 55 feet. *(Refer to
Section 6-5-1)
4. Floor Area Requirements. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed
0.25 and the minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than
1,750 square feet. The ground floor area of one story dwellings shall not
be less than 1,750 square, or for dwellings with more than one story, the
ground floor area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet.
5. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 2 stories or 30 feet,
whichever is lower. Public buildings, churches, temples, colleges, or
schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet. However if
such building is located in any residence district it shall be set back from
each property line at least one foot per each foot of additional building
height above the limit for the district, in addition to the other requirements of
this Zoning Code. This clause shall not be construed as modifying the
other provisions of this Zoning Code limiting the use of property in any other
district.
6. Maximum Impervious Surface. The maximum impervious surface may not
exceed 40% of the Gross Lot Area, notwithstanding whether the calculation
of the Buildable Area for the subject Lot results in a larger area for
permitted structures and uses. (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
7. Where a setback greater than the minimum required front yard setback has
been maintained for existing buildings on lots having frontage of
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the total frontage of that block, the
front yard setback for any new principal building, attached accessory
building or building addition shall be no closer than the front yard setback
Village of Lincolnshire Page 9 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
established by the existing principal building on that side of that portion of
that street with the least front yard setback, excluding existing principal
buildings permitted by virtue of a variance to this regulation; provided that
this regulation is not to be interpreted to permit a setback less than that
required in the designated zoning district. Further, this regulation shall not
apply to any building in a new subdivision for the first five (5) years from the
approval of the Final Plat of Subdivision. (Amd Ord. 07-2977-05, eff.
3/12/07)(Amd. Ord. 07-2999-27, eff. 7/23/07)
B. Yard Requirements
1. Front Yard. In the R3 District, the front yard shall not be less than 30 feet.
2. Side Yards. Two side yards, each a minimum of 10 feet in width shall be
provided. (Ord. Amd. 04-1934-50, eff.11/8/04)
3. Rear Yard. In the R3 District, the rear yard shall not be less than 30 feet.
4. Corner Side Yard. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 20
feet in width. If a corner lot, duly recorded prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Code, has insufficient width to provide a side yard 20 feet in width
and still maintain a buildable with of 27 feet, then the side yard abutting the
street may be reduced in width to permit a building width of 27 feet,
provided such side yard is not less than five feet in width.
(Ord. Amd. 99-1619-03, eff. 1/11/99)
5. Building Side Setback Plane. For all new single-family residential dwelling
units and additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, a
Building Side Setback Plane must be calculated, inside which said dwelling
unit must be contained. The Building Side Setback Plane shall be
measured beginning at 10= directly above the Side Lot Line. (Ord. Amd.
04-1934-50, eff.11/8/04)
6-5A-6: OFF-STREET PARKING: Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set
forth in Section 6-11-3 of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 65-138-15)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE B. R2A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-5B-1: Intent
6-5B-2: Permitted Uses
6-5B-3: Special Uses
6-5B-4: Lot Area, Setback and Height Requirements
6-5B-5: Yard Requirements
6-5B-6: Site Plan Review Process
6-5B-6-1: Policy Phase
6-5B-6-2: Technical Phase
6-5B-7: Environmental and Comprehensive Policies Plan Criteria
6-5B-1: INTENT: The R2A Single-Family Residence District is designed to permit
the development of environmentally sensitive large lot areas through the
application responsible environmental ad other planning criteria. The intent
is to encourage a creative approach to the use of land, preserve natural
vegetation, topographic and geologic features, enhance the appearance of
the neighborhoods by the conservation of forested areas, water bodies
and the preservation of natural vegetation and wildlife and advance the
various Lincolnshire planning policies outlined in the Official
Comprehensive Policies Plan. Specific environmental and planning criteria
will be applied through the site plan review process.
6-5B-2: PERMITTED USES: In the R2A Single-Family Residence District no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for
one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Article.
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Parks, forest preserves, hiking and bicycle trails.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
C. Educational Institutions (non boarding).
D. Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as
a principal use, as follows:
1. Athletic fields and playgrounds.
2. Attached garages.
3. Greenhouses and conservatories for private use.
4. Swimming pools.
5. Storage of building materials and equipment, fences and temporary
buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction. No accessory use or building shall be
located in areas of the building lot which are reserved by deed
restriction for preservation of natural environment or are otherwise
restricted. (Ord. 77-470-4)
E. Community residential homes of less than four (4) persons. (Ord.
90-1182-66)
F. Memorial Garden, as an accessory use to an assembly use, including, for
example, religious institutions or schools; provided the memorial garden is
not located in any required yards. (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
G. Short-Term Rental, as an accessory use to residential dwelling units and
as regulated in section 6-3-5 of this Title. (Amd. Ord. 15-3379-106, eff.
11/09/15)
6-5B-3: SPECIAL USES:
A. Churches and religious institutions.
B. Deleted by Ord. 11-3205-27, eff. 6/13/11)
C. Cemeteries.
D. Rest homes.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
E. Golf courses (but not golf driving ranges, pitch and putt or miniature golf
courses).
F. Cultural institutions, including:
1. Public libraries.
2. Public museums.
G. Publicly owned utilities, and civic buildings as follows:
1. Fire station.
2. Police station.
3. Post office.
4. Municipal offices and buildings.
H. Noncommercial recreational and social facilities, as follows:
1. Recreation clubs, including grounds (excluding hunt or gun clubs).
2. Community centers.
3. Deleted by Ord. 11-3205-27, eff. 6/13/11)
I. Planned single-family residential developments.
J. Horticulture, nature preserves, arboretum and agriculture (except animal
husbandry, mushroom farming, retail sales, and any other agricultural use
deemed noxious by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 77-470-4)
K. Detached garage only in an Historic District, as defined herein. (Ord.
87-956-42)
L. Memorial Assembly Facility: (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
1. Shall only be permitted as an accessory use to an assembly use,
including, for example, religious institutions or schools.
2. Shall be permitted
a. inside the principle structure on the Lot, or
b. as a accessory structure subject to compliance with the
following design and setback standards:
i. Shall be located not less than one-hundred feet (100=) from
any Lot Line where there is Frontage;
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
ii. Shall maintain a minimum distance of one hundred and
thirty-five feet (135=) from any Lot Line where there is no
Frontage;
iii Shall be located not more than twenty feet (20=) from the
principle structure on the Lot;
iv. Shall comprise an area no greater than six hundred (600)
square feet;
v. The structure shall have a height not greater than three feet
(3=);
vi. The structure shall be concealed from the adjacent
right-of-way and contiguous residential Lots with vegetation
which provides complete screening during the entire year and
shall be a minimum of six feet (6=) tall at the time of planting,
but which vegetation shall not be considered part of the
Memorial Assembly Facility for the purpose of measuring the
permitted area thereof; and
vii. The face of the structure into which cremated human remains
are interned must substantially face towards the principal
structure to which it is accessory.
6-5B-4: LOT AREA, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Density for Single-Family Residential Use: Allowable density on each tract
of land shall be five-tenths (0.5) to one dwelling unit per acre. However,
where specific elements of the Comprehensive Policies Plan are being
significantly advanced, the Zoning Board may recommend and the Village
Board may approve density premiums to permit densities up to one and
one-quarter (1.25) units per acre. Density premiums shall be granted only
where the petitioner shows special attention to protection and preservation
of natural environmental resources and where the proposed development
significantly advances the policy objectives of the Official Comprehensive
Policies Plan of the Village.
The determination of final density on each tract shall be a subject of the
site plan review process in accordance with environmental and planning
criteria provided for herein. Final density shall be as set forth on the zoning
site plan as approved by the Village Board.
B. Lot Area:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
1. Single Family: Lot area may vary within this District in order to achieve
creative lot design and protect the environmental resources of each
tract of land. Lot area shall be determined through the site plan review
process in accordance with environmental and planning criteria and
with the following:
a. In no case shall lots be smaller than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in area, and,
b. Average lot size on any individual tract shall not be less than twenty
two thousand (22,000) square feet in area. (Individual tract being
defined as being under single ownership and being developed under
a single plan of development.) (Ord. 77-470-4)
c. Frontage: No less than one hundred feet (100') unless the frontage
of a lot is on a cul-de-sac, as defined in Section 7-1-4 of Title 7 of
this Code, the frontage shall be not less than fifty five feet (55').
(Ord. 88-978-10)
2. The determination of preliminary lot area shall be a subject of the site
plan review process in accordance with environmental and planning
criteria provided for herein. Final lot area and design in the R2A Zone
shall be establish-ed as part of the subdivision plat process. Final lot
area and design shall however substantially conform in layout, area and
design to the preliminary lots shown on the zoning site plan.
3. Uses Other than Single-Family:
a. Permitted Uses:
Park, forest preserves no size limitations
Horticulture and agriculture 5 acres
Educational institutions with 10
or more self-contained
classrooms 10 acres 10 acres
Educational institutions with
less than 10 self-contained
classrooms 5 acres
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
b. Special Uses:
Suggested Lot Size
Churches 2 acres
Cemeteries 10 acres
Rest homes 3 acres
Golf courses 20 acres
Cultural institutions 3 acres
Public utilities and services .5 acres
Recreational and social
(non-commercial) 2 acres
Planned developments residential 5 acres
C. Building Height: The maximum building height shall be two and one-half
(2-1/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') whichever is lower.
D. Property Line Setbacks from Major Roads: The property line shall be set
back as follows in all mature forested areas:
1. Riverwoods Road, one hundred sixty five feet (165') from center line.
2. Half Day Road, one hundred eighty five feet (185') from center line.
3. For other major roads designated by the Zoning Board, the setback to
the property line from the center line shall be no less than one hundred
twenty five feet (125'). However, the Zoning Board may recommend
and the Village Board may approve up to a twenty percent (20%)
variation in the above property line setbacks in order to accommodate
Comprehensive Policies Plan and environmental preservation
objectives, and may approve other variances on parcels of ten (10)
acres or less to alleviate hardship situations or other unusual
circumstances.
E. Floor Area Requirements. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed
0.25 and the minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than
1,750 square feet. The ground floor area of a one story dwelling shall not
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
be less than 1,750 square feet, or for dwellings with more than one story,
the ground floor area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet. (Amd. Ord.
07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
F. Building Side Setback Plane. For all new single-family residential dwelling
units and additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, a
ABuilding Side Setback Plane must be calculated, inside which said
dwelling unit must be contained. The Building Side Setback Plane shall be
measured beginning at ten feet (10') directly above the established grade
on the Side Lot Line. (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff. 1/22/07)
G. Where a setback greater than the minimum required front yard setback has
been maintained for existing buildings on lots having frontage of
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the total frontage of that block, the
front yard setback for any new principal building, attached accessory
building or building addition shall be no closer than the front yard setback
established by the nearest existing principal building on that side of that
portion of that street; provided that this regulation is not to be interpreted to
permit a setback less than that required in the designated zoning district.
Further, this regulation shall not apply to any building in a new subdivision
for the first five (5) years from the approval of the Final Plat of Subdivision.
(Amd Ord. 07-2977-05, eff. 3/12/07)
6-5B-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS: Yard requirements shall be as follows:
A. Single-Family Residential:
1. Front Yard and side yard abutting a street: 20 feet
(Except when an attached garage protrudes into the required front yard or corner side
yard, the garage portion of the structure may extend up to 10 feet into the required front
yard or corner side yard.) (Amd. Ord. 07-2973-01B, eff.1/22/07)
2. Side Yard 10 feet
3. Rear Yard 35 feet
4. Corner Side 20 feet
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
B. All other uses involving buildings or structures:
1. Front yard and side yard abutting
a street 50 feet
2. Side yard 20 feet
3. Rear yard 75 feet
6-5B-6: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Applicability: Applications or petitions for R2A zoning for tracts of land five
(5) acres or greater or where approval of a density greater than one-half
(2) dwelling unit per acre is requested, shall be subject to the site plan
review process.
B. Purpose: Whereas the proper maintenance and use of areas of high
environmental value are important to the physical, aesthetic, recreational
and economic well-being of present and future residents, and whereas
each tract and its environmental resources are unique, each zoning permit
application shall be reviewed on an individual basis.
C. Review Responsibility: Each application shall be reviewed in accordance
with the procedures and standards contained in this Section, and in
accordance with criteria contained herein and established from time to time
by the Zoning Board and approved by the Village Board.
The Community Development Department shall have responsibility for the
site plan review process. The Village Manager shall utilize the services of
the Community Development Department and various other Village
Departments including the Village Attorney as well as the local Fire District
for technical and advisory aspects of the site plan review in accordance
with normal Zoning Board operating procedures.
D. Procedure for Site Plan Review: Site plan review process for the R2A
Zoning District shall occur in two (2) phases; a policy phase, and a
technical phase which includes the steps involved in subdivision platting.
Zoning approval shall be evidenced by acceptance of a zoning site plan by
the Village Board at the end of the policy phase. However, no land
clearance, grading or construction shall commence until acceptance of a
final subdivision plat, and the issuance of individual lot development
Village of Lincolnshire Page 9 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
permits and building permits in accordance with the provisions hereinafter
set forth and other applicable Village ordinances.
E. Application: Applications for each phase shall be made on forms provided
by the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by
the required plans and documents. The application at each phase shall be
submitted to and certified by the Community Development Department as
being complete and in proper form.
6-5B-6-1: POLICY PHASE:
A. Step 1. Pre-application Conference: Prior to filing a formal application for a
zoning permit, the applicant shall request a preliminary conference with the
Community Development Department.
1. At the pre-application conference, the developer shall present, at a
minimum, the following material:
Written description of the proposed development and proposed design
team.
Area and specific location maps and surrounding land-use maps.
Title information regarding ownership of all the land including full
disclosure of all beneficiaries of any land trust involved and full
disclosure of all partners in any general or limited partnership, with
supporting documentation.
Topographic map available at five foot (5') intervals.
Sketch plans and concepts regarding land-use, site design, access,
street layout, surface drainage and utility service.
Aerial photograph at a four hundred foot (400') scale or larger.
2. The Community Development Department shall determine and advise
the applicant of required material, data and plans to be submitted in
Step 2, Zoning Site Plan Review and Public Hearing. The Community
Development Department shall further advise the applicant of
Comprehensive Policies Plan objectives which may affect the tract of
Village of Lincolnshire Page 10 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
land in question and any other issues of particular concern to the
Community Development Department.
B. Step 2: Zoning Site Plan Review and Public Hearing: An application with all
accompanying material as designated herein and as may be required at
the conclusion of Step 1 shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department who shall certify the submittal as complete and in proper form.
The Community Development Department shall forward the application to
the Zoning Board for the consideration of Zoning Board subcommittees,
Village staff, Village advisory bodies and other affected governmental
bodies.
1. Prior to the public hearing, the Zoning Board may provide the applicant
with the opportunity to present his proposed development. After such
presentation, the Village development staff shall prepare a written
review of the proposed site plan and supporting plans and concepts.
After the Zoning Board has completed its preliminary review and
studied the staff report, it shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
site plan in accordance with its normal public hearing procedures.
2. The applicant shall submit the following material for this phase of the
site plan review:
General development information.
Housing designs, materials, prototype floor plans.
Market information including bedroom mix, price range, targeted
purchasers and marketing concept.
Land purchase agreements if not owner of record.
Site plan and environmental protection concepts.
Engineering concepts.
Description of variations to the subdivision improvement regulations
requested, if any.
Aerial surveys at a scale of one hundred feet equals one inch (1" 100').
Village of Lincolnshire Page 11 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
Other data, maps, surveys or plans as may be required for the review of
the various studies outlined in Section 6-5B-6-1A.
3. The Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Section 6-14-3 of this Zoning Code.
4. Following the public hearing and review of the development staff report
the Zoning Board shall submit its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board. Findings of fact will be submitted in written form and
include recommendations to approve the zoning permit, approve with
conditions or deny the application. Such recommendations may include
those specific engineering and environmental studies beyond those
required in the subdivision regulations which are found necessary and
reasonable to properly manage the development of the site given
unique site characteristics, variations from the subdivision regulations
requested by the applicant or recommended by the Zoning Board, and
shall include a designation of that area for which a detailed tree survey
shall be required, if any.
C. Step 3. Village Board Approval or Denial: The Village Board shall grant
zoning permit approval, conditional approval or shall disapprove the zoning
site plan. This approval shall constitute zoning approval only. It does not
constitute subdivision, lot development or building permit approval
6-5B-6-2: TECHNICAL PHASE: The technical phase involves four (4) steps: 1)
submission of detailed studies; 2) approval of the preliminary subdivision
plat (with such additional studies as recommended by the Zoning Board);
3) approval of the final plat; 4) approval of individual lot development plans
and issuance of lot development permits. The technical phase shall occur
simultaneously with and be closely coordinated with the subdivision plat
approval process.
A. Step 1: Detailed Engineering and Environmental Studies.
1. As part of the submission of a preliminary subdivision plat, the applicant
shall submit the following detailed studies to the Village Manager:
A survey, mapped and drawn to a scale of fifty feet equals one inch (1"
= 50') of all trees eight inches (8") or more in diameter measured fifty
four inches (54") from the ground. Each such tree shall be noted as to
location, size, species and general condition. The survey shall be
Village of Lincolnshire Page 12 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
prepared by an approved forester and shall encompass that area
designated by the Zoning Board in Section 6-5B-6-1B4.
Topographic survey showing existing and proposed contours at one
foot (1')intervals.
A plan showing all existing utilities including sanitary sewers, water and
gas mains, telephone and electric lines.
A plan showing the location of all existing drainage systems, natural
and man-made, which influence the site. This plan should include
information on drainage to and from adjacent parcels to the extent that
they may be affected by the proposed drainage concepts proposed for
the subject site.
Natural resource and ecological studies of marsh, wetlands, ponds or
other water bodies completed by a professional in the natural sciences
approved by the Village Manager when such studies are deemed
appropriate as part of the policy phase deliberation.
2. The Zoning Board may require the submission of additional detailed
studies as they deem appropriate, and/or may waive the requirement of
submitting a particular study or studies as set forth herein.
3. The Village Manager shall refer these studies to members of the Village
development staff for review to assure the substantial compliance of the
preliminary subdivision plat to the zoning site plan.
B. Step 2: Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Village Board: The applicant
shall submit a preliminary plat to the Zoning Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in the Subdivision Code of the Village1. The
preliminary plat shall conform in substance to the approved zoning site
plan. The preliminary plat shall contain all items and attachments required
in the Subdivision Code and, in addition, the following:
1See Title 7 of this Village Code
Village of Lincolnshire Page 13 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
1. Location and extent of all deed restricted portions of individual lots
showing those areas of each lot which shall remain in a natural and
undisturbed state.
2. Preliminary engineering drawings for the entire parcel at a level of detail
to be determined by the Village Engineer. (Final engineering plans and
specifications shall be submitted for "units" representing successive
phases of the development.)
3. Designation on each lot of the construction envelope which shall be that
area where construction activity and ingress and egress to the building
site shall be permitted.
4. Designation of that area to be covered by deed restrictions, if any
5. A phasing plan identifying units of the proposed subdivision and the
sequence of staging of these units.
6. Documentation of the type of corrective actions to be taken on trees
within or along the edge of the construction envelope that may be
damaged or adversely impacted by the construction process.
7. Documentation that the developer will fence the construction envelope
of each lot.
8. The Zoning Board shall, following receipt of the preliminary plat, submit
its recommendations to the Village Board in accordance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Code.
9. Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, and any attachments thereto, from
the Zoning Board along with their written recommendations, the Village
Board shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the
preliminary plat in accordance with the Subdivision Code.
C. Step 3: Approval of the Final Pat:
1. The Zoning Board shall, following receipt of the final plat, submit its
recommendations to the Village Board in accordance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Code.
2. Upon receipt of the final plat, and any attachments thereto, from the
Zoning Board along with their written recommendations, the Village
Village of Lincolnshire Page 14 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
Board shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the final
plat in accordance with the Subdivision Code.
D. Step 4: Individual Lot Development Plans and Permit: Prior to issuance of a
building permit and prior to any lot preparation whatsoever, the applicant
shall apply for a lot development permit and file a lot development plan for
review and approval. This final step in the site plan review process shall
take place after approval of a final subdivision plat for a portion of the
subdivision or for the entire subdivision.
1. Application: The applicant shall submit six (6) copies of a lot
development plan for each lot to the Village Manager. The Village
Manager shall refer the lot plan to the Village Engineer and Village
Forester for their review and approval.
No lot development permit or building permit shall be issued for any lot
within the R2A Zoning District without the signature of the Village
Engineer and Village Forester on the face of the lot development plan
indicating approval.
2. Designation of Lot Activity Areas: The lot development plan shall locate
the activity zones of each lot delineating:
a. The building and grading area.
b. The construction envelope.
c. The deed restricted area, if any.
The building and grading area shall be restricted to:
a. The building pad area.
b. An area not to exceed the greater of that area fifteen feet (15')
immediately beyond the building pad or that area necessary to
comply with the final plat.
c. The area proposed to be used as the driveway and for necessary
utility lines.
The construction envelope shall be that area needed for the
movement and placement of equipment and material to be used in
Village of Lincolnshire Page 15 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
the construction of the dwelling unit. It shall be as small as possible
but include the entire building and grading area. The construction
envelope shall be placed so as to minimize tree damage.
Any deed restricted undisturbed area shall be located on each lot to
blend into the restricted areas of adjacent lots. The undisturbed
areas should extend the entire length of the lot wherever this is
feasible in the overall design of the subdivision.
3. Data to be Included: The lot development plan shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and include the following
information:
Existing contours at one foot (1') intervals.
The location of all trees eight inches (8") or more in diameter measured
fifty four inches (54") from the ground within the construction envelope
and fifteen feet (15') beyond, and an indication of all such trees
proposed to be removed.
The location of all existing and proposed streets, driveways, easements
and rights of way.
The location of all existing and proposed utilities including sewers, water
mains, gas lines, telephone service lines and electric service lines.
The location of all existing and proposed drainage across, to and from
the lot. The proposed location of all drainage structures such as
culverts, swales, ditches, etc. The proposed location of sump pump
discharge.
The location and extent of areas to be graded or filled.
The location of snow fencing or other suitable protective barriers to be
placed around and within the construction envelope to protect trees and
avoid unnecessary soil compaction.
Statement of earliest starting date for lot grading.
Statement that no tree shall be removed by bulldozing and that all trees
to be removed will be cut and the stumps ground with a stump remover.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 16 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
4. Lot Development Permit: No lot grading or removal of any vegetation
shall take place without an approved lot development plan and a lot
development permit issued by the Village is displayed at each lot. Work
will proceed only after the appropriate inspections as indicated on the
lot development permit.
5. A copy of the approved lot development plan shall be kept at the lot
during the time that lot development work is underway.
The Village Forester shall make the necessary inspections required to
check compliance with the lot development plan. The schedule of
inspections and a place for signature indicating satisfactory inspection
shall be on the face of the lot development permit.
The first inspection shall be required after the building corners are
staked, grading area marked, driveway located and snow fencing or
other suitable protective barrier put in place but prior to any clearing of
vegetation or grading. The second inspection shall be made after rough
grading is complete. Excess excavation spoil, as determined by the
Village Forester, shall be removed from the forested portions of a
project. The third inspection shall be made when all lot development
work is complete.
Where it is found that the condition of the lot or progress of lot
development work does not conform to the approved lot development
plan, the Village Forester shall issue a stop work order. No building
permit shall be issued until after the second inspection has been made
and approved by the Village Forester.
6. Final Grading: All finished grading shall be performed by the developer
prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, and in accordance with
Village standards and an approved grading plan.
6-5B-7: ENVIRONMENTAL AND COMPREHENSIVE POLICIES PLAN
CRITERIA: The following criteria shall be used in evaluating the zoning site
plan, preliminary plat and lot development plan for each tract within the
R2A Zone. The purpose of these criteria is to promote the preservation of
trees and natural vegetation, to preserve unique natural features, to
prevent flooding and drainage problems, to maintain vistas, to provide for
open space, park and recreation areas and to promote the implementation
of the Official Comprehensive Policies Plan of the Village. The Zoning
Board and Village development staff shall utilize this criteria in its review of
the zoning site plan, preliminary plats and lot development plans. Final site
Village of Lincolnshire Page 17 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
density shall depend upon the extent to which each development proposal
satisfies the environmental criteria and promotes policy objectives of the
Comprehensive Policies Plan. In utilizing these criteria the Zoning Board
shall give consideration to the unique environmental and locational
characteristics of the tract of land.
A. Environmental Criteria:
1. Maximum tree preservation in forested areas including design treatment
to minimize tree damage and removal, the location of open space to
protect tree and tree rehabilitation commitments where unavoidable
damage is likely to occur.
2. The amount and location of open space, dedicated or otherwise
reserved, and the extent to which it is used to protect unique natural
features and vistas. At a minimum, five percent (5%) of the site shall be
dedicated open space at one-half (2) unit per acre; ten percent (10%)
at one unit per acre and fifteen percent (15%) for densities above one
unit per acre. However the Zoning Board can recommend and the
Village Board can approve a cash donation in lieu of the required open
space or a portion thereof. Park land should abut existing parks or open
space wherever possible.
3. Forested areas and areas containing unique natural features or
constituting important natural habitats should be protected by deed
restrictions wherever possible keeping such lands in a natural
undisturbed state.
4. Areas of poor visual impact due to exposure to major roads or
disharmonious land uses should be screened by the use of berming
and landscaped with natural vegetative materials.
5. A variety of site design techniques including variable yards, moderate
clustering and variable lot size should be used to create large
undeveloped areas within the development.
6. Ponds, streams and wetlands should be preserved in their natural
condition and included as part of dedicated open space wherever
feasible and advisable.
7. Steep slopes should be protected from development.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 18 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
8. In forested areas, drainage improvements should be designed so as to
minimize any change in the existing groundwater level.
9. In forested areas, engineering improvements should be concentrated
into as narrow a corridor as is consistent with current engineering
standards so that clearing of wooded rights of way can be minimized.
B. Comprehensive Policies Plan Objectives:
1. For subdivisions of forty (40) acres or more in total area, the density
should decrease as the distance from major State or County collector or
arterial highways increases.
2. All aspects of the development proposal, including site design, street
layout and design, engineering, land use, housing character, landscape
treatment, conservation measures and the treatment of community
facilities such as parks and schools, should be consistent with and
advance the objectives contained within the Official Comprehensive
Policies Plan of the Village. Particular emphasis should be placed on
advancing the plan's open space strategy and upon the following:
The preservation in a natural state of forested land.
The provision of bikeway and pedestrian ways linked to the Village's
system.
Property lines of lots to be subdivided should be substantially set back
from all major roads. While minimum setbacks are required, additional
setbacks should be included wherever possible.
The preservation of semirural vistas of open meadows and woodlots
should be given design consideration.
The provision for park improvements in addition to dedicated or
otherwise reserved open space.
Open space in the form of nature preserves as well as parks should be
included as integral parts of residential neighborhoods.
Conformance with the transportation and road plan elements.
Maintaining the visual character of Village and County roads.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 19 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
The coordination of development with School Districts 103 and 125,
expansion and program objectives.
The avoidance of highway commercial land uses along Route 22 and
Riverwoods Road and all local roads.
The development of estate, large lot residential and very low density
single-family cluster developments in areas designated as
"environmentally sensitive residential areas".
Developments should be as nearly self-sustaining as possible in terms
of their Municipal cost-revenue effect. (Ord. 77-470-4).
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE C. R4 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-5C-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-5C-2: Permitted Uses
6-5C-3: Special Uses
6-5C-4: Lot Size Requirements
6-5C-5: Yard Requirements
6-5C-6: Building Height Limitations
6-5C-7: Signs
6-5C-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
6-5C-1: INTENT AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS: The R4 District is intended to
provide low to moderate density multi-family residential options in areas
adjacent to commercial districts, other moderate density residential
districts, public or non-residential land uses. This district is meant to be
occupied primarily by attached single-family swellings in structures of a
size that are compatible with the single-family character of Lincolnshire.
Density of projects for attached single-family dwellings are meant to be low
for developments of this type. Density for multiple-family dwellings are
meant to be moderate and should be based on the degree to which the
development fulfills the objectives of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
(amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff.1/9/95)
Areas containing unique natural features, transition areas adjacent to
residential districts and areas at or near major intersections are identified
as being of significant impact to the Village. This is due to the need to
protect valued natural resources, the integrity and environment of the
Village's residential neighborhoods, traffic safety conditions and the land
use character of key intersections. Therefore, all development proposed
within this District shall be subject to site plan review and approved as
specified in Section 6-14-7 of this Code.
6-5C-2: PERMITTED USES: No building, structure, or parcel of land shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or enlarged which is
arranged, intended, or designed for other than any of the following uses:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
Accessory uses (attached to the principal building only).
Parks, playgrounds and forest preserves.
Single-family attached in structures containing not more than four (4)
dwelling units. (Ord. 86-885-22) (amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff. 1/9/95)
Community residential homes of less than four (4) persons. (Ord.
90-1182-66)
Memorial Garden, as an accessory use to an assembly use, including, for
example, religious institutions or schools; provided the memorial garden is
not located in any required yards. (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
Short-Term Rental, as an accessory use to residential dwelling units and
as regulated in Section 6-3-5 of this Title. (Amd. Ord. 15-3379-106, eff.
11/09/15)
6-5C-3: SPECIAL USES: The following special uses may be permitted in specific
situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 6-14-14
of this Code, as appropriate:
Cemeteries.
Churches and Synagogues.
Multiple-family structures. (amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff. 1/9/95)
Planned unit developments.
Private recreation clubs and community buildings (but not including
commercial recreation businesses).
Public utility uses.
Schools and day care facilities.
Continue Care Retirement Campus (CCRC), so long as the same
determined on site plan review to fulfill the objectives of the Official
Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 03-1862-39, eff. 8/25/03)
1. Purpose and Description of a Continuing Care Retirement Campus:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
The continuing care retirement campus provisions of this section are
intended to provide for age-restricted planned unit developments to
serve the needs of elderly residents and to keep them as independent
as the status of their respective health will permit from time to time.
These developments shall be intended to provide, through common
management or by contractual agreement, housing needs and services
that aid the elderly in maintaining an independent lifestyle.
Services provided by the continuing care retirement campus may
include, but are not limited to, health care maintenance, nursing service
facilities, congregate dining facilities and food services, housekeeping,
social and recreational programs, administrative offices, chapels, park
facilities, security stations, transportation services, community buildings,
and any other services, activities and accessory uses integral to the
operation and maintenance of a residential community intended
primarily for the use of the elderly residents and the employees of the
continuing care retirement campus.
2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this type of Planned Unit Development:
a. “Independent Living Units” are dwelling units within the Continuing
Care Retirement Campus which are unrestricted except that at least
one person occupying each dwelling unit shall be 62 years of age or
older and may contain in addition to an individual living area,
comprised of one or more rooms, a kitchen and bath area, while
receiving equal benefits, such as meals and recreation, with others
within the community.
b. “Assisted Living Units” are self-contained units within an assisted
living facility licensed by the Illinois Department of Public Health to
assure compliance with the Assisted Living and Shared Housing
Establishment Code (77Ill. Adm. Code 295). The Assisted Living
Unit is intended to provide twenty-four hour a day support for
personal and health services for residents in need of this care.
Assisted Living Units shall include accessory uses such as dining
rooms, bathing areas, common areas, staff offices and any other
incidental space necessary to provide the above care.
c. “Skilled Care Nursing Units” are beds located within a nursing facility
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Public Health for
residents who require twenty-four or more consecutive hours of care
because of physical or mental conditions.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
d. “Continuing Care Retirement Campus Accessory Uses or
Structures” are accessory facilities, functions, and structures which
are to be used primarily by the residents of the retirement campus
and their respective visitors and the staff servicing the retirement
campus, except as may otherwise be authorized.
3. Purpose: The Continuing Care Retirement Campus development
provisions of this Section are intended to provide the following:
a. A choice in the type of environment available to the public by
allowing development that would not be possible under the strict
application of other sections of this Title;
b. Development and/or permanent reservation of open space,
recreational areas and facilities;
c. A land use plan which permits preservation of green space, natural
vegetation, topographic and geological features and historic
resources;
d. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
which results in better urban design, higher quality construction and
the provision of aesthetic amenities;
e. The efficient use of land, so as to promote economies in the
provision of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings,
and other facilities;
f. Innovations in development so that the growing needs and demands
of the population may be met by a greater variety in type, design,
and layout of buildings, and by conservation and more efficient use
of open space ancillary to said buildings, all in a manner so as to be
consistent with the character of the zoning district in which the
planned unit development is located;
g. A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals
and welfare in general, and the health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the elderly in particular.
4. Procedure: A Continuing Care Retirement Campus may be granted as
a Special Use only in those districts in which it is provided for, and
application for said special use shall be made and considered according
to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 14 of this Title;
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
however, to the extent that there is any inconsistency between this
Section and the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 14 of
this Title, the terms and conditions of Chapter 14 of this Title shall
prevail.
Notwithstanding the provision for a Continuing Care Retirement
Campus special use within the zoning classification, no Continuing Care
Retirement Campus shall be established unless located in an area
adjacent to districts of similar density, such as commercial, public or
non-residential land uses, or moderately dense residential districts,
including Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) which are also located in
R-3 or R-4 zones.
No Continuing Care Retirement Campus special use may be granted or
maintained unless the Continuing Care Retirement Campus has been
approved by, and/or is currently Licensed, Registered and in good
standing with, the Illinois Department of Public Health.
5. The development for which an application is made for a Continuing
Care Retirement Campus special use shall either:
a. be intended to have 90% of its units occupied by at least one person
62 years of age or older and provide significant facilities designed to
meet the physical or social needs of such older residents; or
b. be intended to be occupied solely by persons 62 years of age or
older and such staff as is necessary for the medical care of the
residents and maintenance of the campus.
6. Bulk Requirements
a. The minimum lot area shall be seventy-five (75) acres, with a
minimum net buildable lot area of fifty (50) acres.
b. The minimum lot width shall be 500 feet.
c. The maximum height of any building within the Continuing Care
Retirement Campus shall be eighty-five feet (85').
d. The maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) shall be 0.75.
e. The minimum front and corner side yard setback shall be fifty feet
(50').
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
f. The minimum interior side yard setback shall be twenty-five feet
(25').
g. The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty-feet (50').
7. Parking Requirements: Parking shall be provided as required herein.
a. Independent Living Units (ILU): 1.0 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
b. Employees/Staff: 1.0 parking space per employee on maximum
shift.
c. Visitors: a minimum of four percent (4%) of total required parking
hereunder.
d. The additional requirements of Title 6 - 11 of the Village of
Lincolnshire’s Code regarding Off-Street Parking and Loading.
e. No parking area or vehicular circulation shall be nearer than twenty
feet (20') of any lot line.
8. Accessory Structures:
Accessory Structures are permitted within the Continuing Care
Retirement Campus and shall include the following:
Entertainment facilities, houses of worship, dining facilities, food
preparation facilities, laundry service facilities, nursing services,
administrative offices, staff facilities, storage and maintenance facilities,
security facilities, exercise/recreational facilities, libraries and any other
services or facilities intended for the use by residents, visitors and staff
of the Continuing Care Retirement Campus.(Ord. 03-1862-39, eff.
8/25/03)
Memorial Assembly Facility: (Amd. Ord. 08-3070-53, eff. 11/24/08)
a. Shall only be permitted as an accessory use to an assembly use,
including, for example, religious institutions or schools.
b. Shall be permitted:
i. inside the principle structure on the Lot, or
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
ii. as an accessory structure subject to compliance with the
following design and setback standards:
6-5C-4: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS: The minimum lot sizes required in the R4
District shall be as follows:
Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
Single-family attached structures 5,000 sq. ft. per unit 100 ft. plus 15 additional
feet for each unit in the
structure
Parks, playgrounds & forest
preserves
10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft.
Special Uses
Churches & Synagogues By Zoning Board
Multiple-family structures Existing Structure: 4,000 sq.
ft. per unit
350 ft. of frontage on a
public road
Proposed structure: per
Zoning Board based on
number of dwelling units
proposed and the
Official Comprehensive
Plan
Private recreation clubs &
community buildings
By Zoning Board
Public utility uses By Zoning Board
Schools 2 acres 200 ft.
Day care facilities 1 acre 125 ft.
Cemeteries 3 acres 200 ft.
Planned unit developments 3 acres none
Accessory Uses:
Each accessory use may be established on the same lot as a principal use, provided
such lot meets the lot size requirements of the R4 District.
6-5C-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS: The minimum yard requirements in the R4
District shall be as follows:
Permitted Uses Corner Side Front & Interior Side Rear
Single-family attached structures 25 ft. 12 ft. 30 ft.
Parks, playground & forest
preserves
None
Special Uses
Churches & Synagogues 30 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
Memorial Assembly Facility By Section 6-5C-3
Multiple-family structures 50 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft.
Private Recreation Clubs &
Community Buildings
30 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft.
Public Utility Uses By Zoning Board
Schools, day care facilities 30 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft.
Cemeteries 30 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft.
Planned unit developments By Village Board
(amd. Ord. 95-1377-7, eff. 1/9/95)
6-5C-6: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS: In the R4 District no building or other
structure erected within the R4 District shall exceed three (3) stories or
thirty six feet (36') in height except for church steeples.
6-5C-7: SIGNS: Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of
this Code.
6-5C-8: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS: Off-street
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of
this Title. (Ord. 86-885-22)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-5D: R5 MIXED-USE GENERAL RESIDENCE
Revised 12/08/2014 Page 1
TITLE 6: Zoning
CHAPTER 5: Residence District
ARTICLE: D
Sections:
6-5D-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-5D-2: Uses
6-5D-3: Lot Sizes
6-5D-4: Building Setbacks
6-5D-5: Building Height
6-5D-6: Signs
6-5D-7: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-5D-8: Landscaping
6-5D-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
The R5 District is primarily intended to accommodate a mixture of residential dwelling units and
selected retail uses. Accordingly, mixed-use developments incorporating residential and commercial
uses in the same or in attached structures are consistent with this District.
The R5 District also recognizes the special complexity and interaction of land uses in and around the
Village Green and Milwaukee Avenue, to allow flexibility in land use and design of multiple structures
on a single lot; to encourage opportunities for mixed-use development; to facilitate the creation of
convenient, attractive, and harmonious context of buildings and streets, and pedestrian ways; and to
encourage public and private investment that will promote vitality, activity, and safety in the District.
6-5D-2: Uses
Uses permitted in the R5 Mixed Use General Residence District are identified in the table below:
Uses
P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Bank, financial institution with drive-thru facility SU
Banks and financial institutions, without drive-thru facilities P
Community residential homes of less than four (4) persons (Ord. 90-1182-66) SU
Convenience store P
Day care center SU
Drinking establishment SU
Food store, including candy/confectionery stores, dairy products, and bakeries P
General retail and service uses P
Office, business and professional P
Physician’s office SU
Planned Unit Development (PUD), as regulated in Section 6-14-12 of this Title SU
Personal fitness/instruction studio (yoga, martial arts, dance), not including health
club/athletic facilities P
Education institution, private, business, trade school SU
Restaurant with Live Entertainment SU
Restaurant, excluding Live Entertainment P
Restaurant, Fast Food with drive-thru facility SU
Restaurant, Fast Food without drive-thru facility P
Retail pharmacy/drug store, with drive-thru facility SU
R5 MIXED USE GENERAL
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-5D
R5 MIXED-USE GENERAL RESIDENCE
Revised 12/08/2014 Page 2
Retail pharmacy/drug store, without drive-thru facility P
Separate dwelling units above the ground floor of commercial-use structures P
Single-family attached dwellings SU
Any other similar use not specifically permitted in this Article, but which has substantially
similar impacts on public services, traffic, parking and property values as the uses expressly
permitted herein and is consistent with the trend in development within the District.
P
Short-Term Rental, as an accessory use to residential dwelling units and as regulated in
section 6-3-5 of this Title. P
6-5D-3: Lot Sizes
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Permitted Uses 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Bank, financial institution with drive-thru facility 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Drinking establishment 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Education institution, private, business, trade school
/day care center 7,500 sq. ft. 50 ft.
Physician’s office 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) By Village Board By Village Board
Restaurant, with Live Entertainment 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Restaurant, Fast Food with drive-thru facility 45,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
Retail pharmacy/drug store, with drive-thru facility 45,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
Single-family attached dwellings 4,000 sq. ft. 140 ft.
6-5D-4: Building Setbacks
Uses Front* Side
Corner
Side Rear
Permitted Uses 15 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Special Uses 15 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Planned Unit Developments (PUD) By Village Board
*When adjacent to the Village Green the front yard shall be zero (0) feet.
6-5D-5: Building Height
In the R5 District no building or other structure shall exceed three and one-half (3 ½) stories or forty
(40) feet in height.
6-5D-6: Signs
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of this Code.
6-5D-7: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title
unless otherwise recommended by the Zoning Board and approved by motion of the Corporate
Authorities for projects in the downtown redevelopment area. (Ord. 86-885-22)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-5D
R5 MIXED-USE GENERAL RESIDENCE
Revised Page 3
6-5D-8: Landscaping
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 46 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE E. COMMUNITY RESIDENCE HOMES
SECTION:
6-5E-1: Purpose
6-5E-2: Criteria for the Issuance of an Administrative
Occupancy Permit
6-5E-3: Standards for the Issuance of a Special Use Permit
6-5E-4: Spacing and Density Requirements
6-5E-5: Chart Outlining Zoning Provisions Related to
Community Residential Homes
6-5E-1: PURPOSE: It is declared to be the policy and intent of the Board of Trustees of
the Village to assure that there are adequate available sites for community residences
within the Village. In order to attain this goal, the Board of Trustees has done and has
taken into consideration the following:
A. In accordance with the Plan for Compliance with the Community Residence
Location Planning Act that the Mayor and Board of Trustees approved at the
June 11, 1990 regular Village Board meeting, the Village is demonstrating that
adequate provisions are being made to provide for sites for community
residential homes serving people with disabilities in areas zoned primarily for
single-family residential use and to comply with the Federal Fair Housing Act of
1988.
B. That the established spacing requirements for community residential homes will
foster the integration of such residences into the residential nature of
single-family residential neighborhoods.
C. That the established density standards are necessary to preserve the Village's
ability to protect the public safety and to provide for adequate public facilities.
D. That the Village is fully committed to ensure that persons with disabilities are
able to live in appropriate community residential homes which operate to
promote their safety residing within all residentially zoned areas of the
community.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 47 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
E. That the Village desires to promote the State and local public policy of
deinstitutionalization of persons with disabilities which benefit both the
individual and the community as a whole, because it enhances the individual
lives of all disabled persons and improves society through the integration of
persons with disabilities into the mainstream of their community.
F. That the Village finds that the dispersal of community residential homes will
directly encourage and facilitate the implementation of the residential setting
intent of the State statute.
G. That it is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the community residential homes by requiring compliance with all applicable
State statutes, regulations and licensing requirements as well as all building,
fire and safety ordinances and regulations of the Village.
H. That community residential homes of seven (7) or more persons with
disabilities pose sufficient different and unique problems relating to the health
and safety of the residents as well as the appearance of "institutionalization"
and the Village shall require that such community residential homes apply for
and receive a special use permit prior to occupancy.
I. That the maximum number of six (6) unrelated persons who are permitted to
reside in a residential zoning district as a right through an administrative
occupancy permit was arrived at by taking the current average household size
in the Village of two and ninety five-hundredths (2.95) persons, rounded to
three (3), multiplied by two (2).
J. That the maximum number of twelve (12) unrelated persons who are permitted
to reside in a residential zoning district upon the issuance of a special use
permit was arrived at by taking the current average household size in the
Village of two and ninety five-hundredths (2.95) persons, rounded to three (3),
multiplied by four (4).
6-5E-2: CRITERIA FOR THE ISSUANCE OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPANCY
PERMIT: Any community residential home consisting of four (4) or more residents shall
not be occupied by any resident unless the sponsor shall have first obtained from the
Village Manager or his designee an administrative occupancy permit authorizing the use
of the dwelling unit as a community residential home.
All community residential homes shall be licensed in accordance with the "Standards
and Licensure Requirements for Community-Integrated Living Arrangements" as
established by the Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities or the
Department of Public Health.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 48 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
All administrative occupancy permits shall be issued upon written application upon forms
furnished by the Village Manager or his designee. The application shall be under oath
and shall state the following:
A. The date of application;
B. The name and address of the applicant, and if a corporation the name and
address of the registered agent, president, secretary and treasurer, and if a
partnership, the name and address of all partners, including limited partners;
C. The proposed location of the community residential home;
D. The number of residents to be housed in the community residential home;
E. The proposed date of occupancy by residents;
F. The number of other persons that will reside within the dwelling unit, classified
according to their respective duties;
G. The number of other persons that will work at the home or provide support
services at the home to its residents, classified according to their respective
duties; and
H. Any other information that the Village Manager may reasonably require.
The application shall be accompanied by reliable evidence that the sponsor is licensed
or similarly authorized by an agency of the State of Illinois of competent jurisdiction to
operate the proposed community residential home in the proposed location. The
absence of such evidence shall constitute sufficient grounds to deny the administrative
occupancy permit.
The application shall also be accompanied by a certificate or affidavit of the sponsor that
the residents to be housed in the community residential home have been evaluated and
screened as required under applicable statutes and administrative regulations and that
the residents are capable of community living if provided with an appropriate level of
supervision, assistance, and support
services. The applicant or sponsor shall be responsible for updating the application
within fourteen (14) days of any change and at a minimum of once a year.
No administrative occupancy permit shall be issued for a community residential home
that does not comply with any ordinance of the Village or applicable regulation of the
State of Illinois or its agencies.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 49 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
No administrative occupancy permit shall be issued for a community residential home
that does not comply with the provisions of this Article.
An administrative occupancy shall not be required to operate a community residential
home consisting of three (3) or fewer residents.
The Village Manager may revoke an administrative occupancy permit on the following
grounds:
A. The permit was obtained by fraudulent means, material misrepresentation or by
submitting false information;
B. The sponsor is no longer licensed or authorized by an agency of the State of
Illinois of competent jurisdiction to operate a community residential home at the
location specified in the permit;
C. The sponsor has unlawfully refused to permit an inspection of the home by an
authorized official of the Village; or
D. The dwelling unit has been determined by an appropriate official of the Village
to be unsafe for human habitation.
Prior to the revocation of an administrative occupancy permit, the Village Manager or his
designee shall investigate whether probable cause for revocation may exist and, if so,
shall notify the sponsor in writing of reasons for the proposed revocation and grant the
sponsor the opportunity to appear before the Village Manager or his designee at a time
and place specified within such notice. Such hearing shall be held not less than ten (10)
days after the notice is received by the sponsor. Hearings shall be conducted under
rules issued by the Village Manager. Such rules shall be consistent with the nature of the
proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine
witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. If after the hearing the Village Manager
or his designee determines that the permit should be revoked, a written order revoking
the permit shall be issued.
An administrative occupancy permit is not transferable to any other person.
6-5E-3: STANDARDS FOR THE ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL USE PERMIT: Any
community residential home consisting of seven (7) or more residents shall not be
occupied by any residents unless and until the sponsor has first obtained a special use
permit as provided for in this Section.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 50 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
No special use permit shall be recommended by the Zoning Board for any community
residential home, unless it shall find that each and every one of the following criteria are
met:
A. That the design, location and operation of the community residential home will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety and welfare;
B. That the community residential home will not substantially diminish the
economic value of properties in the vicinity of the proposed home;
C. That the granting of the permit would not result in the concentration of
community residential homes or of such other facilities for service dependent
populations such that the nature and character of the area would be
substantially altered; and
D. That the proposed use of the affected property complies with all the applicable
ordinances of the Village.
In addition to supplying all of the information required for an administrative occupancy
permit, the party seeking issuance of a special use permit shall submit such evidence as
may be requested by the Mayor and Board of Trustees to make the findings required by
this Section.
The issuance of a special use permit for a community residential home shall also be in
accordance with the provisions of Section 6-14-14, subsections I, J, K and L of this Title
6, provided, however, that the references to subsections H in I1 and J2 shall, solely for
purposes of this Section, be amended to read Section 6-5E-2.
6-5E-4: SPACING AND DENSITY REQUIREMENTS: In order to avoid a
saturation/concentration effect in the siting of community residential homes, spacing
requirements have been established to regulate the siting and operation of community
residential homes in the Village.
Due to the unique character of street configuration within the Village, a standard for the
appropriate number of community residential homes related to the size of a block is not
appropriate. Therefore, this Section includes a minimum spacing distance established
according to a simple formula; Required lot frontage in the zoning district x 10 (an
average number of homes per block in a residential area laid out on the typical grid
system). These numbers establish a distance that is comparable to one community
residential home per block.
The spacing requirements would assume that saturation/concentration would not occur
in any one area of the Village. It is the intent of these requirements to assimilate
Village of Lincolnshire Page 51 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
residents of community residential homes into the entire community rather than
establishing concentrations of community residential homes in any one neighborhood.
6-5E-5: CHART OUTLINING ZONING PROVISIONS RELATED TO COMMUNITY
RESIDENTIAL HOMES: The foregoing provisions of this Article as to administrative
occupancy permits, special use permits, numbers of unrelated persons residing in a
residential home and spacing requirements relative to community residential homes
located in all residential zoning districts are outlined in the following chart:
Bottom of Page Left Intentionally Blank
Village of Lincolnshire Page 52 Title 6-5
Revised 08/25/2014
CHART OF
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE
ZONING PROVISIONS RELATED TO
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOMES
NUMBER OF RESIDENTS
PER COMMUNITY
RESIDENTIAL HOME*
ZONING DISTRICTS
R1 R2 R2A,R3 R4 R5
Up to a maximum number of
unrelated persons with
disabilities allowed under
zoning ordinance definition of
"family"
Spacing distance
P
3
None
P
3
None
P
3
None
P
3
None
P
3
None
4 - 6 unrelated persons
Minimum spacing distance
P-A
1500'
P-A
1200'
P-A
1000'
P-A
500'
P-A
800'
7 - 12 unrelated persons
Minimum spacing distance
SUP
1500'
SUP
1200'
SUP
1000'
SUP
500'
SUP
800'
P = Permitted as of right under zoning definition of "family" with no restrictions or
conditions.
P-A = Permitted as of right through an administrative occupancy permit that requires
licensing or certification and a spacing requirement no greater than indicated
here.
SUP = Permitted by special use permit with objective standards and rational spacing
requirement no greater than indicated here.
* And per the most recent edition of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code
standards for all Residential Properties, Section PM-403.3. (Ord. 90-1182-66)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE F. R6 MIXED USE ESTATE DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-5F-1: Purpose
6-5F-2: Permitted Uses
6-5F-3: Special Uses
6-5F-4: Lot Area, Setback, Bulk and Height Requirements
6-5F-5: Yards
6-5F-6: Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
6-5F-7: Other Regulations
6-5F-1: PURPOSE: The Mixed Use Estate District is established to permit an
owner of a residence on a larger residential parcel to maintain a separate
building that may house limited business uses while providing protection to
surrounding uses by requiring restrictions on the operator of the business
and sufficient setbacks for all buildings. The district may be of particular
significance after the Village annexes property in previously unincorporated
areas that may contain planned or existing mixed uses. It is recognized
that the benefit in annexing such properties may outweigh any detriment to
the Village by permitting such mixed uses.
6-5F-2: PERMITTED USES:
A. Single Family detached dwellings.
B. Business uses as regulated in Section 6-5F-7.
C. Signs as regulated in Title 12 and Section 6-5F-7.
D. Uses and building accessory to single family detached dwellings. (Ord.
65-138-15)
E. Dog runs as regulated in Section 6-5F-4B. (Ord. 74-358-34)
F. Community residential homes of less than four (4) persons. (Ord.
90-1182-66)
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
G. Short-Term Rental, as an accessory use to residential dwelling units and as
regulated in section 6-3-5 of this Title. (Amd. Ord. 15-3379-106, eff 11/09/15)
6-5F-3: SPECIAL USES: There are no special uses in the Mixed Use Estate
District.
6-5F-4: LOT AREA SETBACK, BULK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
A. Lot Area and Setbacks
1. Lot Area. Not less than three (3) acres.
2. Sideyard Setbacks. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
3. Front and Rear Yard Setbacks. Not less than fifty (50) feet.
4. There shall be at least 100 feet between the two primary structures on
the property.
B. Frontages
1. Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
C. Floor Area Ratio
1. Not to exceed .25 for the two primary buildings.
D. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
1. 1-story dwelling, not less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750)
square feet.
2. Dwellings having more than one (1) story, not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet. (Ord. 65-138-15)
E. Size of Non-Residential Building
The non-residential building shall be no greater than three thousand
(3,000) square feet in size.
F. Building Height
The maximum building height shall be two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or
thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is higher.
6-5F-5: YARDS:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
A. Front and Rear Yards: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
B. Side yards: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
6-5F-6: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set forth in Section 6-11-3 of
this Zoning Code. (Ord. 65-138-15)
B. No business, service or delivery vehicles may be parked outside overnight.
6-5F-7: OTHER PROVISIONS:
A. Two principal structures are permitted on a lot zoned Mixed Use Estate
District.
B. All operations of the business enterprise shall be conducted indoors. No
operations at all may take place out of doors.
C. There shall be no outside storage of the business enterprise materials or
supplies on the property and no accessory storage buildings for the
business enterprise may be constructed or maintained on the property.
D. There shall be no business advertising or identification signs on the
property.
E. There shall be no more than two persons employed by the enterprise and
no more than three persons including the owner working at the enterprise
at any time. The owner of the property must be the owner of the
enterprise and shall reside at the residence on the property.
F. Such a lot must be contiguous to at least one property on which two or
more buildings have been constructed.
G. Retail sales, wholesale showrooms, and traffic-intensive service uses are
not permitted in the Mixed Use Estate District. Rather, the uses permitted
shall be the uses listed below and those similar type uses:
1. Professional offices.
2. Graphic design studio.
3. Photographer's studio.
4. Interior decorating workroom.
5. Custom tailoring or dressmaking workroom.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 6-5
Revised 11/09/2015
6. Appliance repair workroom.
7. Machine shop for automotive engine repair provided no vehicles may
be parked, stored, or worked on out of doors.
8. Greenhouses.
(Amend. Ord. 95-1399-29)
(Amend Ord. 06-2014-05, eff. 2/13/06)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6A: B1 RETAIL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 1
TITLE: 6
CHAPTER 6: Business Districts
ARTICLE: A, B1 Retail Business District
Sections:
6-6A-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-6A-2: General Requirements
6-6A-3: Uses
6-6A-4: Lot Size Requirements
6-6A-5: Building Setbacks
6-6A-6: Building Height
6-6A-7: Signs
6-6A-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-6A-9: Landscaping
6-6A-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
This District is intended to provide a location suitable to accommodate a combination of retail,
service and office uses in an intensive commercial core area. Permitted and special uses can
be placed on relatively small zoning lots reflecting the historic development pattern of Half Day
Road and to encourage a pedestrian environment in retail shopping areas.
As the village relies almost exclusively on retail sales generated from properties located in the
village to fund its municipal services, this Article is also intended to regulate the conversion or
elimination of retail sales establishments through the preservation and enhancement of sales
tax generating uses, while also working with the property owners to maintain a viable tenant mix
on various properties within this District.
6-6A-2: General Requirements
A. Outdoor Business and Storage: All business, service, storage, merchandise display and
repair processing, where allowed, shall be conducted only within a completely enclosed
building except for off-street parking, off-street loading, open sales lots, automobile service
facilities, and drive-thru facilities where such uses are allowed.
B. Production of Goods: The production of any goods on the premises shall be associated with
a Permitted and/or Special Use and incidental to the principal use, unless otherwise
specifically provided herein.
C. Performance Criteria: The use of equipment and goods processed or produced in the
premises shall not be objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise,
vibration, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
B1
RETAIL BUSINESS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6A
B1 RETAIL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 2
6-6A-3: Uses
Uses permitted in the B1 Retail Business District are identified in the table below:
Uses
P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Banks and financial institutions, with drive-through facilities SU
Banks and financial institutions, without drive-thru facilities P
Catering establishment SU
Convenience store P
Day care center SU
Day Spa, with massage services SU
Day Spa, without massage services P
Educational institution, private, business, trade school SU
Food store, including candy/confectionery stores, dairy products and bakeries P
Funeral home SU
General retail and services uses P
Government building (subject to the regulations of Section 6-6A-2(D)) SU
Liquor sales, package only P
Musical instrument sales and repair, including accessory instruction/lessons P
Office, business and professional (subject to the regulations of Section 6-6A-2(D)) P
Personal fitness/instruction studio (yoga, martial arts, dance), not including health
club/athletic facilities P
Pet shop, with limited boarding and/or sale of live animals SU
Physician’s office P
Planned Unit Development (PUD), as regulated in Section 6-14-12 of this Title SU
Printing, publishing, blueprinting and photocopying establishments with retail sales only SU
Repair or servicing of any article, the sale of which is from a permitted use in this District SU
Restaurants with Live Entertainment SU
Restaurants, excluding Live Entertainment P
Restaurants, Fast Food with drive-thru SU
Restaurants, Fast Foot without drive-thru facility P
Retail pharmacy/ drug store, without drive-thru facility P
Vehicle Fueling Station, may include convenience store SU
Any other similar use not specifically permitted in this Chapter, but which has substantially
similar impacts on public services, traffic, parking and property values as the uses
expressly permitted herein, is consistent with the trend in development within the District,
and is complementary to the Village’s reliance on non-property taxes to finance municipal
operations.
P
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6A
B1 RETAIL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 3
6-6A-4: Lot Sizes
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Permitted Uses 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Banks and financial institutions, with drive-through 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
Funeral home 30,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
Planned Unit Development By Village Board By Village Board
Restaurant with Live Entertainment 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Restaurant, Fast Food with drive-thru facility 45,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
Special Uses, all others 7,500 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Vehicle Fueling Station, may include convenience
store 45,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
6-6A-5: Building Setbacks
Uses Front Side
Corner
Side Rear
Permitted Uses 10 ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.
Special Uses 10 ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.
Planned Unit Developments (PUD) By Village Board
Where a side and/or rear yard abuts any residential zoning district, excluding the R5 District, a
transitional yard measuring twice the minimum yard requirement shall be required. Landscaping
or fence screening a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) opacity shall be provided along
such transitional yards. Transitional yards shall not contain any off-street parking or other
structures, except driveways, sidewalks, and landscaping.
6-6A-6: Building Height
In the B1 District no building shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty feet (30') in
height including rooftop equipment.
6-6A-7: Signs
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of this Code.
6-6A-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title.
(Ord. 86-885-22)
6-6A-9: Landscaping
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6B: B2 GENERAL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 1
TITLE: 6
CHAPTER 6: Business Districts
ARTICLE: B, B2 General Business District
Sections:
6-6B-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-6B-2: General Requirements
6-6B-3: Uses
6-6B-4: Lot Sizes
6-6B-5: Building Setbacks
6-6B-6: Building Height
6-6B-7: Signs
6-6B-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-6B-9: Landscaping
6-6B-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
The intent of the B2 District is to accommodate those uses which require substantial land area,
are major travel destinations, require substantial support parking and draw their clientele or
employees from the regional market. Often times such uses require a high degree of access
and roadside visibility or exposure from major thoroughfares.
As the village relies almost exclusively on retail sales generated from properties located in the
village to fund its municipal services, this Article is also intended to regulate the conversion or
elimination of retail sales establishments through the preservation and enhancement of sales
tax generating uses, while also working with the property owners to maintain a viable tenant mix
on various properties within this District.
6-6B-2: General Requirements
A. Outdoor Business and Storage: All business, service, storage, merchandise display and
repair processing, where allowed, shall be conducted only within a completely enclosed
building except for off-street parking, off-street loading, open sales lots, automobile service
facilities, and drive-thru facilities where such uses are allowed.
B. Production of Goods: The production of any goods on the premises shall be associated with
a Permitted and/or Special Use and shall be incidental to the principal use, unless otherwise
specifically provided herein.
C. Performance Criteria: The use of equipment and goods processed or produced on the
premises shall not be objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise,
vibration, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
B2
GENERAL BUSINESS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6B
B2 GENERAL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 2
6-6B-3: Uses
Uses permitted in the B2 General Business District are identified in the table below:
Uses
P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Any Permitted Use in the B1 Retail Business District P
Any Special Use in the B1 Retail Business District SU
Assembly Uses, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title SU
Automotive service facility SU
Bowling alley establishment P
Colleges, universities, or vocational schools SU
Convalescent, sheltered care facilities and group or nursing homes P
Drinking establishments, including Live Entertainment SU
Hotels SU
Motor vehicle sales establishments SU
Parks and playgrounds P
Radio and television station, excluding transmission towers SU
Recreation facility, public or private, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title SU
Retail shopping centers P
Urgent medical care center/clinic SU
Any other similar use not specifically permitted in this Chapter, but which has substantially
similar impacts on public services, traffic, parking and property values as the uses
expressly permitted herein, is consistent with the trend in development within the District,
and is complementary to the Village’s reliance on non-property taxes to finance municipal
operations.
P
6-6B-4: Lot Sizes
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Permitted Uses 30,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
Automotive service/repair facility 30,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.
Motor vehicle sales establishment 30,000 sq. ft. 300 ft.
Planned Unit Developments (PUD) By Village Board By Village Board
Special Uses, all other 30,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
6-6B-5: Building Setbacks
Uses Front Side
Corner
Side Rear
Permitted Uses 50 ft. 20 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft.
Special Uses, all others 50 ft. 20 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) By Village Board
Where a side and/or rear yard abuts any residential zoning district, excluding the R5 District, a
transitional yard measuring twice the minimum yard requirement shall be required. Landscaping
or fence screening a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) opacity shall be provided within
such transitional yards. Transitional yards shall not contain any off-street parking or other
structures, except driveways, sidewalks, and landscaping.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6B
B2 GENERAL BUSINESS
Revised 7/8/2019 Page 3
6-6B-6: Building Height
In the B2 District no building shall exceed three and one-half (3-1/2) stories or forty two feet
(42') in height including rooftop equipment.
6-6B-7: Signs
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of this Code.
6-6B-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title.
(Ord. 86-885-22)
6-6B-9: Landscaping
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6C: E SMALL SCALE OFFICE
Revised 12/08/2014 Page 1
TITLE: 6
CHAPTER 6: Business Districts
ARTICLE: C, E Small Scale Office District
Sections:
6-6C-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-6C-2: Uses
6-6C-3: Lot Sizes
6-6C-4: Building Setbacks
6-6C-5: Building Height
6-6C-6: Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
6-6C-7: Signs
6-6C-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-6C-9: Landscaping
6-6C-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
The E District is intended to provide low density office and service uses to serve as transitional
areas between residential areas and more intense commercial sectors of Lincolnshire. This
district is characterized by lands developed in tranquil residential-like settings as opposed to
more intensely developed commercial centers.
6-6C-2: Uses
Uses permitted in the E Small Scale Office District are identified in the table below:
Uses
P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Animal Clinic/Hospital SU
Assembly Uses SU
Banks and financial institutions with drive-thru facilities SU
Banks and financial institutions, without drive-thru facilities P
Day care centers SU
Educational institution, private SU
Government Buildings SU
Hotel SU
Memorial Assembly Facility, as regulated in Section 6-3-5 of this Title SU
Office, business and professional P
Physician’s office P
Planned Unit Development (PUD), as regulated in Section 6-14-12 of this Title SU
Recreation facility, private SU
Any other similar use not specifically permitted in this Chapter, but which has substantially
similar impacts on public services, traffic, parking and property values as the uses
expressly permitted herein, is consistent with the trend in development within the District.
P
E
S M A L L
S C A L E
O F F I C E
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-6C
E SMALL SCALE OFFICE
Revised 12/08/2014 Page 2
6-6C-3: Lot Sizes
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Permitted Uses 30,000 sq. ft. 125 ft.
Animal clinic/hospital 30,000 sq. ft. 130 ft.
Assembly Uses 80,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
Banks and financial institutions with drive-thru
facilities
60,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
Private recreation facility 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) By Village Board By Village Board
Special Uses, all other 30,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
6-6C-4: Building Setbacks
Uses Front Side
Corner
Side Rear
Permitted Uses 35 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft. 30 ft.
Special Uses 35 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft. 30 ft.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) By Village Board
Where a side and/or rear yard abuts any residential zoning district, excluding the R5 District, a
transitional yard measuring twice the minimum yard requirement shall be required. Landscaping
or fence screening a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) opacity shall be provided within
such transitional yards. Transitional yards shall not contain any off-street parking or other
structures, except driveways, sidewalks, and landscaping.
6-6C-5: Building Height
A. The maximum building height shall be three and one-half (3-1/2) stories or forty two feet
(42') including rooftop equipment.
B. Assembly uses, government buildings and educational institutions may be erected to a
maximum building height of 60 feet. The minimum yard requirements of Section 6-6C-5(A)
shall be increased one (1) foot per each foot of additional building height above the limit for
this district.
6-6C-6: Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.36.
6-6C-7: Signs
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of this Code.
6-6C-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title.
6-6B-9: Landscaping
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Section:
6-7 Manufacturing Districts
6-7A M1 Restricted Manufacturing District
6-7B Sexually Oriented Businesses
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 2
CHAPTER 7
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-7-1: General Requirements
6-7-2: Performance Standards
6-7-3: Screening
6-7-4: Dwelling Units
6-7-5: Multiple Uses in a Single Building
6-7-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, and testing of materials, products, and
goods shall be within completely enclosed buildings; except, that underground
storage of liquids is permitted subject to conformity with applicable provisions
of this Chapter.
B. No lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be used, and no building or structure shall
be erected, altered, or remodeled for any of the following uses: abattoirs;
arsenals, an activity involving storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products which are exploded by detonation except such as are specifically
licensed by the Village; blast furnaces; boiler works; coke ovens, crematories;
creosote treatment or manufacture; dumps and slag piles; fat rendering; drop
forges and forge plants; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or explosive
manufacture or storage; dumping, reduction, or other processing of garbage,
dead animals, offal or refuse, except as customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use; grain storage; foundries: ore reduction; petroleum processing or
refining; pyroxylin manufacture, manufacturing or processing natural or
synthetic rubber; caoutchouc, or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment;
packing plants; rock excavation and crushing; salt works; sauerkraut
manufacture; soap manufacture; smelters; stockyard or slaughter of animals or
fowl; processing of fish oil, tallow, grease; lard manufacture or treatment;
tanning; curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation, or manufacture;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 3
cement concrete or asphaltic concrete mixing plant; junk shop; junk yards or
automobile wrecking yards; or for the manufacture of brick, tile, terra-cotta,
bulk chemicals, gas, soap, gypsum, lime or plaster of paris.
C. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacturing of materials or
products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as
are customarily incidental to the operation of a principal use in such quantities,
and in a manner conforming with applicable performance standards set forth
hereafter under Section 6-7-2. Such materials shall include, but shall not be
confined to: all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN,
and picric acid; propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and
fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium
nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable
organic compounds such as acetylide, tetrazoles, perchloric acid, perchlorates,
chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent
(35%); and nuclear fuel, fissionable materials and products and reactor
elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
6-7-2: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use established in a manufacturing district which involves the
manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, or testing of materials, goods, or products, shall be operated in such
a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as hereinafter
set forth governing noise, smoke, particle matter, toxic or noxious matter,
odors, fire and explosive hazards, or vibration, or glare or heat for the district in
which use shall be located; and no use, already established on the effective
date of this Zoning Code shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or
further conflict with such applicable performance standards for the district in
which such use is located.
A. Noise: Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed
by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using
the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject
to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises
shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises
capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this Zoning Code, shall be
those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level
meter, with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (+/-2) decibels.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 4
Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and/or
intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound
intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the operation of
motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the
designated octave bands shown in the following table:
OCTAVE BAND MAXIMUM PERMITTED
SOUND LEVEL (decibels)
Along Along
(Frequency, Residence Business
cycles District District
per second) Boundaries Boundaries
0 to 75 72 75
75 to 150 67 70
150 to 300 59 63
300 to 600 52 57
600 to 1,200 46 52
1,200 to 2,400 40 45
2,400 to 4,800 34 40
above 4,800 32 38
B. Smoke and Particle Matter: The emission of smoke or particle matter in such
manner or quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort, or welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and
shall henceforth be unlawful.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart,
published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be employed.
The emission of smoke or particle matter of a density greater than No. 2 on the
Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times, except as otherwise provided
hereinafter. The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particle
matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles having a
particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as
storage area, yards, roads, and the like, within lot boundaries, shall be kept to
a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or acceptable
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 5
means. Emission of particle matter from such sources in excess of the weight
limitation herein specified is prohibited.
The emission of more than eight (8) smoke units per hour per stack is
prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringlemann No. 2.
However, during one, one hour period in each twenty four (24) hour day, each
stack may emit up to sixteen (16) smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning
fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann
No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than three (3) minutes.
C. Toxic or Noxious Matter: No use shall, for any period of time, discharge across
the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located toxic or noxious matter in such
concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
D. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily
detectable at any point along lot lines, or as to produce a public nuisance or
hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
E. Fire and Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging
from incombustible to moderate burning - as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of not less than one hundred eighty seven degrees
Fahrenheit (187°F) is permitted subject to compliance with all other
performance standards of the M1 District, and provided the following
conditions are met that the use and storage of liquid material shall be in
conformity with current standards prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association and the requirements of other codes and
ordinances of the Village.
2. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging
from free or active burning to intense burning - as determined for liquids
by a closed cup flash point of less than one hundred eighty seven
degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) but not less than one hundred five degrees
Fahrenheit (105°F) - is permitted, subject to compliance with all other
performance standards for the M1 District, and provided the following
conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or produced
within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 6
b. All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty
feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or
structures protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler
system, approved by the fire inspection authority having
jurisdiction; or if the materials, goods or products are liquid, the
protection thereof shall be in conformity with the current
standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
3. The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce
flammable or explosive vapors or gasses - as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point or less than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit
(105°F) - shall be permitted in this District provided:
a. That the final manufactured product does not itself have a closed
cup flash point of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees
Fahrenheit (187° F).
b. That the use and storage of such materials shall be in conformity
with current standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection
Association, and the requirements of other codes and
ordinances of the Village.
c. That the storage of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons
of materials or products having a closed cup flash point of less
than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105° F) (exclusive of
storage of finished products in original sealed containers) is
prohibited.
d. That the storage of more than thirty thousand (30,000) gallons of
materials or products having a closed cup flash point of less than
one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187° F)
(exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers) is prohibited.
6-7-3: SCREENING:
Wherever such district immediately adjoins a residentially zoned area, screen
planting in the form of trees, shrubs, hedges, or similar planting shall be
installed and maintained by the owners or occupants of the industrial property.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 7
6-7-4: DWELLING UNITS:
Dwelling units are not permitted other than one for a watchman or janitor
employed on the premises. (Ord. 65-138-15)
6-7-5: MULTIPLE USES IN A SINGLE BUILDING:
Multiple uses in a single building are not permitted unless such multiple uses
are made by a single business entity (user).
A business entity shall be construed to include any parent company and any
related companies which fall within the definition of "affiliated group" as defined
in section 1504(a) Of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, and
any parent company and any related companies which fall within the definition
of "affiliated service group" as defined in section 414(m) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 as amended. (Ord. 83-764-18)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 8
CHAPTER 7
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. M1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-7A-1: Statement of Purpose
6-7A-2: Permitted Uses
6-7A-3: Special Uses
6-7A-4: Lot Area, Setback and Height Requirements
6-7A-5: Yards
6-7A-6: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-7A-7: Special Use Standards for Concrete Recycling, Storage and Sales
Facilities (Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
6-7A-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The M1 Restricted Manufacturing District is intended to provide sites primarily
for light manufacturing and light industrial uses under controls which minimize
any adverse effects on property in nearby residence, business and farming
districts. Subject to the general requirements and restrictions on use set forth
in this Chapter, permitted uses include those which are already established on
the effective date of this Zoning Code and are deemed not to have adverse
effects on property in nearby districts. Except for those uses which are
specifically prohibited in subsections 6-7-1B and C, other manufacturing and
industrial uses may be allowed as special uses in accordance with standards
and procedures set forth in Chapter 14 of this Zoning Code. These special use
procedures provide an opportunity for interested parties to have a hearing
before the Zoning Board and for a review of each special use permit or use
and occupancy application by the Village President and Board of Trustees in
order to establish conditions designed to assure conformity to the requirements
and restrictions set forth in this Chapter. New residential uses may continue as
well as all other lawful uses, subject to the provisions and restrictions of all
other codes and ordinances. (Ord. 65-138-15; and. Ord. 90-1138-22)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 9
6-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted subject to all the provisions in this Chapter:
Aluminum rolling mill.
Automobile laundries.
Bakeries.
Bookbinding.
Cargo and freight terminals.
Cartage and express facilities.
Cold processing of metals.
Cold storage plants.
Contractors' or construction offices and shops, such as building, cement,
electrical, heating, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration, and roofing,
provided that there be no outside storage of material.
Dyeing and rug-cleaning establishments.
Ice and ice cream production and distribution.
Machinery, rental, sales and service.
Machine shops.
Mail order houses.
Milk bottling and distribution.
Packaging and crating.
Printing plant and screen printing.
Research laboratories.
Shops for repair of furniture, appliances and office and office equipment.
Shops for soldering and welding.
Sign painting.
Storage and warehousing establishments.
Wholesale establishments.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
The manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, disassembling, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing, or testing of the following materials, goods or merchandise:
Air conditioners.
Apparel.
Beverages (non-alcoholic), processing and bottling.
Boxes and cabinets.
Cameras and other photographic equipment and copying machines,
except film.
Ceramic products.
Clocks.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 10
Clothing.
Compounding and packaging of chemicals.
Cosmetics and toiletries.
Dairy products.
Drugs and pharmaceutical products.
Electrical and acoustic products and components.
Food products (except meat and fish, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast).
Furniture.
Glass products.
Hardware.
Jewelry.
Leather products, but not including tanning or treatment of leather.
Machines, business - such as typewriters, accounting machines,
calculators, and card counting equipment.
Medical laboratory supplies, equipment and specialties.
Metal stamping, rolling, grinding, welding and polishing.
Musical instruments.
Paper products.
Plastic products.
Radio, phonograph, recorder, and television sets and parts.
Scales.
Sporting firearms.
Textiles.
Tools and dies.
Toys and children's vehicles.
Tubing.
Well supplies.
Wood products.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
6-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
A. Any other light manufacturing or light industrial fabricating, assembling,
disassembling repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing establishments,
except those prohibited in this Chapter.
B. Airports.
C. Cargo and freight terminals.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 11
D. Frozen food lockers.
E. Laundries.
F. Radio and television towers.
G. Restaurants serving only employees of an established use. (Ord. 65-138-15)
H. A facility for the purpose of selling, leasing, repairing, maintaining, and
rebuilding truck, trailer and truck-trailer parts, indoors only. (Ord. 78-533-23)
I. Concrete recycling, storage and sales, subject to the standards described in
Section 6-7A-7.
J. Tree chipping, subject to the standards described in Section 6-7A-7(Ord. 06-
2948-40, eff. 08/14/06).
6-7A- 4: LOT AREA, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Frontage: Not less than one hundred feet (100').
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed five-tenths (.5).
D. Building Height: Not to exceed forty five feet (45').
6-7A-5: YARDS:
A. Front Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50') in depth; all front yards must be
landscaped or planted in grass.
B. Side Yards: Not less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
C. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
6-7A-6: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Off-Street Loading: Loading berths in accordance with provisions set forth in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 12
Section 6-11-2 of this Zoning Code.
B. Off-Street Parking: Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set forth in
Section 6-11-3 of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 65-138-15)
6-7A-7 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS FOR CONCRETE RECYCLING, STORAGE
AND SALES FACILITIES AND TREE CHIPPING FACILITIES.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6-14-14(H), a special use permit
shall not be granted for either a concrete recycling, storage and sales facility
or tree chipping facility unless the applicant demonstrates the ability to
comply and maintain compliance with the standards set forth in this section.
All other provisions of Section 6-14-14 not in conflict herewith shall apply to
both a concrete recycling, storage and sales facility and tree chipping
facility.
B. In addition to the application contents described in Section 6-14-14(C),
applicants seeking a special use permit for either a concrete recycling,
storage and sales facility or tree chipping facility shall submit a plan of
operations demonstrating traffic flow and the manner in which the relevant
material shall be received and accepted, processed, stored and made ready
for transport to end markets. The Village may permit a facility with a
boundary less than 1,320 feet from the nearest property zoned for primarily
residential use.
C. Standards: No special use shall be recommended by the Zoning Board,
unless it shall find the each and every one of the following standards are
met and capable of continuing to be met:
1 The relevant Asource material,@ either previously manufactured
concrete or tree limbs, shall not be speculatively accumulated;
2. The operating plan submitted by the applicant under paragraph B
demonstrates how the facility will meet the following requirements:
a. The relevant source material shall not be stored for longer
than one year after its acceptance at the facility;
b. Raw materials produced by the facility are returned to the
economic mainstream within one year after the facility accepts
the previously manufactured concrete;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 13
c. Within 48 hours of receipt of the source material at the facility,
it shall be sorted to separate the recyclable material from nonrecyclable
material to be disposed of or discarded;
d. Transport off site for disposal all non-recyclable material in
accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements within 72 hours of its receipt at the facility;
e. Limit the percentage of incoming non-recyclable material to
25% or less of the total incoming source material (for each
type of material), as calculated on a daily basis;
f. Employ tagging and record-keeping procedures to:
(i) Demonstrate compliance with this Section, and
(ii) Identify the source and transporter of material accepted
by the facility;
g. Control odor, noise, combustion of mataerials, disease
vectors, dust, and litter;
h. Control access to the facility;
i. Identify the name and location of the disposal site to be used
for the transportation and disposal of non-recyclable materials
accepted at the facility;
When any of the information contained or processes described
in the operating plan submitted to the Village changes, the
owner and operator shall submit an updated plan within 14
days of the change.
3. The facility complies with Section 6-7-3, notwithstanding whether the
property is adjacent to a residentially zoned area;
4. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the concrete
recycling, storage and sales facility will not be detrimental to, or
endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
5. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities
have been or will be provided;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 14
6. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets;
7. The facility shall, in all other respects, conform to the performance
standards of the M1 Restricted Manufacturing District, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the
recommendations of the Zoning Board; and
8. Adequate measures have or will be taken to offset the extraordinary
impacts the facility will have on public rights-of-way, police protection,
water service and other services provided by the Village.
9. The property on which the facility shall be located must be no farther
than 500 feet from any major, 4-lane arterial highway.
D. Review and Renewal: Any special use permit granted under this Section shall
be for a term not to exceed two (2) years and shall be valid only for the benefit
of the applicant to whom it is issued. The applicant may petition for a new
special use permit, provided that the petition is submitted no later than 90 days
prior to the expiration of the current permit. The special use permit shall
automatically expire in the event there is any change of more than 10% in the
control or ownership (except for financing purposes) of the entity operating the
facility. (Ord. 06-2948-40, eff. 8/14/06)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 15
CHAPTER 7
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE B. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
6-7B-1: Statement of Purpose
6-7B-2: Findings
6-7B-3: Definitions
6-7B-4: Special Use
6-7B-5: Setback Requirements
6-7B-6: Signage
6-7B-7: Bulk Regulation
6-7B-8: Other Regulations
6-7B-9: Amortization
6-7B-1. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the municipality in order to promote the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions of this Article have
neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content any communicative materials or communication, including sexually
oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose or effect of this Article to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not
the intent or effect of this Article to condone or legitimize the distribution or
exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 16
6-7B-2. FINDINGS:
Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings incorporated in
the cases of City of Erie v. Pap=s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382 (2000);
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Renton v. Playtime
Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S.
50 (1976), Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation, 865 F.2d 797 (7th Cir
1989); Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th Cir. 1982);
Bamon Corp v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990) and EWAP
Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr. (1979), and on
studies in other cities including the Report of the Attorney General=s Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (Minnesota, 1989);
Memorandum re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance, of the Assistant Chief of
Police of the Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., Report to
the American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex
Oriented Businesses (March 31, 1996); Adult Entertainment Businesses in
Indianapolis, An Analysis (1984) and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D. and Meeker,
James W., Ph.D., Final Report to the City of Garden Grove: The Relationship
Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard,
(Garden Grove, CA, October 23, 1991), this Legislative body finds:
A. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities.
B. Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at sexually
oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private
booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually oriented
entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable diseases
such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
C. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between
sexually oriented business and a decrease in the residential and commercial
property values that surround them, especially those properties within 1,000
feet of such businesses.
D. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between
sexually oriented businesses and increased crime in the neighborhood,
including sex-related crimes like prostitution, obscenity, and sexual assault.
This correlation is especially acute when more than one sexually oriented
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 17
business is located in a neighborhood, and when a sexually oriented business
is located near a public open space such as a park, cemetery or school.
E. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between
sexually oriented businesses and increased harassment and propositioning of
women, children and the elderly in the neighborhood.
F. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between
sexually oriented businesses and offensive material such as pornographic
magazines and used condoms being discarded in the surrounding
neighborhood, making them available to children.
G. Location of sexually oriented business in a neighborhood can create a Asex for
sale@ reputation in a neighborhood.
H. The foregoing findings raise substantial governmental interests and concerns.
I. The municipality cannot entirely prohibit sexually oriented businesses which
are not obscene from locating within the municipality.
J. The municipality can effect reasonable locational regulations which it believes
will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually
oriented businesses.
K. Locating sexually oriented businesses in the Manufacturing zone will
ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually
oriented businesses.
L. Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000 feet from any other
sexually oriented businesses will ameliorate these deleterious secondary
effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.
M. Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000 feet from any
school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any lineal recreational
area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for
residential purposes and lot used for residential purposes, complies with the
requirements of state law, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5, and will ameliorate these
deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.
N. Aptakisic Road is one of the main thoroughfares in the municipality, and
therefore reflects on the economic status of the municipality.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 18
O. Accordingly, a decrease in the property values and an increase in visible crime
along Aptakisic Road will affect the property values of the municipality as a
whole in a way that other locations would not.
P. Preventing sexually oriented businesses from locating directly on, or within 500
feet of Aptakisic Road will help to conserve property values in the municipality
as a whole, while still providing an adequate number of sites and acreage
available for the location of sexually oriented businesses.
Q. At the time this Article was approved, the regulations set forth herein permitted
approximately eight (8) acres and approximately two (2) sites available for
sexually oriented businesses in the municipality.
6-7B-3. DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article:
EMPLOYEE Shall mean a natural person who performs any service
or work on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, including but not limited to providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or
supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on
a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said
person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation
by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not
include a person on the premises exclusively for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the
premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS Shall mean urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation
and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and
defecation performed in a public or employee-only
restroom in the manner in which those facilities are
intended to be used, and when not performed or
presented for a commercial purpose. It shall not mean
lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant, unless
performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other
than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast-feeding an infant.
MUNICIPALITY Shall mean the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 19
NUDITY or NUDE Shall mean exposing to view specified anatomical
areas or any device, costume, or covering that gives
the appearance of or simulates any specified
anatomical areas.
PATRON Shall mean any natural person who is not an
employee.
SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE Shall mean exposing to view, with less than a fully
opaque covering, any portion of the female breast
below the top of the areola, any portion of female or
male buttocks, or the male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque
covering. This definition shall include the entire lower
portion of the female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited
by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED
AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Shall mean any machine or device which is designed,
intended, displayed or kept as an amusement or
entertainment, and may be operated upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, electronic key, credit
card, debit card or any similar item, or the use of which
is made available for any valuable consideration, and
which displays a natural person, people, or characters
as in cartoons and animation, live or by any medium,
including without limitation film, motion picture
machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video
disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc,
photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and
computer software, engaged in specified sexual activity
or displaying specified anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS
Shall mean any of the following when done in a place
where the public is invited or permitted, or when done
for any commercial purpose including sale and rental,
regardless of who pays or receives the consideration
therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
1. Live exhibition or display of a natural PERSON or people in the state of
NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY, or engaged in SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 20
2. Engaging in, promoting or permitting a natural PERSON or people to engage in
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS.
3. Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between natural
PERSONS, when one or more of the PERSONS is NUDE or SEMI-NUDE.
4. Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural PERSON or
people when one or more of the people, whether a PATRON, agent,
EMPLOYEE or otherwise, is in a state of NUDITY or SEMI-NUDITY.
5. Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural PERSON,
or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any medium,
including without limitation film, videotape, closed-circuit television, digital video
disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide,
television, book, magazine, and computer software, which is:
a. characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY
FUNCTIONS, or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS; or
b. advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, including without limitation, the use
of the term Aadult@ and the use of the designation of one or more AX@ such
as, but not limited to, AXXX@.
6. The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or that give the appearance of or simulate
any of the SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
7. The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the following:
a. The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other nonprescription
contraceptives;
b. The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices which
require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, and which are in fact dispensed
by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the State of
Illinois;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 21
c. The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES if they are displayed and offered to
others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the State of
Illinois is employed to dispense prescription drugs, instruments or
devices;
d. Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial
purpose other than education and training in the art, science or technique
of breast-feeding an infant;
e. The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format,
which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of
America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed
substantially in their entirety;
f. Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or
local governmental funds.
g. The display and offering to others of items described in Section 3-12-
2(M)(5) of this Ordinance, if and only if the display and offering are done
for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business
displaying and offering such items to others:
(1) Less than 5% of its gross income comes from the sale, rental or
exhibition of the following types of items:
(a) items which are characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination
thereof, and
(b) items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the
public as being characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination
thereof, including without limitation, the use of the term
Aadult@ and the use of the designation of one or more AX@
such as, but not limited to, AXXX@; and
(2) Less than 5% of its display space is used for the sale, rental or
exhibition of the items described in paragraph (1)(a) and (b)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 22
above; and
(3) Less than 5% of the items it offers to others are the items
described in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) above; and
(4) The items described paragraph (1)(a) and (b) above are
segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the
premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no
openings or windows and with entrance and egress by means of
a solid door posted with a sign not less than one foot by one foot
with the words AUNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED@ lettered on the
sign, except that magazines characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES, EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS, or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS or any combination thereof may be
displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is
encased or otherwise covered up and concealed from common
view of anything other than the magazine title or text or other
materials which would not be described as sexually oriented.
Certain uses which fall within the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS may also
constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or child
pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
under the definition set forth in this Ordinance, they shall not be permitted to receive a
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS
Shall mean the human genitals, pubic area, perineum,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of
the areola of the female breast if less than a fully and
opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque
covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing
portions of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered,
coverage by make-up, paint, or similar matter applied
directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES
Shall mean any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, perineum,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female breasts, regardless
of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state
of semi-nudity;
2. The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 23
of any portion of manipulator=s body, whether covered or uncovered, or by any
device, if the person performing the manipulation is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
3. Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual, including
without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus, masturbation,
bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism, and any
other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
4. Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with
the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
6-7B-4. SPECIAL USE:
Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and subject
to the setback requirements of Section 6-7B-5, sexually oriented businesses
shall be a special use only in the M1 Restricted Manufacturing District.
6-7B-5. SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No sexually oriented business shall be located:
A. Within 1,000 feet of the property boundary of any other sexually oriented
business, and any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including
any lineal recreational area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious
worship, lot zoned for residential purposes, and lot used for residential
purposes; and
B. Within 500 feet of the center line of Aptakisic Road, which 500 feet shall be
measured from the nearest point of the building, or portion of the building in
which the sexually oriented business is located to the nearest point of the
center line of Aptakisic Road.
6-7B-6. SIGNAGE:
No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of billboard, sign boards
or sign, within 1,000 feet of any school, day care center, cemetery, public park
including any lineal recreational area like a bike path, public housing, place of
religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes, and lot used for
residential purposes.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-07: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Revised 08/22/2006 Page 24
6-7B-7. BULK REGULATION:
In addition to the limitations of Section 6-7A-4, the floor area ratio of a sexually
oriented business shall not exceed 0.25.
6-7B-8. OTHER REGULATIONS:
The restrictions set forth in this Article shall supersede any other restrictions
found in other ordinances or other sections of any ordinance as applied to
sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the restrictions are in conflict.
6-7B-9. AMORTIZATION:
If at the time this Article becomes effective, any sexually oriented business
exists in a location not permitted by this Article or is otherwise not in
compliance with this Article, then the sexually oriented business shall
constitute a legal non-conforming use. However, notwithstanding any other
ordinance or section of any ordinance to the contrary, the legal nonconforming
sexually oriented business shall come into compliance with the
requirements of this Article within one year of the effective date of this Article.
No sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal non-conforming use
after one year after the effective date of this Article. (Amd Ord. 06-2012-03,
eff. 2/13/06)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 1 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-8-1: Intent and Purpose
6-8-2: Subdistricts Established
6-8-3: General Requirements and Restrictions
6-8-4: Performance Standards
6-8-4-1: Noise
6-8-4-2: Vibration
6-8-4-3: Air Pollution
6-8-4-4: Toxic Substances
6-8-4-5: Water Pollution
6-8-4-6: Fire and Explosion Hazards
6-8-4-7: Additional Restrictions
6-8-5: Permitted Uses and Special Uses
6-8-6: Prohibited Uses
6-8-7: Lot Sizes and Floor Area Ratio Requirements
6-8-8: Building Setbacks
6-8-9: Building Height
6-8-10: Signs
6-8-11: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-8-12: Landscaping
6-8-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE
The O/I (Office/Industrial) District is intended to accommodate office buildings, highly
restrictive industrial and warehousing uses, and limited commercial activities in a mutually
compatible environment which necessitate suitable separation from residential development.
Uses permitted in the O/I District shall be restricted to those which require a pleasant, hazardand-
nuisance-free environment and do not create either an appreciable nuisance or hazard to
other property, individuals, or the public in general.
6-8-2: SUBDISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The District is divided into four (4) subdistricts for the purpose of accommodating officeindustrial
developments of different bulk character.
A. The O/Ia, a subdistrict, is intended to be located along State Highways 21 and 22 and shall be
for office use with no industrial or warehousing uses or activities whatsoever permitted.
B. The O/Ib subdistrict is intended primarily to accommodate office dominant uses where
combinations of office/restricted light industrial or office-warehousing uses are to be
accommodated as long as twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the original
principal structure on the zoning lot is devoted to office activities.
C. The O/Ic subdistrict is a restricted light industrial district. It is meant to be located off of
secondary roads which are within industrial park developments. Uses permitted in the O/Ia and
O/Ib subdistricts are encouraged in the O/Ic subdistrict.
D. The O/Id subdistrict is designed to accommodate uses similar in character to those permitted in
the O/Ic, and in addition, to industrial users who require rail service, which requires a special
use permit, while maintaining a controlled structural and activity environment which meets the
criteria of bulk regulations, performance standards and other design standards and regulations
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 2 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
as contained herein. It is further intended to permit such uses to occur on smaller lots than
those permitted in the O/Ic subdistrict. O/Id subdistrict is appropriate for areas along and
adjacent to railroad lines which offer rail access to industrial users. Uses permitted in the O/Ia,
O/Ib, and O/Ic subdistricts are also encouraged in the O/Id subdistrict.
6-8-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
A. No building or zoning lot shall be devoted to any use other than uses permitted hereinafter in
the zoning district in which such building or zoning lot shall be located, with the exception of the
following:
1. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Chapter.
2. Special uses allowed in accordance with the provisions hereof.
3. Uses established prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be rendered
nonconforming and subject to the regulations of Chapter 13 of this Title.
B. Dwelling units are not permitted, unless otherwise permitted in this Chapter.
C. Special uses shall be permitted in the zoning districts indicated, subject to procedures outlined
in Section 6-14-11 of this Title.
D. All activities including manufacturing, storage, merchandise display, business operations and
service or maintenance shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except areas
specifically set aside for refuse collection or pick-up. All refuse collection or pick-up areas shall
be completely screened by permanent construction material on all sides, as regulated in Section
6-15-3(B)(4).
All loading berths on zoning lots in the O/Ib District shall be within completely enclosed
buildings. All utilities shall be placed underground. (Ord. 80-632-89)
E. All drives, loading dock aprons, parking areas, and walkways throughout the site shall be paved
with asphalt or concrete material. Areas not covered by impervious materials shall be fully
landscaped and maintained with grass, groundcover, trees and shrubs.
F. To the extent of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any
applicable Village building, subdivision or fire codes, the most strict provision shall prevail and
be applicable. (Ord. 80-632-89; and. Ord. 82-742-49)
6-8-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Any use established in an Office/Industrial District after the effective date of this Chapter shall
be so operated as to comply with the performance standards established hereafter. Any use
already established on the effective date of this Chapter shall be permitted to be altered,
enlarged, expanded, or modified, providing that the addition conforms to the performance
standards established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located. In any event,
every use of land or structure shall be operated in compliance with all applicable local, State,
and Federal regulations including the State of Illinois Pollution Control Board rules and
regulations hereby incorporated by reference.
Every application for a building permit or occupancy permit within an Office/Industrial District
shall have affixed to it the certificate of a licensed architect or a registered professional engineer
licensed by the State of Illinois certifying that the building or structure, and the proposed use
thereof, complies with all of the provisions of this Zoning Code respecting performance
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 3 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
standards for industrial and similar uses. The Director of Building and Zoning shall, upon
receipt and upon complete review (either by said Director and/or any outside technical review
agency selected by the Village) of such application, approve and authorize the issuance of a
building permit or occupancy permit as the case may be, provided the applicant has complied
with all other relevant provisions of this Code. If the Director of Building and Zoning determines
it desirable to have some outside technical agency review the plans and application, then the
applicant shall pay to the Village in advance a sum sufficient to reimburse the Village for such
technical reviews. The Director of Building and Zoning may, however, withhold issuance of a
building permit or occupancy permit as a result of examination of the plans or on the basis of
other evidence if he determines that the proposed activity will not in fact comply with the
performance standards and he shall so advise the architect or engineer in writing of such denial.
The Director of Building and Zoning may also obtain an injunction or other appropriate legal or
equitable relief, including but not limited to specific performance, writ of mandamus or
mandatory injunction, to prevent, remedy, or abate any violations which occur after a building
or occupancy permit is issued, which relief shall be in addition to any ordinance prosecutions for
fines only. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate occurrence and offense as
outlined in Section 6-1-5 of this Zoning Code.
6-8-4-1: NOISE
A. Definitions: (All definitions of acoustical terminology shall be in conformance with those
contained in ANSI (American National Standards Institute, Inc.) S1.1-1960 "Acoustical
Terminology").
ANSI American National Standards Institute, Inc. or its successor bodies.
A-Weighted
Sound Level
In decibels, a frequency weighted sound pressure level, determined by the use
of the metering characteristics and A-weighted network specified in ANSI
S1.4-1971 "Specifications for Sound Level Meters" and the latest revision
thereof.
Construction On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition or removal of
any structure, facility, or addition thereto, including all related activities,
including, but not restricted to, clearing of land, earthmoving, blasting and
landscaping.
Daytime Hours 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M., local time.
dB(A) Sound level in decibels determined by the A-weighting of a sound level meter.
Decibel (dB) A unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale to the base 10, of the ratio of the
magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a standard reference pressure,
which, for purposes of this regulation, shall be twenty (20) micronewtons per
square meter (uN/m2).
Fast Meter Response The dynamic characteristic specified as "FAST" in ANSI 51.4-1971
"Specifications for Sound Level Meters" and the latest revision thereof.
Impulsive Sound Either a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple pressure peaks) for a
duration less than one second.
Nighttime hours 7:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M., local time.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 4 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Octave Band
Sound Pressure Level
The sound pressure level for the sound being measured contained within the
specified octave band. The reference pressure is twenty (20) micronewtons
per square meter.
Preferred Frequencies Those frequencies in Hertz preferred for acoustical measurements which, for
the purposes of this regulation, consist of the following set of values: 20, 25,
31.5, 40, 50, 63, 80, 100, 125, 160, 200, 250, 315, 400, 500, 630, 800, 1000,
1250, 1600, 2000, 2500, 3150, 4000, 5000, 6300, 8000, 10,000, 12,500.
Prominent Discrete Tone Sound, having a one-third octave band sound pressure level which when
measured in a one-third octave band at the preferred frequencies, exceeds the
arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two (2) adjacent onethird
octave bands on either side of such one-third octave band by:
A. 5 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 500
Hertz to 10,000 Hertz, inclusive. Provided, such one-third octave band
sound pressure level exceeds the sound pressure level of each adjacent
one-third octave band, or;
B. 8 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 160
Hertz to 400 Hertz, inclusive. Provided, such one-third octave band
sound pressure level exceeds the sound pressure level of each adjacent
one-third octave band, or;
C. 15 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 25
Hertz to 125 Hertz, inclusive. Provided, such one-third octave band sound
pressure level exceeds the sound pressure level of each adjacent one-third
octave band.
Sound An oscillation in pressure in air.
Sound Pressure Level In decibels, twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
magnitude of a particular sound pressure to the standard reference pressure.
The standard reference pressure is twenty (20) micronewtons per square
meter.
Unregulated Safety A safety relief valve used and designed to be actuated Relief Valve by high
pressure in the pipe or vessel to which it is connected and which is used and
designed to prevent explosion or other hazardous reaction from pressure
buildup, rather than being used and designed as a process pressure
blowdown.
B. Prohibition of Noise Pollution: No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound beyond
property lines so as to cause noise pollution or a nuisance in Lincolnshire, or so as to violate any
provision of this Zoning Code.
C. Measurement Techniques: Test procedures to determine whether emission of sound is in
conformance with this regulation shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and
Recommended Practices established by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., (ANSI),
and the latest revisions thereof, including ANSI S1.1-1960, ANSI S1.6-1967, ANSI S1.8-1969,
ANSI S1.2-1962, ANSI S1.4-1971 - Type 1 Precision, ANSI S1.11-1966 and ANSI S1.13-1971 Field
Method.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 5 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
D. Sound Emitted to Residential (R) Districts During Daytime Hours: Except as elsewhere
provided in this regulation, no use shall cause or allow the emission of sound during daytime
hours from any noise source located in the O/I District, to any receiving residential districts or
developments and any public school buildings or sites (hereinafter collectively referred to as R
District) which exceeds the allowable octave band sound pressure level specified in Table 1,
when measured at any point within such receiving R District; provided, however, that no
measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made less than twenty five feet (25') from such
noise source.
TABLE 1
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of Sound Emitted
to any Receiving R District from O/I District
31.5 72
63 71
125 65
250 57
500 51
1000 45
2000 39
4000 34
8000 32
E. Sound Emitted to R District During Nighttime Hours: Except as elsewhere provided in this
regulation, no use shall cause or allow the emission of sound during nighttime hours from any
noise source located in the O/I District to any receiving R District which exceeds any allowable
octave band sound pressure level specified in Table 2, when measured at any point within such
receiving R District; provided, however, that no measurement of sound pressure levels shall be
made less than twenty five feet (25') from such noise source.
TABLE 2
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of Sound Emitted
to any Receiving R District from O/I District
31.5 63
63 61
125 55
250 47
500 40
1000 35
2000 30
4000 25
8000 25
F. Sound Emitted to Business (B) Districts: Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use
shall cause or allow the emission of sound from any noise source located in the 0/I District land
to any receiving business (B) district (hereinafter referred to as B District) which exceeds any
allowable octave band sound pressure level specified in Table 3, when measured at any point
within such receiving B Districts; provided, however, that no measurement of sound pressure
levels shall be made less than twenty five feet (25') from such noise source.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 6 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
TABLE 3
Octave Band Center Frequency
(Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of Sound
Emitted to any Receiving R District from O/I District
31.5 79
63 78
125 72
250 64
500 58
1000 52
2000 46
4000 41
8000 39
G. Sound Emitted In/To the O/I District: Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use
shall cause or allow the emission of sound from any noise source located in the O/I District to
any receiving neighboring lot in the O/I District which exceeds any allowable octave band sound
pressure level specified in Table 4, when measured at any point within such receiving 0/I
District; provided, however, that no measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made less
than twenty five feet (25') from such noise source. (Ord. 80-632-39)
TABLE 4
Octave Band Center Frequency
(Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of Sound
Emitted to any O/I Lot from Neighboring O/I Lots
As Measured in O/Ia, b, & c As Measured in O/Id
31.5 79 80
63 78 79
125 72 74
250 64 69
500 58 63
1000 52 57
2000 46 52
4000 41 48
8000 39 45
(Ord. 85-817-01)
H. Impulsive Sound: No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulsive sound from any
noise source located in the 0/I District to any receiving R or B District or 0/I lot which exceeds
the allowable dB(A) sound level specified in Table 5, when measured at any point within such
receiving R or B District or 0/I lot; provided, however, that no measurement of sound levels
shall be made less than twenty five feet (25') from the noise source. (Ord. 80-632-39)
TABLE 5
Allowable dB(A) Sound Levels of Impulsive Sound Emitted from 0/I Districts to Designated
Classes of Receiving Uses
O/Ia, b, & c O/Id Non-Residential Residential
57 61 50 45
(Ord. 85-817-01)
I. Prominent Discrete Tones
1. No use shall cause or allow the emission of any prominent discrete tone from any noise
source located in the 0/I District land to any receiving R or B District or neighboring 0/I
lot; provided, however, that no measurement of one-third octave band sound pressure
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 7 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
levels shall be made less than twenty five feet (25') from such noise source.
2. This rule shall not apply to prominent discrete tones having a one-third octave band
sound pressure level 10 or more dB below the allowable octave band sound pressure level
specified in the applicable table in subsections D through G for the octave band which
contains such one-third octave band.
J. Exceptions
1. Subsections D through I, inclusive, shall not apply to sound emitted from emergency
warning devices and unregulated safety relief valves.
2. Subsections D through I, inclusive, shall not apply to sound emitted from lawn care
maintenance equipment and snow blowers and similar snow removal equipment used
during daytime hours.
3. Subsections D through I, inclusive, shall not apply to sound emitted from equipment
being used for temporary construction between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of each day. (Ord. 80-632-39)
4. Subsections D through I, inclusive, shall apply to sound emitted from trucks and vehicles
under the control of the property user and/or owner, except for vehicles entering and
leaving the property. Examples of sound from such vehicles and trucks not either
entering or leaving the premises are idling engines and trailer mounted refrigeration
units. Sound emitted from railroad facilities shall be exempt. (Ord. 80-632-39; and. Ord.
85-817-01)
6-8-4-2: VIBRATION
A. Definitions
Amplitude The maximum displacement of the earth from the normal rest position. Displacement
is usually reported as inches per mils.
Discrete Impulses A ground transmitted vibration stemming from a source where specific pulses do not
exceed sixty (60) per minute (or one per second).
Frequency The number of times that a displacement completely repeats itself in one second of
time. Frequency may be designated in cycles per second (cps) or Hertz (Hz).
Impact An earthborne vibration generally produced by two (2) or more objects striking each
other so as to cause separate and distinct pulses.
Particle Velocity A characteristic of vibration that depends on both displacement and frequency. If not
directly measured, it can be computed by multiplying the frequency by the amplitude
times the factor 6.28. The particle velocity will be in inches per second, when the
frequency is expressed in cycles per second and the amplitude in inches.
Seismograph An instrument which measures vibration characteristics simultaneously in three (3)
mutually perpendicular planes. The seismograph may measure displacement and
frequency, particle velocity, or acceleration.
Steady State A vibration which is continuous, as from a fan, compressor, or motor.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 8 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Vibration A reciprocating motion transmitted through the earth, both in horizontal and vertical
planes.
B. Instrumentation: Ground-transmitted vibration shall be measured with a seismograph or
complement of instruments capable of recording vibration displacement, particle velocity, or
acceleration and frequency simultaneously in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions.
C. Maximum Permitted Vibration Levels: Table 1 designates the applicable lines of Table 2 that
apply on or beyond adjacent lot lines within the district, and on or beyond appropriate district
boundaries. Vibration shall not exceed the maximum permitted particle velocities in Table 2.
Where more than one set of vibration levels apply, the most restrictive shall govern. Readings
may be made at points of maximum vibration intensity.
TABLE 1
Steady-State Vibration Limits for the O/I District
Maximum Peak Particle Velocity (inches per second)
O/I Lot Line and B District R District
0.06 Day Night
0.03 0.01
Nighttime limits shall be considered to prevail from seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.to seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., local time.
The maximum particle velocity shall be the maximum vector sum of three (3) mutually
perpendicular components recorded simultaneously. Particle velocity may also be expressed as
6.28 times the displacement in inches multiplied by the frequency in Hertz (cycles per second).
For purposes of this regulation, steady-state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or
vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than sixty (60) per minute. Discrete impulses
which do not exceed sixty (60) per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations.
The values presented in Table 1 shall be doubled for impact vibrations.
6-8-4-3: AIR POLLUTION
A. Definitions
Opacity A condition which renders material partially
or wholly impervious to transmittance of
light and causes obstruction of an observer's
view. For the purpose of these regulations,
the following equivalence between opacity
and Ringelmann shall be employed:
Opacity
Percent
Ringelmann
No.
10 0.5
20 1
30 1.5
40 2
60 3
80 4
100 5
Particulate Any solid or liquid material, other than water, which exists in finely divided
form.
Ringelmann The chart published and described in the Bureau of Mines, U.S. Department
of Interior, Information Circular 8333(Revision of IC 7718) May 1, 1967, or
any adaptation thereof which has been approved by Lincolnshire.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 9 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Smoke Small gas borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion, consisting
predominantly but not exclusively of carbon, ash and other combustible
material, that form a visible plume in the air.
B. Visual Emissions: In the O/I District, no use shall cause or allow emission of smoke or other
particulate matter into the atmosphere having an opacity greater than ten percent (10%).
For the purpose of soot blowing or equipment breakdown, emissions of smoke or other
particulate matter may exceed an opacity of ten percent (10%) but it shall be limited to no more
than three (3) times in any twenty four (24) hour period and shall not be greater than forty
percent (40%) for a period or periods aggregating three (3) minutes in any sixty (60) minute
period.
Opacity limitations shall not apply to emissions of uncombined water or water vapor. The
determination of opacity of a smoke or particulate emission shall be in accordance with the
procedures adopted by the State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations.
C. Particulate Matter Emissions: In the O/I District, no use shall cause or allow the emission of
particulate matter, through one or more stacks, vents, ducts, or chimneys into the atmosphere in
excess of 0.2 pound per hour, per acre of property. Tests for particulate matter shall be
conducted in accordance with State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations.
D. Fugitive Particulate Matter: In the O/I District, no use shall cause or allow the emission of
fugitive particulate matter across lot lines which is visible by an observer looking generally
toward the zenith, beyond the property line. Total suspended particulate concentrations across
lot lines shall not exceed twenty five (25) micrograms per cubic meter above background. No
outdoor stockpiling of uncontained powdered or granular material subject to dusting is
permitted.
E. Odors
1. Definitions
Habitable
Elevation
The height of the highest space in any existing or future building
which is designed for use as a residence or working area of
persons.
Odor
Concentration
The number of cubic feet that one cubic foot of sample will occupy
when diluted to the odor threshold. It is measured in the number
of odor units in one cubic foot of the sample and expressed in odor
units per cubic foot.
Odor Unit One cubic foot of air at the odor threshold.
2. The release of odorous matter in the manufacturing districts shall comply with the
following regulations. Odor units and odor concentrations shall be determined in
accordance with the State of Illinois Air Pollution Regulation (ASTM D-1391-57 as
determined by Mills adaptation).
3. In the O/I District, the release of odorous matter from any operation, activity or use shall
not cause or create a concentration in excess of one odor unit at any time when measured
beyond the lot line, either at ground level or at habitable elevation.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 10 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
F. Airborne Toxic Matter: In the O/I District, the release of airborne toxic matter shall comply with
applicable State of Illinois and Federal regulations. Maximum concentrations across lot lines at
habitable elevations shall not exceed those concentrations promulgated by the State and Federal
governments as being acceptable to the general population. For those toxic materials not listed,
the maximum allowable concentration measured across lot lines at any habitable elevation shall
not exceed three percent (3%) that permitted an industrial worker.
Concentrations shall be measured and calculated as the highest average that would occur over a
continuous twenty four (24) hour period.
6-8-4-4: TOXIC SUBSTANCES
A. Definition
Toxic
Substance
Any gas, liquid, solid, semisolid substance or mixture of substances, which
if discharged into the environment could, alone or in combination with
other substances likely to be present in the environment, cause or threaten
to cause bodily injury, illness, or death to members of the general public
through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption through any body surface. In
addition, substances which are corrosives, irritants, strong sensitizers, or
radioactive substances shall be considered toxic substances for the
purposes of this regulation.
B. The use, storage, handling or transport of toxic substances shall comply with the Illinois
Pollution Control Board requirements.
C. In the O/I District, any toxic substance listed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Development (Public Health Service, Center for Disease Control, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, "Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances"), as revised
from time to time, contained in one or more containers within the lot line in quantities in excess
of one hundred (100) gallons as a liquid, one thousand (1,000) pounds as a solid or one hundred
(100) pounds as a gas shall not be permitted.
D. In the O/I District, the storage, utilization, manufacture or handling of any radioactive
substance contained in one or more containers within lot lines in a quantity of one curie or more
shall not be permitted.
E. In the O/I District, the storage, utilization, manufacture or handling of any toxic or radioactive
substance shall be allowed only as a special use and only after a special use permit is granted
under the standards set forth above.
6-8-4-5: WATER POLLUTION
In the O/I District, all uses shall comply with the State of Illinois Pollution Control Board rules
and regulations, Chapter 3, entitled, "Water Pollution".
6-8-4-6: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS
A. In the O/I District, activities involving the storage, handling, utilization, or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation and which are classified by the
Department of Transportation as Explosive A (and/or by the United Nations as UN Class 1.1 or
1.2), Explosive 8 (and/or by the United Nations as UN Class 1.3), or Explosive C (and/or by the
United Nations as UN Class 1.4), as such classes are amended from time to time (See C.F.R. 49,
Parts 100 to 177), shall be permitted only as a special use, in accordance with the standards set
forth below, provided that such quantities do not exceed the limits set forth in the following
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 11 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Table 1. Explosives categorized or classified by the Department of Transportation as
"Forbidden" or "Restricted" shall not be permitted. Permitted explosives shall be stored,
utilized, handled and manufactured in accordance with National Fire Protection Association -
National Fire Codes (as adopted by the Village) and all other applicable Village regulations and
ordinances. The storage and accountability of permitted explosives shall comply with applicable
Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Regulations ("Your
Guide to Explosive Regulations" as most recently amended and as amended from time to time -
ATF P 5400.7). This includes the requirement for an explosives permit (18 USC Chapter 40).
B. In the O/I District, the storage, utilization, handling or manufacture of radioactive isotopes
(fissionable material) (regardless of atomic mass) shall not be permitted except as a special use
and only after a special use permit is granted under the standards set forth in this Section 6-8-4-
6, and also shall not be permitted unless the material is contained in an approved (by the
Village) shielded and fire resistant container from which it is never removed. Radioactive
isotopes (fissionable materials) in such shielded and fire resistant containers which are granted
a special use shall be classified for the purposes of the 0/I District as Explosive A materials and
shall comply with the quantity limitations set forth in the following Table 1. Compliance with
Department of the Treasury Regulations for the explosives storage shall not be required.
C. In the O/I District, the storage, utilization, handling or manufacture of highly reactive oxidizing
or reducing agents, unstable or pyroforic materials, or highly unstable materials which include
but are not confined to organic peroxides, organic nitrates, fluorine, liquid oxygen, hydrazine,
acetylides, tetrazoles, ozonides, perchloric acid, perchlo-rates, chlorates, alkyaluminums,
diborane, calcium trifluo-ride, hydroxylamine or other similar materials shall be considered as
Explosive C materials and shall comply with the quantity limitations as set forth in the following
Table 1. The storage, utilization, handling or manufacture of these materials shall be in
accordance with the National Fire Protection Association - National Fire Codes (as adopted by
the Village) and all other applicable Village regulations and ordinances. Compliance with
Department of the Treasury regulations for explosives storage shall not be required.
D. In the O/I District, the storage, utilization, handling or manufacture of flammable liquids and
gases shall be permitted in accordance with the following Table 2, including the storage of
finished products. Flammable liquid and storage tanks shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from
all lot lines. The storage, utilization, handling or manufacture of flammable liquids and gases
shall be in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association - National Fire Codes (as
adopted by the Village) and all other applicable Village regulations and ordinances.
TABLE 1
Total Capacity of Explosive and
Other Unstable or Highly Reactive Materials
Material Classification Total Quantity
Forbidden 0.0
Restricted 0.0
Explosive A 0.1
Explosive B 1.0
Explosive C 10.0
(The total quantity of all such materials shall not exceed 10 pounds)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 12 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
TABLE 2
Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted (In Gallons)
For Material Having an Open Cup Flash Point Aboveground Underground
At or above 140° F 5,000 20,000
At or above 100° F & below 140° F 2,000 20,000
Below 100° F 500 20,000
(When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the
quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure shall not exceed 30 times the
quantities listed in Table 2 above).
Summary of O/I District Performance Standards Regulations
Environmental Effect O/I District
A. Noise Maximum decibel limits at adjacent lot lines and district
boundaries.
B. Vibration Maximum ground transmitted vibration at lot lines and adjacent
district boundaries.
C. Air Pollution
1. Visual Emissions Opacity not greater than 10%, with certain exceptions for soot
blowing and malfunction.
2. Particulate Emissions 0.2 lb., per hour per acre, from all source emissions points.
3. Fugitive Particulate No visible clouds across lot lines. TSP not to exceed 25 mcgm per
meter³ above ground. No stockpiling of dusty material outdoors.
4. Odor Odor threshold not to be exceeded beyond lot lines.
5. Airborne Toxic Matter Not to exceed Federal and State limits across lot lines or 3% of
T.L.V., for industrial worker.
D. Toxic Substances Toxic substances on lot not to exceed:
Liquid 100 gallons
Solid 1,000 pounds
Gas 100 pounds
Maximum of 1 curie of radioactive material.
E. Water Pollution State regulations apply.
F. Fire & Explosive Hazards Explosive and Reactive Materials by IDOT
Classification
Forbidden None
Restricted None
Explosive A 0.1 lb
Explosive B 1.0 lb
Explosive C 10.0 lb
Flammable Liquid and
Gas Storage Max. Gallons
Flash Point Above
Ground Underground
+140° F 5,000 20,000
100° F-140° F 2,000 20,000
100 ° F 500 20,000
Flammable gases 3OX above in standard cubic feet.
G. Glare Maximum illumination in R District from O/I sources ½ foot
candle.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 13 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
6-8-4-7: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS
In addition to the performance standards specified above, in this Section the dissemination of
noise, vibration, particulate matter, odor, toxic substances, or fire or explosive materials in
either such manner or quantity as to be determined to endanger the public health, safety,
comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful.
6-8-5: USES
Uses permitted in the O/I District are identified in the table below:
(See O/I District Uses Table on next page.)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 14 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
O/I DISTRICT USES P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Assembly uses, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• The total amount of Assembly Uses shall not exceed 150,000 square feet of gross building area for the entirety of the O/I District.
Attached or detached structured parking garages, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• The height of all structured parking garages shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the height of the principal building.
• Structured parking garages shall not be closer to the front lot line of the property than the principal building.
• Attached parking garages shall be of the same architectural design and constructed of the same exterior materials as the principal building, except
for a glass curtain-walled principal building, where alternate but compatible exterior materials shall be substituted. Detached parking garages shall
be compatible in architectural design as the principal building.
• All areas surrounding the structured parking garage shall be landscaped as if it were a principal building.
• In no instance shall the structured parking garage exceed the gross floor area of the principal building.
Automobile repair facilities, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P
Auxiliary Uses (retail and service), as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• Shall be incidental to, provide goods or services to the principal use, and for the convenience of the employees of the principal use.
• Auxiliary uses may include, or be substantially similar to, financial institutions without drive-thru facilities, pharmacy/drug store, retail sales,
cafeteria, and private recreational facility.
• Shall be located within the principal building.
• No exterior display of the auxiliary use shall be permitted.
Banks and financial institutions with up to one drive-thru lane O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Banks and financial institutions with more than one drive-thru lane O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Breweries, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P
• Tasting rooms and retail sales shall be accessory to the principal use.
Car rental facilities without on-site car service O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Car rental facilities with on-site car service O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• Car service shall be performed within a completely enclosed facility.
Catering establishments, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU P P
• No retail sales shall be allowed at a Catering Establishment, except to the extent operated as an Auxiliary Use.
Child daycare centers, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• In multi-tenant buildings, child daycare centers shall be located on the first floor only.
Day spas without massage service, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Day spas with massage service, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Distilleries, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P
• Tasting rooms and retail sales shall be accessory to the principal use.
Farmers markets, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• Shall require a Temporary Use permit and be in conformance with Section 6-3-6(B) of Chapter 3 of this Title.
Government services activities O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P
• Including, but not limited to, water supply facilities, public works facilities, fire stations, government post office, or other municipal facilities
providing services to the public.
Hotels O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Laboratories, research and development facilities, public or private O/Ia O/Ib* O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• *Said operations shall contain office space at least twenty five percent (25%) of the gross leasable area and be in conformance with Sections 6-8-3
and 6-8-4 of this Chapter.
Large educational institutions O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• Any educational institution which is not a small educational institution.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 15 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Light manufacturing; fabricating; processing; assembly; repairing; storing; servicing;
or testing of materials, goods or products
O/Ia O/Ib* O/Ic O/Id
P P P
• *Said operations shall contain office space at least twenty five percent (25%) of the gross leasable area and be in conformance with Sections 6-8-3
and 6-8-4 of this Chapter.
Medical cannabis dispensary organizations, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU
• Shall comply with all provisions of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (Illinois Public Act 098-0122), and the regulations
promulgated by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation and Illinois Department of State Police.
• Shall not be located within 1,000 ft. of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school, day care
center, day care home, group day care home, or part day child care facility. For the purpose of this Chapter, “pre-existing” means operating prior to
September 8, 2014.
• Shall not be permitted in a multiple-tenant property and/or structure.
• Drive-thru facilities are prohibited.
• Shall operate for a minimum of 35 hours a week, only between 6:00 AM and 8:00 PM, local time, and shall not operate uninterrupted for a 24 hour
period.
• Medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products, medical cannabis paraphernalia, or similar products shall not be displayed for public view
from the exterior of the Dispensary Organization.
• Consumption of cannabis on the property of a Dispensary Organization shall be prohibited.
• Registration from the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. A current copy of such registration shall be submitted to the
Lincolnshire Police and Community and Economic Development Departments at all times.
• The sale of paraphernalia that is directly used for the consumption of medical cannabis shall be permitted. The sale of any paraphernalia not
directly required for the consumption of medical cannabis is prohibited.
• All trash containers shall be located entirely within the interior of the primary structure to prevent uncontrolled access from the building’s exterior,
except for routine disposal of trash containers.
Office, business, professional and corporate headquarters, as defined in Chapter 2 of
this Title
O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Parking garages (as principal use), as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Performing and visual arts studios, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• In multi-tenant buildings, performing and visual art studios shall be located on the first floor only.
• Performing and visual arts studios in multi-tenant buildings shall not broadcast any sound or play any musical instrument(s) capable of being heard
in adjoining tenant spaces between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Personal Fitness Studios O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• In multi-tenant buildings, personal fitness studios shall be located on the first floor only.
• Personal fitness studios in multi-tenant buildings shall not broadcast any sound or play any musical instrument(s) capable of being heard in
adjoining tenant spaces between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Pet daycare, grooming and training, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• In multi-tenant buildings, pet daycare, grooming and training uses shall be located on the first floor only.
• Pet daycare, grooming and training facilities in multi-tenant buildings shall not broadcast any sound capable of being heard in adjoining tenant
spaces between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
• May include overnight boarding of animals.
Physician’s offices, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• The cumulative off-street parking spaces for all uses operated on or from the premises shall be provided in accordance with the minimum
requirements listed in Section 6-11-3(B) of this Zoning Code.
Printing and reproduction services, graphic and photo-stating services, office machine
sales and repair, office supply sales, and other similar uses
O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Product showrooms O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• Accessory to a principal use.
• Limited to twenty five percent (25%) of the gross leasable space.
Public utility facilities O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• Public utility facilities shall include transportation facilities, structures and buildings (bus turnarounds, bus waiting shelters, but excluding
heliports) telephone exchanges, transmission buildings and equipment, telephone booths, electric distribution substations, natural gas equipment
and distribution facilities.
Railroad lead and spur tracks O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU
• Except for the present lead track running in an easterly direction from the Soo Line main line track, any new lead tracks must run parallel to the Soo
Line main line track and within twenty five feet (25') from the right of way line of said Soo Line or as otherwise provided for herein.
• No new lead track running parallel to the Soo Line main track shall be located less; than one hundred feet (100') of the center line of Aptakisic Road.
• The present lead track running in an easterly direction from the Soo Line main line track along the south line of the property presently occupied by
Aluminum Mills shall not be extended eastward from its present terminus.
• Only spur tracks required to serve specific industries or users contiguous to a lead track shall be permitted and such spur tracks shall run parallel to
the present lead track running in an easterly direction from the Soo Line main line track or to a lead track parallel to running parallel to the Soo
Line main line track.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 16 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
• All spur tracks installed to serve any users in this subdistrict shall only be permitted in the rear yard as defined in Section 6-8-5 of this Zoning Code,
and must terminate within five feet (5') of the edge of the building.
• No railroad spur track shall be constructed or made available for public use or to any user(s) not immediately abutting upon such spur track.
• On zoning lots in the O/Id subdistrict which have spur tracks on the zoning lot, the coupling and uncoupling of railroad cars is prohibited between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
• Zoning lots in the O/Id subdistrict which are contiguous to any lead track must have a minimum two (2) acre lot area (eighty thousand [80,000]
square feet) and a two hundred foot (200') minimum lot width.
• In the O/Id subdistrict only one rail user will be allowed for each five hundred (500) lineal feet of lead track. (Ord. 85-817-01)
Recreation facilities (public or private), as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Restaurants without drive-thru lanes O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Restaurants with drive-thru lanes O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Small educational institutions O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• The portion of the premises used for instructional purposes shall have a maximum capacity of 1 student per 25 square feet, but no greater than 100
on-site students at any given time.
Testing of materials O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
• Shall be conducted only in the interior of a building.
• Shall be accessory to the primary business operations.
• Testing of and on animals shall be prohibited.
• Testing of hazardous or combustible materials shall be prohibited.
• All Performance Standards outlined in this Chapter, inclusive of Section 6-8-4 and all subparts thereof, shall apply separately to each individual
tenant space and/or building, wherein testing of materials is performed. (Amd. Ord. 10-3132-09, eff. 4/12/10)
Tutoring centers, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P P P
Vehicle fueling stations, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
• May include a convenience store and/or a vehicle wash as an accessory use.
Urgent medical care centers/clinics, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
SU SU SU SU
Warehouse and storage uses O/Ia O/Ib O/Ic O/Id
P P
• Shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure.
• Shall not include freight terminals or cartage firms, which are not permitted.
END OF O/I USES LIST 6-8-5
6-8-6: PROHIBITED USES: ALL SUBDISTRICTS
A. No zoning lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be used, and no structure shall be erected, altered, or
remodeled for any of the following uses: abattoirs; arsenals, blast furnaces; boiler works; cartage
except where incidental to a permitted principal use; coke ovens cement and stone mason
contracting yards; crematories; manufacture or storage of fireworks or explosives; dumping,
reduction, or other processing of garbage, dead animals, or offal; the processing of refuse, except
as customarily incidental to a permitted principal use; ore reduction; petroleum processing or
refining; pyroxylin manufacture; natural or synthetic rubber, coutchouc, or gutta percha
manufacture or treatment; packing plants; salt works; sauerkraut manufacture; soap
manufacture; smelters; stock yard or slaughter of animals or fowls processing of fish oil; tallow,
grease or lard manufacture or treatment; tanning; curing, or storage of raw hides or skins; tar
distillation or manufacture; or cement manufacturing; concrete or asphaltic concrete mixing
plants.
B. No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which
decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as are specifically licensed by the
Village or are used as customarily incidental to the operation of a principal use in such
quantities, and in a manner conforming with applicable performance standards set forth
hereafter under subsection A of this Section. Such materials shall include, but shall not be
confined to; all primary explosives such as lead ozide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene;
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 17 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components
thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives;
pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium
nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds
such as acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in
concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials
and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
6-8-7: LOT SIZES AND FLOOR AREA RATIO REQUIREMENTS
A. Lot Size Requirements:
Uses Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
O/Ia subdistrict 2 acres
(87,120 sq. ft.) 220 ft.
O/Ib subdistrict 2 acres
(87,120 sq. ft.) 220 ft.
O/Ic subdistrict 2 acres
(87,120 sq. ft.) 220 ft.
O/Ic, Municipal services 1 acre
(43,560 sq. ft.) 150 ft.
O/Id subdistrict 1 acre
(40,000 sq. ft.) 100 ft.
Commercial Service Activity, Car Rental 20,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.
Commercial Service Activity, Motels and Hotels 5 acres 220 ft.
Commercial Service Activities, All others 1 acre 150 ft.
Dispensary Organization 1 acre 150 ft.
Municipal Services Activity, Commuter rail station As specified by the Zoning Board
Non-Membership Assembly Uses 5 acres 220 ft.
Parking garages, as principal use As specified by the Zoning Board
Physician’s office 1 acre 150 ft.
Public utility facility As specified by the Zoning Board
Urgent medical center/clinic 1 acre 150 ft.
Special Uses, All others 2 acres 150 ft.
B. Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR): In the O/I District, the floor area ratio shall not exceed the
following:
Uses Maximum FAR
All other Permitted uses 0.5
Auxiliary use 0.7
Commercial Service Activity, Car Rental 0.7
Commercial Service Activity, Motels and Hotels 1.0
Commercial Service Activity, Restaurants 0.7
Commercial Service Activity, Vehicle Service Stations 0.7
Dispensary Organization 0.5
Laboratories/research and development facilities 0.5
Light manufacturing/fabricating and warehouse uses 0.5
Non-Membership Assembly Uses 0.5
Office and bank/financial institutions 1.0
Parking Garages As specified by the
Zoning Board
Public Utilities Facilities As specified by the
Zoning Board
All other Special Uses 0.5
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 18 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
Accessory Uses: In the O/I District, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in
the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot; however, any floor area devoted to offstreet
parking or loading facilities shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. (Ord. 14-
3309-35)
6-8-8: BUILDING SETBACKS
O/Ia & O/Ib Districts
Front &
Corner Side 50 ft.
Increase by 1 ft. for each 1 ft. building height exceeds 45 ft., up to 72 feet,
including roof-top mechanical equipment.
Increase by 2 ft. for each 1 ft. building height exceeds 72 ft., including roof-top
mechanical equipment. Said increase shall be cumulative
Side
Rear 30 ft. Increase by 1 ft. for each 1 ft. building height exceeds 45 ft., including roof-top
mechanical equipment.
O/Ic District
Front &
Corner Side 35 ft. Increase by 1 ft. for each 1 ft. building height exceeds 20 ft., including rooftop
Side 20 ft. mechanical equipment.
Rear 25 ft.
O/Id District
Front &
Corner Side 35 ft. Increase by 1 ft. for each 1 ft. building height exceeds 30 ft., including roofSide
20 ft. top mechanical equipment.
Rear 25 ft.
However, where the side or rear yard of any zoning lot in the O/I District is adjacent to a zoning
lot in any residential district such yard shall be considered a transitional yard. Transitional
yards shall be 50 feet in depth where the building height is under 45 feet in height. This yard
shall be increased by 2 feet for every 1 foot by which the building height exceeds 45 feet in
height.
Figure 6-8-8: Transitional Yard
6-8-9: BUILDING HEIGHT
A. O/Ia Subdistrict: Maximum allowable height of all structures, including all mechanical
equipment, shall be eighty five feet (85') or six (6) stories (and two (2) levels of underground
parking), whichever is less. (Ord. 80-632-39)
B. O/lb and O/Ic and O/Id Subdistricts: Maximum allowable height of all industrial, warehouse, or
manufacturing structures, including all mechanical equipment, and other permitted uses, shall
be forty five feet (45') or three (3) stories, whichever is less. Office buildings constructed in the
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 6: ZONING
CHAPTER 8: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Page 19 of 19
Revised 11/25/2019
O/lb and O/Ic and O/Id subdistricts will be permitted to the heights set forth in paragraph 1
above. (Ord. 85-817-01)
6-8-10: SIGNS
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained Title 12 of this Code.
6-8-11: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title.
6-8-12: LANDSCAPING
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-09: FARMING DISTRICT
Revised 06/13/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 9
FARMING DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-9-1: General Requirements
6-9-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No product raised in the F1 District shall be disposed of on the premises
within said District in such quantities as to constitute said premises as a retail
store. (Ord. 65-138-15)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-09: FARMING DISTRICT
Revised 06/13/2011 Page 2
CHAPTER 9
FARMING DISTRICT
ARTICLE A. F1 FARMING DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-9A-1: Permitted Uses
6-9A-2: Special Uses
6-9A-1: PERMITTED USES:
A. Any of the uses permitted in the R-1 and R-3 Districts.
B. Specialized seed farms, poultry farms, nurseries, greenhouses, andmushroom
barns, provided that the products raised thereon are not disposed of at retail in
such quantities as to constitute a retail store. Kennels and veterinary hospitals
provided, however, that said uses shall be conducted in such manner as to
conform to the health and sanitation ordinance of the County and State. (Amd.
Ord. 11-3205-27, eff. 6/13/11)
C. Temporary professional carnivals and circuses.
D. Temporary roadside stands of portable or sectional construction offering for
sale only products grown on the premises, shall be subject to a temporary
permit for a period not to exceed four (4) months, and such stands are to be
removed when not in use.
6-9A-2: SPECIAL USES:
A. Schools and colleges (including dormitories), religious institutions and retreats,
hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged or orphans, school camps, and
recreational camps for children of school age.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-09: FARMING DISTRICT
Revised 06/13/2011 Page 3
B. Publicly owned parks, playgrounds and forest preserves.
C. Private airports, public golf courses, ski and toboggan clubs, and commercial
polo fields.
D. Private trapshooting, skeet ranges, and rifle clubs, provided the firing point
shall not be closer than one thousand feet (1,000') to any residence other than
that of the owner or lessee thereof. (Ord. 65-138-15)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-10: OFFICE CAMPUS
Revised 08/10/2015 Page 1
TITLE: 6
CHAPTER 10: Office Campus
Sections:
6-10-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
6-10-2: Uses
6-10-3: Lot Size
6-10-4: Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
6-10-5: Building Setbacks
6-10-6: Building Height
6-10-7: Signs
6-10-8: Off-Street Parking and Loading
6-10-9: Traffic Impacts
6-10-10: Landscaping
6-10-1: Intent and Scope of Regulations
The OC District is intended primarily to provide large, planned corporate campus sites immediately
adjacent to interstates or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') thereof, for professional
office campus and headquarters. These developments are to be conceived and implemented as
comprehensive and unified developments, may contain multiple principal structures on the same lot,
and shall be designed to achieve the conscientious preservation/enhancement of existing high
quality natural environment and/or buffering of surrounding residential neighborhoods.
6-10-2: Uses
Uses permitted in the OC Office Campus District are identified in the table below:
Uses
P = Permitted
SU = Special Use
Auxiliary use, subject to the following:
? Shall be incidental to and to service the principal use or for the convenience of the
employees, including but not limited to, financial institutions without drive-through
facilities, pharmacy/drug store, retail sales, cafeteria, and private recreational facility.
? Shall be located within the principal structure.
? No exterior display of the auxiliary use shall be permitted.
P
Attached or detached structured parking garages (accessory to principal use) P
Office; business, professional and corporate headquarters P
Research and development laboratory SU
6-10-3: Lot Size
A. Lot Area shall not be less than four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width shall not be less than five hundred feet (500').
6-10-4: Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR), including all accessory buildings, shall be 0.50 of the
gross lot area.
OC
O F F I C E C AM P U S
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-10
OC OFFICE CAMPUS
Revised 08/10/2015 Page 2
6-10-5: Building Setbacks
Front*
Corner
Side* Rear* Side*
150 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
100 ft., except when abutting an R1, R2, R2A, and/or
R3 Zoning District the setback shall not be less than
150 ft.
*When a required setback abuts an interstate highway, the setback may be reduced to no less than
50 ft.
6-10-6: Building Height
A. The maximum building height shall be (5) stories or seventy-five feet (75’), including rooftop
equipment and screening.
B. The height of attached or detached structured parking garages shall be subordinate to the
principal structure to which it serves.
6-10-7: Signs
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 12 of this Code.
6-10-8: Off-Street Parking & Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Chapter 11 of this Title.
6-10-9: Traffic Impacts
Unless the planned office campus will be reusing the existing structures or occupying no greater
than the existing number of parking spaces, a traffic impact study shall be prepared at the property
owner/applicant’s expense, analyzing the impacts caused by the planned office campus
development on the adjacent public roadways and highway systems, including associated traffic
intersections. In the event the traffic study predicts that the performance of the existing traffic
infrastructure decreases, the owner/applicant shall proactively mitigate the impacts described in the
traffic study so that the traffic infrastructure serving the planned office campus, including any new
improvements, performs no worse than pre-existing conditions.
6-10-10: Landscaping
Landscaping shall be subject to the regulations contained in Title 13 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11: OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 1
TITLE 6: Zoning
CHAPTER 11: Off-Street Parking and Loading
Sections:
6-11-1: General Requirements
6-11-2: Off-Street Parking Facilities
6-11-3: Off-Street Loading Facilities
6-11-1: General Requirements
A. General Applicability: Off-street parking and loading facilities for all existing and new
structures and uses of land within the Village of Lincolnshire shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
B. Increase in Intensity: Whenever the intensity of use of any structure, or premises is
increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other
units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and
loading facilities shall be required for such increases in intensity.
C. Change in Use: Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this Chapter is changed to
a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new
use.
D. Responsibility: The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking spaces and/or loading
facilities shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the use
and/or owner of the land for which off-street parking spaces and/or loading facilities are
required to be provided and maintained hereunder.
E. Design Plan: Parking and loading facilities shall be illustrated on a site plan to be submitted
with all applications for Building Permits or Certificates of Occupancy in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
F. Snow Removal: Accommodations shall be made for the storage and/or removal of snow
from all parking and loading facilities. Areas for snow storage shall be designated
reasonably close to drains or catch basins. Snow storage within landscaped areas should
be avoided to prevent damage to plant material.
6-11-2: Off-Street Parking Facilities:
A. General Requirements
1. Use: Required off-street parking facilities shall be solely for the parking of vehicles
used for the transportation of occupants, patrons, employees or materials of the uses
to which they are accessory. Each required parking space shall be kept available at all
times for parking of such vehicles. No required parking space shall be rented, leased
or used for any purpose other than that for which said space is required.
2. Access: Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and located to provide
appropriate means of vehicular access to adjacent streets or alley ways in a manner
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 2
which will least interfere with traffic movements. Parking spaces shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and designed to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space at all times.
3. Computation: When the number of parking spaces required herein results in a
fractional space, any fraction shall require one (1) additional parking space. Parking
spaces required on a square footage basis shall be based on the gross square footage
of the structure/leasable space. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing on the premises
at any one time.
4. Shared Parking Facilities: Parking spaces required for separate structures and uses
may be provided collectively on the same lot, provided use of such spaces shall not
occur at the same time based on the operations of the uses they are serving. The
minimum number of required parking spaces shall be established by the primary use
or the highest parking generating use, whichever is more.
5. Land Banking: The Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction in the total number
of off-street parking spaces required herein, subject to the following:
a. No more than 50% of the required parking spaces shall be landbanked.
b. Prior to authorization of landbanked spaces, the lot owner or tenant must
demonstrate that required parking spaces are excessive as applied to the use of
the zoning lot, including but not limited to employee counts, lack of public
customers, or similar scenarios.
c. Every request for landbanking of required parking spaces shall be accompanied by
a detailed parking plan identifying the area(s) reserved for future parking and the
landscape treatment of such open space.
d. The property owner shall file with the Zoning Administrator his/her unconditional
agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Village Attorney that the
area(s) reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open space
until and unless required to be used for off-street parking in compliance with this
Chapter. Such agreement shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder’s
Office.
e. The Zoning Administrator, in his/her sole discretion, shall have the authority to
require the property owner or successor, at any time, to increase the number of
parking spaces required by this Chapter.
B. Location:
1. All parking facilities shall be located in the same zoning lot as the structure or use to
which they serve. Parking facilities of ten (10) or more parking spaces may be located
on a separate lot provided said parking spaces are located within the development in
which such parking spaces are serving.
2. Parking facilities solely for employees, may be located on a separate lot provided no
such parking spaces shall be located in excess of six hundred feet (600') measured
along a paved pedestrian circulation route to the nearest building entrance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 3
Figure 1
Vehicle Overhang
3. Residential zoning: Parking facilities containing three or more spaces shall not be
located in a Front, Side, or Rear Setback, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title, except
when a garage structure is located within the Rear Setback. Surfaced driveways may
be used as parking spaces in addition to the requirements herein.
4. All Other Zoning Districts: Required parking spaces shall not be located in a Front or
Corner Side Yard, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title, and shall be located a minimum
of twenty five (25) feet from the property line of any adjoining residential zoning district,
except as permitted in Section 6-8-11(B) of this Title. Required parking spaces may
be located in an interior side yard or rear yard in all non-residential zoning districts,
provided in the O/I districts a fully landscaped and maintained strip of at least fifteen
feet (15') in the O/Ia and O/lb subdistricts or eight feet (8') in the O/Ic and O/Id
subdistricts is installed and maintained continuously along the perimeter of the
applicable rear and interior side yards (excluding driveway or sidewalk entrances, or
railroad track frontage).
C. Size: Every parking space shall conform to the parking dimensions identified on the Offstreet
Parking Chart found at the end of this Chapter, exclusive of access drive aisles,
ramps, etc., and have a minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet. For parking spaces
adjacent to a curb, the parking space length shall be shortened by two (2) feet to provide
sufficient vehicle overhang (see Figure 1). For parking spaces where vehicle overhang is
adjacent to a pedestrian walkway, the walkway width shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet to
provide unobstructed pedestrian access (see Figure 1).
D. Design and Maintenance:
1. Surfacing:
a. Single-Family Residential: Off-street parking facilities accessory to single-family
residential (attached or detached) shall be paved or otherwise surfaced with an allweather
dustless material. The portion of the driveway connecting from the curb
line to the property line shall be paved with concrete, asphaltic materials or
permanent materials, in accordance with Village Codes.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 4
b. All Other Uses: The minimum required off-street parking facilities, spaces and
access drives shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, or equal, not
less than six inches (6") thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete or comparable allweather,
dustless material. Any portion of a parking facility containing parking
spaces in excess of 10% of the minimum number required herein shall implement
innovative stormwater management features (commonly identified as Best
Management Practice techniques, BMP), including but not limited to alternate
paving surface materials, use of light colored concrete, recycled asphalt permeable
pavement materials, bioretention areas, swales, or similar techniques approved by
the Village of Lincolnshire; unless it can be demonstrated no further increases in
impervious surface coverage will be produced.
2. Drainage: All parking facilities shall be designed to prevent the drainage of stormwater
onto adjoining property and to effectively manage stormwater and snowmelt on-site in
accordance with Village Codes and the Lake County Watershed Development
Ordinance (WDO), including the use of stormwater BMP techniques.
3. Screening and Landscaping: Parking facilities shall be landscaped in accordance with
Section 13-2-4 of Title 13.
4. Illumination: Illumination of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with
Section 6-3-15 of this Title. All lighting should create an identity for parking facilities
and be appropriately designed for the location, context, and scale of the areas being
illuminated.
5. Curbing: All parking facilities, drives, access roadways, and landscape islands must be
bordered by a six (6) inch high concrete barrier curb. Such curbing shall not be
required if essential to the design and implementation of stormwater BMP techniques,
as approved by the Village and Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
(SMC).
E. Parking Lot Standards:
1. Parking facilities containing twenty (20) spaces or more shall have one (1) landscape
island for every ten (10) parking spaces (see Figure 2). Landscape islands shall be a
minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of nineteen (19) feet.
Landscaping shall be in accordance with Section 13-2-4 of Title 13.
2. Landscape islands shall be located at the end of every parking row and shall be
landscaped in accordance with Section 13-2-4 of Title 13 (see Figure 2).
3. Parking facilities containing two (2) or more parking aisles shall provide continuous
vehicular circulation at each end of the parking aisles and shall be landscaped in
accordance with Section 13-2-4 of Title 13 (see Figure 2).
4. A minimum eight (8) foot landscaped area shall be required between all building
façades and parking facilities, including parking spaces and circulation drives, and
shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 13-2-4 of Title 13.
5. Parking facilities containing forty (40) parking spaces or more shall have one (1)
landscape island for every fifteen (15) parking spaces (see Figure 2). Landscape
islands shall be a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of nineteen
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 5
Figure 2
Parking lot islands
(19) feet. Landscaping shall be in accordance with Chapter 2, Landscaping, of Title 13.
F. Accessible (ADA) Parking Spaces: Off-street parking spaces required herein shall comply
with the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design and Illinois Accessibility Code, except
for single-family dwellings, which shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Required Accessible Spaces: ADA accessible parking spaces shall be included in the
total number of required parking spaces as required in following table:
ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
Total Number of Parking Spaces
Provided in Parking Facility
Minimum Number of Required
Accessible Parking Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100, or fraction
thereof, over 1,000
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 6
2. Van Parking Spaces: For every six (6) or fraction of six (6) accessible parking spaces
required by (B)(1) above, at least one (1) accessible space shall be a van parking
space.
G. Specific Requirements: Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
minimum requirements listed below. The format in identifying the minimum number of
required spaces is as follows:
Unspecified Use: When the use of a structure or lot is known, but not identified in the
following parking table, the minimum number of parking spaces required shall be
determined based on a reasonably comparable and/or similar use identified.
S E E O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G T A B L E O N N E X T P A G E
{Number of spaces} 10/1,000 {Per square footage, units, seats, etc.}
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 7
Use
Minimum Number of
Required Spaces
Residential
Single-family detached dwelling 2/dwelling
Single-family attached dwelling, townhome 2.5/dwelling
Single-family attached dwelling, duplex 2.5/dwelling
Continuing care retirement campus (CCRC) 1/independent living unit + 1/employee + 4%
of the total required parking for visitor parking
Multi-family dwelling/condominium 1.5/efficiency studio and 1 bedroom units
2.5/2 or more bedroom units
Recreational
Bowling alley 4/lane + 12/1,000 sq. ft. of lounge or dining
area
Golf course 80/9 holes
Park and playground
None for first acre.
5/1 to 5 acres + 5 for each acre in excess of
5 acres + 1/5 persons of design capacity of
any structure or facility
Forest preserve/nature preserve By Village Board
Personal fitness/instruction studio 1/4 persons based on maximum occupancy
+1/employee
Private or public recreation facility
and community buildings
1/3 persons based on maximum occupancy
+1/employee + 1/100 sq. ft. of water surface
area for any swimming pool facilities
Assembly Uses
Art galleries, libraries and museums 1/500 SF
Exhibition and convention facilities 1/100 SF
Meeting and events center 1/4 persons at max occupancy
Private clubs, fraternal lodges 1/3 persons at maximum occupancy
Religious institutions 1/4 seats
Theater 1/3 seats
OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 8
Use
Minimum Number of
Required Spaces
Institutional
Child day care center 1/500 SF
College/university or vocational, private educational
institution, business or trade school 1/each employee + 1/3 students
Elementary, junior high school 1/each employee
High school 1 each employee +
1/4 students aged 16 years or older
Hospital 1/500 SF + 0.5/ employee
Municipal and government buildings 1/250 SF
Nursing/rest homes 1/1,000 SF
Urgent medical care center/clinic 1/200 SF + 1/employee, including doctors
Industrial
Cargo and freight terminals
1/250 SF of Office Space + 1/1,000 SF of
Manufacturing Space + 1/2,000 SF of
Warehouse Space
Cartage and express facilities
Laboratories or research and development facilities
Light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly,
repairing, storing, servicing or testing of materials,
goods or products
Research laboratories
Warehouse and storage, distribution facilities
OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 9
Use
Minimum Number of
Required Spaces
Commercial
Automotive repair facility, service facility 0.5/employee + 2/service bay
Banks and financial Institutions 1/250 SF + 2 stacking spaces/ATM + 3
stacking spaces/drive-up service window
Car rental facilities 1/400 SF of gross leasable area + sufficient
parking for rental cars
Catering establishment
1/250 SF
Office, business or professional
Printing, publishing, blueprinting and photocopying
establishments
Radio and television stations
Day spa 1/150 SF of gross leasable area
Dispensary organization 1/175 SF of office space + 1/2,000 SF of
warehouse/storage space
Hotels 1/unit + 0.5/employee + 1/50 SF of lounge or
dining area open to the public
Convenience store
1/200 SF
Drinking establishment
Food store, including candy/confectionery stores, dairy
products and bakeries
Funeral home
General retail and service use
Pharmacy/drug store
Liquor sales, package goods
Musical instrument sales and repair shop
Motor vehicle sales
Pet shop
Shopping center
Performing and visual arts studios 1/employee + 1/every 3 students
Pet daycare, grooming and training 1/500 SF
Physician’s office 1/employee + 2/examination room
Restaurants (fast food with drive-thru)
10/1,000 SF + 4 stacking spaces/drive-up
service window + 2 stacking spaces for each
additional ordering station
Restaurants (fast food) 13/1,000 SF
Restaurants (table service, convenience dining) 12/1,000 SF
Salon (hair, nails, makeup), barber shop 1/employee + 2/chair
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 10
Tutoring centers 1/employee + 1/every 3 students
Vehicle fueling station 1/fueling pump + 1/employee + 1/500 SF of
convenience store area
END OF OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE
Off-Street Parking Chart
TABLE OF DIMENSIONS (IN FEET)
S P C* D E F H J K*
0°
8.0 22.0 8.0 8.0 12.0 28.0 8.0
8.0 24.0 8.0 11.0 27.0 8.0
8.0 26.0 8.0 8.0 10.0 26.0 8.0
30° 8.5 19.0 16.9 13.2 10.0 6.0 43.8 40.1
9.0 19.0 17.3 13.4 9.0 6.0 43.6 39.7
45°
8.5 19.0 19.4 16.4 10.8 15.5 9.5 49.6 46.6
9.0 19.0 19.8 16.6 10.0 16.0 9.0 49.6 46.4
9.5 19.0 20.1 16.7 9.5 16.5 8.5 49.7 46.3
10.0 19.0 20.4 16.9 9.0 17.0 8.0 49.8 46.3
60°
8.5 19.0 20.8 18.7 18.0 15.0 12.5 59.6 57.5
9.0 19.0 21.0 18.8 17.0 15.0 12.0 59.0 56.8
9.5 19.0 21.3 18.9 15.5 15.0 11.5 58.1 55.7
10.0 19.0 21.5 19.0 14.0 15.0 11.0 57.0 54.5
90°
8.5 19.0 19.0 19.0 27.0 20.0 65.0 65.0
9.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 25.0 20.0 63.0 63.0
9.5 19.0 19.0 19.0 24.0 20.0 63.0 62.0
10.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 23.0 20.0 61.0 61.0
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 11
Notes:
J = C +E + C
K = C + E + D
*Except as shorten for 2 ft. vehicle overhang per Section 6-11-2(A)(3).
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 12
6-11-3: Off-Street Loading Facilities
A. General Requirements
1. Location: All required loading berths (docks) shall be located on the same zoning lot as
the structure or use to be served. No loading berth shall be located within twenty five
(25) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) public or private streets; nor
shall it be located in a required front or side yard.
2. Design
a. Maneuvering: All loading berths shall be designed so that all maneuvering and
standing of vehicles shall be performed on the zoning lot, except in parking lots
with a capacity of less than fifty (50) cars in the O/Ic, O/Id and M Districts.
b. Screening: All loading berths shall be fully screened from view of any public or
private street and any adjacent property zoned for residential use. Screening
materials shall consist of landscaping, walls, berms or any other permanent
material which will provide continuous screening throughout the entire year.
c. Access: All loading berths shall be accessed by appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street, alley, or circulation drives which least interferes with traffic
movements.
3. Surfacing: All open loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base
not less than seven inches (7") thick, or equal, surfaced with not less than two inches
(2") of asphaltic concrete or comparable all-weather, dustless material. The use of
alternate paving surface materials, including but not limited to the use of light colored
concrete, recycled asphalt, and permeable pavements such as porous pavement and
alternate pavers is encouraged.
4. Repair and Service: Storage of any kind shall be prohibited, unless such loading berth
is located entirely within an enclosed structure. No vehicle repair work or service of
any kind shall be permitted within any loading berth.
5. Space Allocated: Space allocated to a required loading berth shall not be used to
satisfy off-street parking space requirements.
B. Specific Requirements: Off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
S E E O F F - S T R E E T L O A D I N G T A B L E O N N E X T P A G E
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-11
OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
Revised 10/15/2019 Page 13
Use Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet) Number of Loading Facilities Loading
Berth Size
Office, business or
professional
Less than 10,000 1 loading/unloading area N/A
10,001 – 100,000 1 loading berth 12’ x 55’
100,001 – 500,000 2 loading berths + 1 loading
berth per each additional
500,000 SF or fraction in
excess of 500,000 SF
12’ x 55’
Industrial and
manufacturing
Less than 7,000 1 loading/unloading area N/A
7,000 – 40,000 1 loading berth 12’ x 55’
40,001 – 100,000 2 loading berths + 1 loading
berth per each additional
100,000 SF or fraction thereof
12’ x 55’
Warehouse
5,000 – 40,000 1 loading berth 12’ x 55’
40,000 – 100,000 2 loading berths +1 loading
berth per each additional
100,000 SF or fraction thereof
12’ x 65’
Less than 5,000 1 loading/unloading area N/A
Commercial
7,000 – 20,000 1 loading berth 12’ x 30’
20,001 – 35,000 2 loading berths 12’ x 30’
35,001 – 60,000 2 loading berths 12’ x 55’
60,001 – 100,000 3 loading berths 12’ x 55’
100,001 + 3 loading berths + 1 loading
berth per each 200,000 SF or
fraction thereof
12’ x 55’
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-12: SIGN CONTROL
Page 1
CHAPTER 12
SIGN CONTROL
Chapter 12 of Title 6
of the Village of Lincolnshire
Village Code concerning Sign Provisions
has been deleted from Title 6, Chapter 12
and inserted in the
Village of Lincolnshire Village Code
as Title 12 in accordance
with Ordinance 86-913-50.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 1
CHAPTER 13
NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
SECTION:
6-13-1: General Provisions
6-13-2: Non-Conforming Uses
6-13-3: Non-Conforming Structures
6-13-4: Non-Conforming Lots
6-13-5: Variances
6-13-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation,
maintenance and gradual amortization of uses, structures and lots that were
lawfully established, but are no longer in compliance with the amended
Village Zoning Code (i.e. “Non-conforming Structures, Lots and Uses”).
Non-conforming structures, lots and uses can substantially and adversely
affect the orderly development and taxable value of other conforming
property in each district. This Chapter provides for the gradual elimination of
non-conforming structures, lots and uses by specifying the circumstances
and conditions under which non-conforming structures, uses and lots shall
be permitted, repaired, replaced or amortized. The goal of this Chapter is to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the public by organizing and
protecting compatible, related uses in appropriate zoning districts.
B. Application and Scope: The provisions in this Chapter apply to nonconforming
uses, structures and lots that were lawfully established, but are
no longer in compliance with the amended Zoning Code. This Chapter does
not authorize the continuation of any use, structure or lot that is or was
initiated, constructed or established in violation of the then-existing Code
(i.e. “Unlawful Use, Structure or Lot”).
6-13-2: NON-CONFORMING USES
A. Authority to Continue: Non-conforming uses may be continued, subject to
the conditions and limitations set forth in this Section. Non-conforming uses
that fail to comply with the terms and provisions of this Section shall be
deemed unlawful and subject to elimination.
B. Alteration or Expansion of Use: A non-conforming use of a structure or lot
shall not be altered or expanded in any way designed to increase the scope
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 2
or intensity of the existing non-conforming use or to introduce new unlawful
uses on the property.
C. Relocation: A non-conforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot or any other lot, unless such use shall
thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located after relocation.
D. Abandonment:
1. Non-conforming use of a lot: When a non-conforming use of a lot, not
involving a structure, is abandoned for a period of one hundred twenty
(120) consecutive days, such use shall not thereafter be re-established
or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such a lot shall
comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which such a lot is
located.
2. Non-conforming use of a structure: The abandonment of any nonconforming
use of a lawful structure for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months shall terminate any rights conferred by this Section
to continue such non-conforming use. Any subsequent use or
occupancy of such structure shall comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which such a lot is located.
3. Non-conforming accessory uses: No use, which is accessory to a
principal non-conforming use, shall continue after such principal nonconforming
use shall have been ceased or terminated.
E. Termination of Use:
1. The following nonconforming uses shall be terminated no later than five
(5) years after the effective date of this Chapter, after such use is
annexed into the Village, or any amendment to the Zoning Code creating
such nonconforming use, whichever is later:
a. Non-conforming commercial and industrial uses in all Residential
Zoning Districts.
b. Non-conforming industrial uses in all Commercial/Business Zoning
districts.
c. Non-conforming commercial uses in all Industrial Zoning Districts.
2. All non-conforming residential uses in Commercial/Business and
Industrial Zoning Districts shall be eliminated upon any change in
ownership. Changes in ownership include any transfer of a legal or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 3
beneficial interest, or tenancy in a lease for a term exceeding 35 years,
either by reason of a voluntary transaction, judicial order or by action of
law. The Village may withhold the issuance of transfer tax stamps
subject to the written commitment by the successor owner to eliminate
the non-conforming residential use upon the transfer of title.
6-13-3: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
A. Authority to Continue: Non-conforming structures may be preserved,
maintained and used, subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in
this Section. Non-conforming structures that fail to comply with the terms
and provisions of this Section shall be deemed unlawful and subject to
elimination. Non-conforming garages constructed in unincorporated Lake
County and annexed to the Village, shall not be subject to elimination but be
subject to all other restrictions in this Section. In addition, detached garages
located within the Stonegate Circle Subdivision, as defined in Ordinance No.
62-000-70, shall be permitted to make such repairs and alterations as are
allowed under applicable floodplain and floodway regulations, except for
those that will increase the existing garage floor area.
B. Alteration or Expansion of Non-conforming Structures: Any non-conforming
structure may be altered or remodeled to the extent permitted in this
Chapter, provided, however, that no such alteration or remodeling shall
either create any additional non-conformity or increase the degree of the
existing non-conformity of all or part of the structure without a variance
approved under the Village Zoning Code.
Illustration for 6-13-3-B
Permitted Alteration or Expansion of Non-Conforming Structures
C. Maintenance and Repair of Non-Conforming Structures: Normal
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 4
maintenance and incidental repair or replacement of lawful fencing, nonbearing
walls and partitions, fixtures, wiring, plumbing, parking, landscaping,
roofing and mechanical equipment may be performed on any nonconforming
principal structure. Subject to paragraph D, nothing in this
Section shall be deemed to prevent the Owner from taking actions
necessary to address an unsafe condition in accordance with any order of a
public official charged with protecting public safety, and who finds such
structure is unsafe in its then-present condition.
D. Restoration and Reconstruction: All non-conforming structures that are
damaged or destroyed, by any means whatsoever, willful or negligent, to the
extent that restoration and reconstruction costs exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the cost of replacement of the entire structure, shall be eliminated or
reconstructed in a manner that conforms to all regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. For the purpose of this Chapter, the costs of
restoration or reconstruction shall be cumulative for all damage occurring
within the last ten (10) years and shall be compared to the value of such
structure at the beginning of such ten (10) year period. However, nonconforming
principal structures devoted primarily to Single-Family
Residential and Assembly uses may be replaced if damaged or destroyed,
regardless of the extent.
For the purposes of this Section, the cost of replacement of a structure
destroyed or damaged shall be established by the presentation of a certified
affidavit of a professional, licensed architect or a MAI appraiser.
E. Abandonment: The abandonment of any non-conforming, non-residential
structure for a period of twelve (12) months shall terminate any rights
conferred by this Section to continue the non-conforming use and
occupancy of such non-conforming structure. Any non-conforming structure
abandoned in the manner herein described shall be eliminated or
reconstructed in a manner that conforms to all regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located and permitted.
F. Relocation: A non-conforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in
part to any other location on the same or any other lot unless every portion
of said structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is to be relocated.
6-13-4: NON-CONFORMING LOTS
A. Authority to Continue: Non-conforming lots that fail to comply with the terms
and provisions of this Section shall be deemed unlawful and the use thereof
shall be subject to elimination under the Zoning Code. Non-conforming lots
may only be used if the following conditions and limitations are satisfied:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 5
1. SEPARATE OWNERSHIP. The lot has remained in separate or individual
ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire
time since such lot became nonconforming. Adjoining lots which have
come under common legal and/or beneficial ownership any time since
either or both of such lots became nonconforming may not be put to
separate, independent uses.
2. Minimum Lot Area; Building Placement: A buildable non-conforming lot
must have a total lot area of at least 75 percent of the minimum lot area
required in the district in which said lot is located.
3. Development Must Comply With Zoning Code; Proportionality: New
principal structures constructed on non-conforming lots shall comply with
all the regulations (except lot area, lot width and/or lot depth, depending
on the specific nonconformity) applicable in the zoning district in which
the lot is located, provided that a building setback (Equation 1) or lot
frontage (Equation 2) shall be reduced (X) from the minimum required
building setback or lot frontage (C) in the same proportion as the nonconforming
lot area (A) is to the minimum required lot area (B). Likewise,
the impervious surface and/or Floor Area Ratio applicable to the subject
property shall be reduced proportionately.
(A) (C)
Equation 1: X = Non-Conforming Lot Area x Min. Required Building
Setback
Min. Required Lot Area
(B)
(A) (C)
Equation 2: X = Non-Conforming Lot Area x Min. Required Lot
Frontage
Min. Required Lot Area
(B)
6-13-5: VARIANCES
A. Consideration of Owner’s Investment: In considering an application for a
variation from any time limitations described in this Chapter for the
continuation of any non-conforming use or structure, the Village shall
consider, in addition to the conditions on the grant of a variation described in
Chapter 14 of this Title, the value of the Owner’s or Occupant’s investment
in the subject use or structure. Such investment shall be subject to straightline
depreciation from the date of the owner’s original investment; provided
in no case shall the amortization period for any structure or use be greater
than double what is otherwise provided in this Chapter.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 06-13: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
Revised 12/10/2012 Page 6
B. Evidence: In applying for a variance from any time limitations described in
this Chapter for the continuation of any non-conforming use or structure, it
shall be the duty of the Owner/Occupant to present all data and
documentation regarding the value of the Owner/Occupant’s investment in
the subject use or structure, any applicable leases and any debt financing
related to the subject property. No agreements, leases, loans, or other
encumbrances entered, incurred or imposed on the subject property after a
structure or use becomes nonconforming shall be considered relevant in the
review of an application for a variance.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 1 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-14-1: Administration
6-14-2: Zoning Administrator
6-14-3: Zoning Board
6-14-4: Village Board of Trustees
6-14-5: Architectural Review Board
6-14-6: Development Review Team
6-14-7: Certificates of Zoning Compliance
6-14-8: General Application Process
6-14-9: Variance
6-14-10: Amendments
6-14-11: Special Uses
6-14-12: Planned Unit Development (PUD)
6-14-13: Appeals
6-14-14: Fees
6-14-15: Inspections
6-14-1: ADMINISTRATION
This Title is hereby administered by the following:
Zoning Administrator (Village Manager)
Village Board of Trustees
Architectural Review Board
Zoning Board
Development Review Team
This Chapter shall first set out the authority of each of the above, and then describe
the procedure and substantive standards with respect to the following administrative
functions:
Issuance of Certificates of Zoning Compliance
General Application Process
Variations
Amendments
Special Uses
Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
Appeals
Fees
Inspections
6-14-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: Shall be the Village Manager or his/her designee, and
shall be responsible for the following duties:
A. Conduct inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this Title.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 2 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
B. Issue violation notices requiring compliance within thirty (30) days and advising
suspected violators of their right to appeal; and to issue citations for violations of this
Title.
C. Require that all construction or work of any type be stopped when such work is not
in compliance with this Title; and revoke any permit which was unlawfully issued.
D. Have possession of permanent and current records of this Title, including but not
limited to, all applications of amendments, special uses, variations, and appeals.
E. Assist in providing public information relative to this Title.
F. Forward to the Zoning Board all applications for appeals, variations, special uses
excluding Planned Unit Developments (PUD), and amendments to this Title.
G. Forward pertinent applications to the Architectural Review Board as specified in Title
2, Chapter 3 of the Lincolnshire Village Code.
H. Forward applications and related information to the Development Review Team in
all cases which require development review as defined in Section 6-14-6 of this
Chapter.
I. Enforce all orders of the Zoning Board. (Ord. 86-885-22; Amd. Ord. 90-1138-22)
6-14-3: ZONING BOARD: The Zoning Board shall discharge the following duties under this
Title.
A. Review all applications for variations from the terms of this Title, and report findings
and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees in the manner prescribed in
Section 6-14-9 of this Chapter.
B. Review all applications for text and map amendments to this Title, and report
findings and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees in the manner
prescribed in Section 6-14-10 of this Chapter.
C. Review all applications for special uses, excluding Planned Unit Developments
(PUD), and report findings and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees
as prescribed in Section 6-14-11 of this Chapter.
D. Approve or disapprove applications for Minor Amendments to special uses,
excluding Planned Unit Developments (PUD), as defined in Section 6-14-11(F)(2).
E. Review all applications for appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Village, and recommend action to the Village Board of
Trustees as prescribed in Section 6-14-13 of this Chapter.
F. Receive from the Zoning Administrator and/or the Village Board of Trustees
recommendations and inquires related to the effectiveness of this Title and report
conclusions and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 3 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
G. Coordinate the provisions of this Title with that of the Official Comprehensive Plan of
the Village.
H. Receive from the Village Board of Trustees any matters not listed above, which has
been referred to it, and report conclusions and recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees.
6-14-4: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The Village Board of Trustees shall discharge
the following duties under this Chapter:
A. Receive findings and recommendations from the Zoning Board, and approve or
disapprove, all applications for amendments, special uses (excluding Planned Unit
Developments) and variations from this Title.
B. Receive recommendations from the Zoning Board or Architectural Review Board for
all appeals filed to it.
C. Receive recommendations from the Zoning Board or Architectural Review Board for
all matters of inquiry referred to it under Section 6-14-3 or 6-14-5, respectively.
D. Review all applications for special uses for Planned Unit Developments (PUD) and
approve or disapprove.
E. Receive findings and recommendations from the Architectural Review Board, and
approve or disapprove, all proposed variations from Title 12 of the Lincolnshire
Village Code, and recommendations regarding the exterior architectural design of
applicable buildings and development.
F. May from time to time adopt rules and procedures governing the conduct of any
public hearings held before the Village Board required by this Chapter.
6-14-5: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD: The Architectural Review Board (ARB) shall
discharge the following duties under this Title:
A. Review and make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees regarding
the exterior architectural design of applications for new construction of buildings
and development, related to exterior architectural design, arrangement, building
massing and scale, height and appearance, color and texture of exterior
materials, landscaping, entrance ways, lighting, off-street parking facilities,
signage, and similar matters. The ARB shall not review plans for single-family
residential structures and structures which are accessory thereto.
B. To make recommendations regarding advisable amendments to existing codes,
ordinances and regulations of the Village.
C. Approve or disapprove revisions to existing site development plan(s), including
Minor Amendments to Special Use or Planned Unit Development (PUD), regarding
exterior architectural design, arrangement, building massing and scale, height and
appearance, color and texture of exterior materials, landscaping, lighting, signage,
and similar elements.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 4 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
6-14-6: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM
A. Creation: The Development Review Team shall consist of the Village Manager or
his/her designee, Director of Community and Economic Development or his/her
designee, Director of Public Works or his/her designee, Village Planner, Building
Official, the Chief of Police or his/her designee, and a Fire Protection District
designee.
B. Jurisdiction: Development Review Team meetings occur every third Wednesday of
each month to carry out review of preliminary or conceptual site development plans
to achieve an acceptable development design and produce solutions to specific site
problems.
1. The Development Review Team shall discharge the following duties:
a. Subdivision layout and design review of new residential subdivision(s) filed
pursuant to Title 7 of this Code.
b. Review of preliminary site development plans for the construction of new
structure(s) and major modifications to existing structures, excluding singlefamily
residential.
c. Site plan review of special use applications required in Section 6-14-11(B) of
this Title.
d. Review of conceptual site development plans for new Planned Unit
Developments required in Section 6-14-12(E)(2) of this Title.
2. Written review comments and recommendations from the Development Review
Team will be issued to the Applicant within ten (10) business days from the
meeting date. No final or binding decision shall be rendered by the Development
Review Team and any comments and recommendations shall be deemed
advisory.
C. Required Plans: The following plans shall be submitted to the Development Review
Team for evaluation:
1. A preliminary plan of the parcel(s) of land, drawn to scale, illustrating the
proposed site improvements, including building footprint location(s), parking
facilities, streets, internal service/access roads, vehicle ingress/egress,
landscaping, services areas (trash enclosure, fire lanes, etc.), and any other
pertinent amenities.
2. Preliminary building elevations of all proposed structures showing actual
dimensions, building materials and any other special building treatments,
excluding single-family residential.
3. Additional plans may be requested by the Development Review Committee
deemed necessary to conduct a full evaluation of the development proposal.
6-14-7: CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: The Village shall issue certificates of
zoning compliance for the purpose of insuring compliance with the regulations of this
Title including any decisions, conditions or special requirements resulting from the
administration of this Title. Every certificate shall state the status of compliance with
Village of Lincolnshire Page 5 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
the provisions of this Title for any use or occupancy.
A. Request for Certificate of Zoning Compliance: Requests for a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance shall be submitted in compliance with the Village of Lincolnshire’s
Freedom of Information Act Policy. Each request must specify the parcel
address(es), parcel index number(s) (PIN), specific zoning information being
requested, and name and address of requestor.
B. Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance: Certificates of Zoning Compliance will
be issued pursuant to the Village of Lincolnshire Freedom of Information Act Policy,
based on available records. No Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued for
any building or portion thereof under construction until the premises has been
inspected and issued a Certificate of Occupancy by the Village’s Building Official.
6-14-8: GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESS
A. Application: An application for any request outlined in this Chapter shall be
submitted upon forms provided by the Community and Economic Development
Department which shall include written consent of the property owner(s). All plans
and documents shall be filed in the manner designated by the application;
applications will not be accepted until filed in proper form and contain all required
information. Within 30 days of the application being filed with the Community and
Economic Development Department and determined to be complete, such
application shall be scheduled for a Preliminary Evaluation Meeting.
B. Preliminary Evaluation Meeting: An application for any new request shall first be
evaluated on a preliminary basis by the Village Board of Trustees for initial comment
prior to the holding of a public hearing. This meeting shall not be required for minor
modifications to existing developments, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
1. Required Documentation:
a. The applicant shall submit a written description of the specific request(s) and
the site conditions and/or development goals resulting in such request.
b. A conceptual illustrative plan shall accompany the written description
showing the extent of the request.
2. The following criteria shall be applied in the Preliminary Evaluation Meeting:
a. The written description and conceptual illustrative plan shall be reviewed
with the Board of Trustees to provide, if any, initial comment, direct further
analysis to be conducted by the Zoning Board, or modifications to the plan(s)
for Zoning Board review. Any final decision must first require a
recommendation incorporating findings of fact from the Zoning Board.
b. Unless requested by the applicant, a maximum of one Preliminary
Evaluation Meeting shall be conducted for any given application.
c. Public notification is not required for a Preliminary Evaluation Meeting.
Public participation may be permitted by the Village Board of Trustee, but is
not required.
C. Notice of Public Hearing:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 6 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
1. Publication of Notice: Notice of the date, time, and place, common address and
Property Index Number(s) (P.I.N.) of the parcel(s) involved in the application,
and requested action(s) of the public hearing shall be published by the Village of
Lincolnshire at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village
not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before such public
hearing.
2. Written Notice: The applicant shall provide written notice to all persons to whom
the current real estate tax bills are sent, as shown on the records of the Vernon
Township Assessor's office as follows:
a. For all lots or any part of which lie within two hundred and fifty feet (250') of
the property lines of the lot for which an application has been filed.
b. Written notices shall give the date, time, and place, case number, if any,
assigned to the application, common address and Property Index Number(s)
(P.I.N.) of the parcel(s) involved in the application, and requested action(s)
of the public hearing. All such notice must be sent no more than thirty (30)
days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing.
c. Notices shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
The applicant shall file a sworn affidavit containing a complete list of the
names, last known addresses of all property owners entitled to notice and
served, and one copy of the notice with the Community and Economic
Development Department not less than four (4) days in advance of the
public hearing, exclusive of the date of the hearing itself.
D. Action by the Zoning Board: Subject to the notice requirements in paragraph C, the
Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing no later than sixty (60) days after the
Preliminary Evaluation Meeting to consider the application and make findings of fact
in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed. Recommendations of the
Zoning Board for approval, approval with conditions, or denial shall be forwarded to
the Village Board of Trustees incorporating the Zoning Board findings of fact for final
action. Any application must receive the approval of four (4) members of the Zoning
Board to be deemed an approval recommendation.
E. Action by the Architectural Review Board: No later than sixty (60) days after the
Preliminary Evaluation Meeting, the Architectural Review Board shall convene a
meeting to consider the application and make recommendations to the Village Board
of Trustees regarding the exterior architectural design of all applicable buildings and
development. Any application must receive the approval of four (4) members of the
Architectural Review Board to be deemed an approval recommendation.
F. Action by the Village Board of Trustees:
1. Recommendations of the Zoning Board for approval, approval with conditions, or
denial shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees incorporating the Zoning
Board findings of fact for final action.
2. Recommendations of the Architectural Review Board for approval, approval with
Village of Lincolnshire Page 7 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
conditions, or denial shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees incorporating
the Architectural Review Board recommendation(s) for final action.
3. The Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the recommendation of the Zoning
Board and/or Architectural Review Board within not more than sixty (60) days
from the last date of the advisory body votes on an application. Without further
public hearing, the Village Board of Trustees shall approve by ordinance, deny
the application, or refer it back to the appropriate advisory board for further
consideration. An application which fails to receive an approval recommendation
of the Zoning Board/Architectural Review Boardmust receive a favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all the elected members of the Village Board of Trustees to be
approved. An application which receives the approval recommendation of the
Zoning Board/Architectural Review Board may be denied by a majority vote of
the Village Board of Trustees.
4. The ordinance authorizing the application shall contain a specific description of
the request, along with any conditions and restrictions, or appropriate
guarantees upon the establishment, location, and construction of the request as
is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements specified herein.
G. Condition of All Applications and Approvals: Any application filed pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be considered complete unless and until all fees and deposits due
pursuant to Comprehensive Fee Schedule have been paid. Any approval granted
pursuant to this Chapter shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed
to be conditioned upon payment of fees as required by Section 6-14-14. The failure
to fully pay any such fee or deposit upon request shall be grounds for tolling any
deadlines, rejection in processing an application and for denying or revoking any
approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the
unpaid fee or deposit relates.
6-14-9: VARIANCE
A. Purpose: A variance authorizes a relaxation of the terms of this Title where such
relaxation will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to practical
difficulties on the property, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in
unnecessary hardship. The Zoning Board may recommend a variance from the
regulations of this Title to the Board of Trustees consistent with the general purpose
and intent of this Title. The Board of Trustees shall make all final decisions on
variance requests.
B. Process: The application process outlined in Section 6-14-8 of this Chapter shall
apply.
C. Findings of Fact: The Zoning Board shall not recommend a variance from the
regulations of this Title unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case the proposed variance meets each and every
one of the following standards:
1. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner
Village of Lincolnshire Page 8 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the
regulations were to be carried out;
2. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used
only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the zoning
district in which it is located;
3. The conditions upon which an application for a variance is based are unique to
the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable, generally,
to other property within the same zoning classification;
4. The alleged difficulty or hardship is not based primarily upon a desire by any
persons presently having an interest in the property or to increase financial gain;
5. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
property is located;
6. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or locality;
7. The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets,
or increase the danger of fire, or impair natural drainage or create drainage
problems on adjacent properties, or endanger the public safety, or substantially
diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
8. The proposed variance is consistent with the official Comprehensive Plan of the
Village and other development codes of the Village.
The Zoning Board may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may
impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a
variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this
Section and the objectives of this Title.
D. Authorized Variations: Due to their minor nature, an application for the following
variations shall not require a Preliminary Evaluation Meeting as outlined in Section
6-14-8(B), and shall advance directly to Public Hearing by the Zoning Board:
1. Reduction in the Setback required by the applicable zoning regulations of not
more than 25%.
2. Reduction of the Lot Area or Lot Width required by the applicable zoning
regulations of not more than 25%.
3. To permit the same off-street parking space(s) to qualify as space(s) for two (2)
or more separate uses required by Section 6-11-3(A)(5) of this Title, provided
that use of such parking space(s) for each user does not occur at approximately
the same hours of the same days of the week.
4. To increase the maximum distance parking spaces are permitted to be located
Village of Lincolnshire Page 9 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
from the use served by not more than fifty percent (50%), as required by 6-11-
3(A)(2) of this Title.
5. To permit the deferment of required parking facilities for a specified period of
time.
6. To permit an increase in established grade from which Building Height is
measured a maximum of 2.5 feet above the base floodplain elevation (BFE),
provided the Buildable Area of the subject parcel has an elevation below the
BFE.
An application for variance from the regulations of this Title not contained in this
Subsection (above) may be considered by the Zoning Board at a public hearing,
only after evaluated at Preliminary Evaluation Meeting by the Village Board of
Trustees, as outlined in Section 6-14-8(B).
E. Revocation: Where a variance has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter, such approval shall become null and void unless construction thereon is
substantially under way within one (1) year from ordinance approval, unless a onetime
extension is granted by the Village Board of Trustees without an additional
public hearing.
6-14-10: AMENDMENTS (MAP AND TEXT)
A. Purpose: For the purpose of ensuring that the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the municipality may be conserved; congestion in the public streets may
be lessened or avoided; the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare may
otherwise be promoted; and to ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas,
and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance, the Village Board
of Trustees may, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed
in the districts created by this Title or amend district boundary lines. Due allowances
shall be made for existing conditions, the policies, standards, and principles of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Village, the conservation of property values, the
direction of building development to the best advantage of the entire community,
and the uses to which property is devoted at the time of the adoption of such
amendatory ordinance.
B. Process: The application process outlined in Section 6-14-8 of this Chapter shall
apply.
C. Findings of Fact - Text Amendment: At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Zoning Board shall submit written recommendations to the Village Board of
Trustees. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is not to
change the zoning classification of particular property, the Zoning Board shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect
to, but not limited to, the following standards.
1. The request for an amendment shall serve the purpose of promoting the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 10 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
2. The request for an amendment shall conserve the value of property throughout
the community.
3. The request for an amendment shall lessen or avoid congestion in the public
streets and highways.
D. Findings of Fact - Map Amendment (Rezoning): At the conclusion of the public
hearing, the Zoning Board shall submit written recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees. The Zoning Board may recommend the adoption of an
amendment changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any
higher classification than that requested by the applicant. For the purpose of this
paragraph, the R-1 District shall be considered the highest classification and the M-1
District shall be considered the lowest classification. The Zoning Board shall not
recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment if it finds that the adoption of
such amendment is detrimental to the public interest, based on the following
standards:
1. Existing zoning classification of the property.
2. Existing uses of property and existing physical, social or economic factors within
the general area of the property in question.
3. The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in
question.
4. The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the
existing or proposed zoning classification.
5. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question,
including changes, if any, which have taken place in its present zoning
classification.
6. The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned.
7. The extent to which the property’s values is diminished by the existing zoning
classification.
8. The impact upon the objectives of the official Comprehensive Plan of the Village,
as amended.
E. Denial of Amendment: Any application for an amendment which has been denied by
the Village Board of Trustees shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year from
the date of the denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of
conditions.
6-14-11: SPECIAL USES
A. Purpose: The development and execution of this Title is based upon the division of
the community into zoning districts within which the use of land, buildings and their
bulk and location in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized,
however, there are certain uses because of their unique characteristics, requires
Village of Lincolnshire Page 11 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and
of the public need for the particular use in the particular location. Such special uses
fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or associated with a public interest, and
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of a unique nature that their operation may
give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property.
B. Process: The application process outlined in Section 6-14-8 of this Chapter shall
apply.
C. Development Review Team: A meeting of the Development Review Team shall be
conducted to carry out review of all new applications for special use prior to the
holding of a public hearing with the Zoning Board, as outlined in Section 6-14-6 of
this Chapter.
D. Findings of Fact: At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Zoning Board shall
submit written recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees. No special use
shall be recommended by the Zoning Board, unless it shall find that each and every
one of the following standards are met:
1. The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity of the subject premises for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
2. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the district.
3. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been
or will be provided.
4. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
5. The proposed special use is not contrary to the objectives of the Official
Comprehensive Plan of the Village as amended.
6. The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations
of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each
instance, be varied pursuant to Section 6-14-9 of this Chapter.
E. Denial of Special Use: Any application for a special use, which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Village Board of Trustees, shall not be resubmitted for a
period of one year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of conditions.
F. Amendments to Special Uses: A special use shall be implemented only in strict
Village of Lincolnshire Page 12 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
adherence to the authorizing ordinance, along with any conditions and restrictions,
or appropriate guarantees upon the establishment, location, and construction of the
application, which shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and
assigns. Any request to amend an approved special use shall be subject to the
following:
1. Major Amendments: Major amendments are classified as any change not
categorized as a Minor Amendment, and shall be subject to the requirements of
Section 6-14-8.
2. Minor Amendments: Minor amendments are classified as any change which
does not substantially alter the nature of the approved use(s), increase the
intensity of the approved use(s), or substantially increase the scale of structures
or site improvements associated with the approved special use(s). Upon the
submission of a new application for a minor amendment, the Zoning Board
and/or Architectural Review Board may approve, without the holding of a public
hearing, minor amendments.
G. Revocation: Where a special use has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter, such approval shall become null and void unless construction thereon is
substantially under way within three (3) years of the date of granting, unless a onetime
extension is granted by the Village Board of Trustees without an additional
hearing.
6-14-12: Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
A. Purpose and Description: While a Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a special
use, this Section provides a special mechanism to accommodate development
which is in the public interest and would not otherwise be permitted pursuant to this
Title. These provisions are also intended to provide an opportunity to accommodate
developments that involve one or more uses and may be located in more than one
zoning district.
It is anticipated that planned unit developments will offer one or more of the
following advantages:
1. Designs which reflect the historic open character of single-family areas of the
Village.
2. Designs which provide substantial buffers and transitions between areas of
different land use or development densities.
3. Designs which enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by conserving
streams, areas of natural beauty, and natural green spaces.
4. Designs which counteract possible urban monotony and congestion in streets.
5. Designs which promote compatible architecture between adjacent buildings.
6. Designs which will buffer differing types of land use and intensities of
development from each other so as to minimize any adverse impact which new
development may have on existing or zoned development.
B. Intent: A planned unit development is of substantially different character than other
uses described in this Title. Planned unit developments allow for far more flexibility
than those pertaining to other land uses and allows for uses which may not
Village of Lincolnshire Page 13 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
otherwise be identified in this Title. The maximum use of zoning exceptions for
planned developments will not automatically be granted by the Village Board of
Trustees; rather the intent is to grant only such adjustments or uses which create a
balance with the benefits accruing to the Village as a result of the planned unit
development. Therefore, the Village Board of Trustees may as a condition of
approval require any reasonable condition limitation or design factor which will
promote proper development of a planned unit development.
The planned unit development provisions of this Chapter are intended to provide the
following:
1. A choice in the type of environment available to the public by allowing
development that would not be possible under the strict application of other
sections of this Title.
2. Creation and/or permanent reservation of open space, recreational areas and
facilities.
3. A land use plan which permits preservation of green space, natural vegetation,
topographic and geological features, and historic resources.
4. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities which
results in better urban design, higher quality construction and the provision of
aesthetic amenities.
5. The efficient use of land, so as to promote economies in the provision of utilities,
streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other facilities.
6. Innovations in development so the growing needs and demands of the
population may be met by a greater variety in land uses, building type, design,
and layout, and by conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary
to such development, all in a manner consistent with the character of the zoning
district in which the planned unit development is located.
7. A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare.
C. Minimum Area for Planned Unit Development: A minimum gross area of three (3)
acres is required of each site for a planned unit development, except in the R-4, R-5,
B and E Zoning Districts where there shall be no minimum size requirement.
D. Application: A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use in
permissible zoning districts and in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in this Section. To the extent the procedures and standards set forth in this
Section conflict with other sections of the Village Code, this Section shall apply,
except that all required improvements, construction standards, design standards
and all other engineering standards contained within the Village's Subdivision and
Land Development regulations of Title 7 must be complied with, except where
specifically varied through the provisions of this Section.
1. Application: Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Community
Village of Lincolnshire Page 14 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
and Economic Development Department and shall be filed as outlined in Section
6-14-8(A) of this Chapter.
2. Joint Request: If any additional application pursuant to this Title is filed in
conjunction with a planned unit development, the applications shall be
processed concurrently; however all applicable public hearings shall be
convened by the Village Board of Trustees, which shall consider the joint
requests prior to consideration of the planned unit development application.
3. Optional Pre-Application Conference: Prior to filing an application for a planned
unit development, the applicant may request a pre-application conference with
the Zoning Administrator. The purpose of such a conference is to allow the
Zoning Administrator to inform the applicant of all applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations, plans, policies, standards, and procedures which may affect the
proposed development, or the consideration of said development by the Village
Board of Trustees. Such conference also allows the applicant to present a
general concept of the proposed development prior to the preparation of detailed
plans. No final or binding action shall be taken at a pre-application conference
and any views expressed shall be deemed to be only preliminary and advisory.
E. Preliminary Development Plan: The Preliminary Development Plan of the planned
unit development is intended to provide the basic scope, character, and nature of
the entire proposed planned unit development. The Preliminary Development Plan is
the basis on which the required public hearing is held, enabling public consideration
of the proposal at the earliest possible stage.
1. Preliminary Evaluation Meeting: An application for a planned unit development
shall be first evaluated at a Preliminary Evaluation Meeting by the Village Board
of Trustees for initial review prior to any further action, and shall include the
following plans and documents:
• A detailed explanation of the character of the planned unit development and
the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of
these regulations. This item shall include a specific explanation of how the
proposed land use(s) and how the proposed planned unit development
meets the objectives of all official plans which affect the parcel(s) in
question.
• A location map.
• An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned unit development.
• Conceptual design plans regarding land use, dwelling type, density, building
architecture, street and lot arrangement and preliminary lot sizes.
• Tentative proposals regarding surface drainage and stormwater
management facilities.
• Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project
Village of Lincolnshire Page 15 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
including the beneficial owners of any land trust in accordance with Section
1-12-1 of the Village Code.
2. Development Review Team: Following the Preliminary Evaluation Meeting, a
meeting of the Development Review Team shall be conducted pursuant to
Section 6-14-6 to carry out review of Preliminary Development Plans prior to
consideration by the Architectural Review Board. Copies of the Preliminary
Development Plan for all new residential developments shall be made available
to any school district, library district, and fire protection district which might be
affected by the development. The Zoning Administrator shall notify any such
district concerning the filing of said documents.
The Preliminary Development Plan and supporting data shall include the
following:
a. Site Plan: A site plan of the planned unit development shall be drawn to
an engineer’s scale ratio and shall include the following:
i. General location and purpose of each building, other than detached
single-family residences on individually platted lots.
ii. All proposed streets (public and private), required yards, common
open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and
other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development.
iii. Existing Easements: Location, width and purpose of all existing
platted and recorded easements.
iv. Conditions on Adjoining Land: Direction and gradient of ground
slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and
location of major buildings, easements, railroads, power lines, towers
and other nearby land uses or adverse influences.
v. Streets: Existing streets adjacent to the tract, including street names,
right-of-way widths, existing or proposed center lines, pavement
type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
vi. Utilities: Identify utilities on and adjacent to the tract; location and
size of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of fire hydrants and street lights
vii. Topography: Ground elevations on the tract and on the first fifty (50)
feet of all adjacent tracts of land showing one (1) foot contours for
land which slopes less than one-half (1/2) percent along with all
breaks in grades, at all drainage channels or swales, and at selected
points not more than one hundred (100) feet apart in all directions.
For land that slopes more than one-half (1/2) percent, two (2) foot
contours shall be provided. Any land within the one hundred (100)
year floodplain shall be shown.
viii. Soil Conditions: Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the
Village Engineer, shall be tested to ascertain subsurface soil, rock
and groundwater conditions, depth to groundwater, unless test pits
are dry at a depth of five (5) feet
ix. Natural Features: Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, and other
significant environmental features.
x. Open Space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public
use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose
Village of Lincolnshire Page 16 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
indicated.
b. Preliminary Building Elevations: Architectural elevation plans of all
proposed structures identifying actual dimensions, building materials and
any other special building treatments.
c. Preliminary Landscape Plan: A landscape plan of the entire planned unit
development and detailed plans of landscaping for a typical building
area.
d. Density: Information of residential uses, including dwelling units per
gross acre, dwelling units per net acre; the number of dwelling units by
type, and the number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type. Information
should be provided for each unit in the planned unit development.
e. Site Data: Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area,
including land area, number of buildings, and number of dwelling units
per acre. Nonresidential intensity information on the type and amount of
nonresidential uses including building locations, sizes, floor area ratio,
building height, the amount and location of common open space.
f. Preliminary Subdivision Plat: A preliminary subdivision plat for all
subdivided lands included in the planned unit development and meeting
all the requirements of a subdivision plat in accordance with Title 7 of the
Lincolnshire Village Code, except those aspects that vary from the
subdivision regulations.
g. Cost-Revenue Analysis: If requested by the Zoning Administrator, a
study shall be prepared by the applicant’s expense, indicating the fiscal
impact of the planned unit development on major taxing districts limited
to, the sanitary treatment facilities, school district(s), fire protection
district(s), library district(s), and the park network. Information shall
include detailed estimates on expected population of the development;
the operating cost to be incurred by each taxing body; any additional
major capital investments required, in part or in whole, because of the
planned unit development; and revenue generated for each taxing body
by the planned unit development to offset fiscal impacts created by the
planned unit development. The study should include a cash flow analysis
based on the proposed staging of the planned unit development.
h. Traffic Analysis: If requested by the Zoning Administrator, a study shall
be prepared by the applicant’s expense, analyzing the impact caused by
the planned unit development on the street and highway systems.
i. Environmental Analysis: If requested by the Zoning Administrator, a
study of the major environmental impacts of the planned unit
development on the environment shall be prepared by the applicant’s
expense, analyzing and disclosing all environmental impacts of the
proposed planned unit development. Generally, such impacts would
include effects on discrete ecosystems; any deterioration in the surface
water quality; and effect on sensitive land areas as identified by the
Village of Lincolnshire Page 17 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
Development Review Team from time to time, such as floodplains,
wetlands, forests, aquifer recharge areas, historic buildings or structures,
prairie landscapes, and mineral resource reserves.
j. Zoning Exceptions: Identification and explanation of those aspects of the
proposed planned unit development that vary from the Zoning Ordinance
requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district and from the
subdivision regulations of the Village.
k. Additional plans or documents as may be required by the Development
Review Team necessary to conduct a full evaluation of the planned unit
development.
3. Architectural Review Board: Prior to any public hearing, the Architectural
Review Board shall review the Preliminary Development Plans and make
recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees regarding the exterior
architectural design of all primary buildings, with the exception of all
detached single-family residential housing, clearly depicting the exterior
architectural design, arrangement, building massing and scale, height and
appearance, color and texture of exterior materials; site development design;
landscaping; lighting; off-street parking facilities; signage; and site fixtures.
4. Action by the Village Board of Trustees:
a. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section
6-14-8(c) and make findings of fact in accordance with standards
hereinafter prescribed, Architectural Review Board findings and
recommendation, and other supporting data.
b. Findings of Fact: The Preliminary Development Plans may be approved
by the Village Board of Trustees if it can make findings of fact related to
the specific proposal set forth with particularity, describing in what
respects the proposal would be in the public interest, based on the
following:
i. The proposed plan is consistent with the stated purpose of the
planned unit development regulations.
ii. The proposed plan meets the requirements and standards of the
planned unit development regulations.
iii. The proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but
not limited to, the density, dimensions, area, bulk, use, required
improvement, construction and design standards and the reasons
why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
iv. The public benefit produced by the planned unit development
outweighs the increased burden(s) on public services and
infrastructure. Any specific beneficial actions, plans or programs
agreed to in the planned unit development proposal which are clearly
Village of Lincolnshire Page 18 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
beyond the minimum requirements of the Zoning Code shall be
specifically listed as evidence of justified bulk premiums and/or use
exception.
v. The physical design of the proposed plan makes adequate
provisions for public services, provides adequate control over
vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common open
space, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment.
vi. The beneficial relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to
the adjacent properties and neighborhood.
vii. The desirability of the proposed plan to the Village's physical
development, tax base and economic well-being.
viii. The conformity with the recommendations of the Official
Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and all other official plans and
planning policies of the Village.
c. Exceptions: Upon approval of a Preliminary Development Plan, the Village
Board may require or grant conditions, modifications, bonuses and
exceptions, if any, and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation to the plan as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the
findings and requirements specified herein.
i. Use Exceptions: The Village Board of Trustees may authorize
specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the zoning
district(s) in which the planned unit development is located, provided
that:
• The uses permitted by such exception are necessary or
desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary
purpose and character of the planned unit development.
• The uses permitted by such exception will not exercise a
detrimental influence on the neighborhoods surrounding the
planned unit development, or upon the internal character of any
part or all of the planned unit development itself.
ii. Bulk Regulations: The Village Board of Trustees may authorize
exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of the Zoning Code
within the boundaries of such planned unit development, provided
that:
• Such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or
occupants of such development as well as the neighboring
property, than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of
Village of Lincolnshire Page 19 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
the Zoning Code for buildings developed on separate zoning lots.
• The overall floor area ratio for the planned unit development
would not exceed more than ten percent (10%) the maximum
floor area ratio which would be determined on the basis of the
floor area ratio required for the individual uses in such planned
unit developments, as stipulated in each zoning district.
• Along the periphery of the planned unit development, required
front, side and rear yards may be provided as required by the
zoning district in which said development is located.
5. Acceptance of the Preliminary Development Plan: The Preliminary Development
Plan shall be deemed only an expression of acceptance of the concepts and
details, and serve as a specific guide to the preparation of the Final
Development Plan which is required of the application for a planned unit
development. Further, it indicates acceptance of the commitment by the
applicant to the details set forth in the application. Acceptance of the Preliminary
Development Plan shall be null and void if a Final Development Plan is not
submitted within one year from the date of approval, unless an extension is
granted by the Village Board of Trustees.
a. Record of Acceptance: An ordinance granting acceptance of the Preliminary
Development Plan for the planned unit development shall be prepared and
contain a specific description of the special use, along with any conditions
applied, modifications, exception and bonuses granted, if any, and the
findings of fact of the Village Board of Trustees.
b. Building Permits: No permits for construction shall be issued for the planned
unit development until the Final Development Plan has been filed, approved,
and recorded with the County Recorder, as provided in Subsection F.
F. Final Development Plan: The Final Development Plan of a planned unit
development shall be prepared to designate the land lots as well as the division of
other lands, not so subdivided, into common open space areas and building areas,
and shall show the exact location of each structure to be constructed to designate
specific internal uses of each structure and parcel of the land. The Final
Development Plan shall detail the restrictions placed upon the land and serves as a
zoning control device.
1. Procedure: Within one year from the date of approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan, the Final Development Plan and supporting data shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator for certification the Final Development Plan is
in substantial conformity to the approved Preliminary Development Plan. The
Final Development Plan shall conform substantially to the Preliminary
Development Plan as approved. If requested by the applicant, the Final
Development Plan may be submitted in development phases, with each phase
representing a unit of the approved Preliminary Development Plan to be
developed; provided, however, that such unit conforms to all requirements of
these regulations.
Village of Lincolnshire Page 20 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
2. Final Development Plans: The Final Development Plan of the planned unit
development shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned unit development.
b. Density information of residential uses, including dwelling units per gross
acre and dwelling units per net acre; the number of dwelling units by type,
and the number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type. Information should
be provided for each unit in the planned unit development.
c. Site Plan illustrating the exact location of all structures to be constructed
and the specific internal land uses for each building, including all proposed
streets (public and private), required yards, common open space, recreation
facilities, off-street parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to
indicate the character of the proposed development.
d. Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, including land area,
number of buildings, number of dwelling units per acre. Nonresidential
intensity information on the type and amount of nonresidential uses including
building locations, sizes, floor area ratio, building height, the amount and
location of common open space.
e. Architectural Plans of all primary buildings clearly depicting the final exterior
architectural design, arrangement, building massing and scale, height and
appearance, color and texture of exterior materials, lighting, signage and site
fixtures, as recommended by the Architectural Review Board.
f. Landscape Plan for each phase of the planned unit development seeking
final approval and detailed plans of landscaping for a typical building area.
g. Final improvement plans in accordance with Section 7-3-3(A) of the
Lincolnshire Village Code including construction details for all roads and offstreet
parking facilities; classification, width of right of way, width of
pavement, and construction details; sidewalks and paths; sanitary sewers;
stormwater drainage facilities; water supply system; and street lighting
Furnished for each building.
h. Authorization from Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
affirming the planned unit development and the design of all improvements
is in accordance with the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance
(WDO), as amended, except where specific exemptions may be authorized.
i. Development schedule indicating the phases in which project will be built; if
more than one construction phase will occur, identifying the phase
boundaries, density, use and public facilities, and open space to be
developed with each phase. Each phase shall be described and mapped as
a unit of the project. Overall design of each unit shall be shown on the plan
and through supporting graphic material. If approval for only one (1) phase
of the Final Development Plan is requested by the applicant, the
development schedule for the entire planned unit development must be
Village of Lincolnshire Page 21 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
submitted with the first Final Development Plan and may be amended upon
filing approval for each subsequent phase.
j. All common open space, at the election of the Village, shall be:
i. Conveyed to a Village or public corporation, or conveyed to a not-forprofit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefitting the
owners and residents of the planned unit development or adjoining
property owners or any one or more of them, in whole or in part. All lands
conveyed shall be subject to the right of the grantee or grantees to
enforce maintenance and improvement of the common open space; or
ii. By a restrictive covenant describing the open space and its maintenance
and improvement, running with the land for the benefit of residents of the
planned unit development or adjoining property owners and/or both.
iii. Permanent common open space equivalent to at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the total development area in the planned unit
development.
k. Covenants: Final agreements, restrictions, provisions, or covenants
governing the use, maintenance, and continue protection of the planned unit
development and any of the common open space.
3. Approval of Final Development Plan: After review of the Final Development Plan
and supporting data for substantial conformity with the approved Preliminary
Development Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall forward a recommendation to
the Village Board of Trustees which shall approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or disapprove the final plan. Disapproval of the final plan shall
include a written statement of the reasons thereof.
a. Authorizing Ordinance: An ordinance granting approval of the Final
Development Plans for the planned unit development shall be prepared and
contain a specific description of the special use, along with any conditions
and restrictions, bonuses and exceptions, or appropriate guarantees upon
the establishment, location, and construction of the planned unit
development as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest. The authorizing ordinance including all exhibits/documents and
Final Plat of Subdivision, as set forth in Title 7 of the Lincolnshire Village
Code, shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder’s Office.
b. Building Permits: No permits for construction of any structure or other
improvements, shall take place until approval and recording of the Final
Development Plan documents.
G. Amendments to Planned Unit Developments: A planned unit development shall be
developed only in strict adherence to the approved Final Development Plan and all
supporting documentation, which shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, grantees and assigns. Any request to amend an approved planned unit
development shall be subject to the following:
Village of Lincolnshire Page 22 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
1. Major Amendments: Shall require the submission of a new planned unit
development plan and supporting data, and shall be subject to the requirements
of Subsection E. Major amendments include but not limited to the following:
a. Increase in density;
b. Increase in building height(s);
c. Reduction in open space (publicly dedicated or private);
d. More than a ten percent (10%) modification in proportion of housing types;
e. Reduction in approved parking areas which reduces the total number of
parking spaces below code requirements or modifications which require an
increase in required parking;
f. Additions to authorized categories of land use(s);
g. Modifications to existing Areas of Special Sign Control which would alter the
character of the development
h. Change in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants.
2. Minor Amendments: Minor revisions to the approved planned unit development
may be approved by the Architectural Review Board, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator. Minor amendments are classified as any change not
outlined as a Major Amendment, including but not limited to the following:
a. Minor modifications to existing Areas of Special Sign Control;
b. Changes to approved landscape plan(s) for the development;
c. Increase of site amenities or changes to site furniture/lighting fixtures;
d. Changes to exterior material(s) and colors, provided the replacement
material(s); will not be of lessor quality from the approved material(s).
H. Revocation: Where approval of the Final Development Plan for a planned unit
development has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, such
approval shall become null and void unless construction of the planned unit
development is substantially under way within three (3) years of the date of approval
of the Final Development Plan. Revocation shall not occur before the applicant
and/or developer receives written notification at least sixty (60) days prior to any
such revocation. Extension in the building schedule may be granted by the Village
Board of Trustees upon written request by the applicant/developer. Upon revocation,
the parcel(s) of land shall conform to regulations and procedures of the underlying
zoning district.
6-14-13: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
A. Authority: Any person aggrieved shall appeal any order, requirement, decision or
determination made under the regulations of this Title within 30 days from the date
of the administrative decision. An application for appeal shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator, who shall schedule a public hearing no later than sixty (30) days after
receipt of an application in accordance with this Section.
B. Action:
1. Action by the Zoning Administrator: The appeal application shall be forwarded to
the Zoning Board which shall hear the appeal and forward its recommendation
to the Board of Trustees.
2. Action by the Zoning Board: The appeal application shall be forwarded to the
Village of Lincolnshire Page 23 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
Village Board of Trustees which shall hear the appeal.
3 Action by the Architectural Review Board: The appeal application shall be
forwarded to the Village Board of Trustees which shall hear the appeal.
C. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be conducted upon consideration of every
appeal application. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in accordance with the
Open Meetings Act.
D. Final Action: The Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the decision of the
Zoning Board and/or Architectural Review Board within not more than sixty (60)
days from the last date of the advisory body votes on an application. The Village
Board of Trustees shall render a final decision of all by ordinance.
6-14-14: FEES
A. Application: Any application filed pursuant to this Title shall be accompanied by the
application fees established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
B. Escrow: Every application filed pursuant to this Title shall be accompanied by the
deposit of an additional amount for recoverable costs as provided in Title 1, Chapter
8 of the Village Code, to be deposited in an application fee escrow. No interest shall
be payable on any such escrow. The Village shall from time to time, draw funds from
the escrow account established for such application to pay such costs and shall
transfer such funds to the appropriate Village accounts. The Village shall maintain
an accurate record of all such drawings. If the actual costs for the services exceed
the amount of the initial deposit, the applicant shall replenish the escrow upon
Village request. Remaining funds in the escrow at the completion of the application
will be returned to the entity providing the initial fee escrow deposit.
6-14-15: INSPECTION: For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Zoning Code, the
Director of Community and Economic Development, or his/her designee, is hereby
authorized to make inspections of all structures and premises to determine their
compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Such inspections shall be made
subject to the following standards and conditions:
A. An entry for the purpose of such inspection may take place if a complaint respecting
said premises has been received by the Director of Community and Economic
Development, or his/her designee, and such complaint in the opinion of the Director
of Community and Economic Development provides reasonable grounds that a
violation exists, or such inspection is undertaken as part of a regular inspection
program whereby certain areas of the Village may be inspected from time to time in
their entirety by the direction of the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Such inspection shall be made by the Director of Community and Economic
Development, or his/her designee, upon the direction of the Village Board of
Trustees.
C. When inspecting a structure or premises, the Director of Community and Economic
Development or his/her designee shall furnish to the owner, occupant or operator
sufficient identification and information to enable the owner, occupant or operator to
determine both the inspector's identity as a representative of the Village and the
purpose of the inspection. The Director of Community and Economic Development
Village of Lincolnshire Page 24 Title 6-14
Revised 11/25/2015
may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant or other legal
process for the purpose of securing entry to any building, structure or premises if the
owner, occupant or operator shall refuse to grant entry.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 1
CHAPTER 15
FENCES AND SCREENS
SECTION
6-15-1: Intent and Purpose
6-15-2: General Requirements
6-15-3: Specific Requirements by Type
6-15-4: Permits, Variations and Exceptions
6-15-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE: This Chapter is intended to regulate the
location, appearance and construction of residential and nonresidential
fences and screens that may be constructed in the Village.
The purpose of these regulations is to maintain the public health,
safety and welfare, to define boundaries, to protect the property
values and economic well-being of the Village, and to promote the
openness of residential yards in the Village.
6-15-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location:
1. General:
a. Fences and screens (except underground electronic fences)
shall not be located within a required front or corner side yard
setback and shall not extend beyond the front façade of a
primary structure. If the front façade of a primary structure is
located within a required front or corner side yard setback,
constructed fences or screens shall not extend into that
required setback.
b. Any owner desiring to locate a fence in, over, upon or across
an easement shall be required to submit a waiver on a form
supplied by the Village of Lincolnshire.
2. Floodway: No fence shall be located within the Floodway except to
the extent permitted by the Lake County Watershed Development
Ordinance, as amended. By way of example but not permission, a
fence may be permitted in the floodway if it is associated with a
recreational facility, such as playing fields or trail systems, and is
designed to be 50% open when viewed from any one direction and
parallel to the direction of flood flows.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 2
B. Appearance:
1. Color: All fences and screens shall be of a color which blends with
the natural surroundings or is complementary to a color used in
the primary structure on the lot. All metallic fences permitted by the
provisions of this Chapter shall be a pre-finished white, black, dark
brown or dark green color. Permitted chain link fences may be
vinyl coated in above colors.
2. Height: The overall standing fence height may be increased by
no more than 4”to accommodate decorative fence elements
such as caps. Fences shall not be placed on constructed
earthen berms or mounds, unless the Village Board has granted
a variation to the fence height requirements.
3. Materials: Fences shall be constructed of a non-metallic or
ornamental metal material and must be of the open type with a
finished side facing outward, unless otherwise specified in the
provisions of this title. Chain link, barbed wire and other non-self
supporting fences are prohibited, except where they are
specifically permitted by this Code. Metal screens are prohibited.
C. Construction Requirements: All fences and screens in the Village
require a building permit issued by the Village. All fences and screens
shall be constructed of materials and in a manner which meets or
exceeds the requirements of all adopted codes. Fence posts shall be
designed of a decay or corrosion resistant material and shall be
embedded into tamped earth, compactable gravel or concrete, to a
depth which will ensure structural stability.
6-15-3: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS BY TYPE: The following
requirements are supplemental to the General Requirements
described in Section 6-15-2, and where there is a conflict between
the General Requirements and Specific Requirements set forth
below, the Specific Requirements shall take precedence and
control.
A. Fences:
1. Yard Fences:
a. Location:
(i) Fences shall not be located within a required front or corner
side yard setback and shall not extend beyond the front
façade of a primary structure. However, fences shall be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 3
permitted to be located within a required corner side yard
setback on lots with a corner side yard adjacent to Half Day
Road or Riverwoods Road. If the front façade of a primary
structure is located within a required front or corner side
yard setback, a fence shall not extend into that required
setback. Fences in adjacent interior side yards which abut
Half Day Road are required to be constructed so that such
fences are aligned horizontally, unless such alignment
conflicts with other regulations of this Section. No portion of
a fence shall be constructed within a dedicated
conservancy area or conservancy easement that runs
continuously between adjacent lot lines. (Amd. Ord. 14-
3328-55 eff. 06-09-14)
Illustration for 6-15-3-A-1(a)(i)
Illustration for 6-15-3-A-1(a)(i)
Fence permitted along
property lines (No
Conservancy Area)
CONSERVANCY
AREA
Fence not permitted
into Conservancy Area
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 4
(ii) A yard fence may be constructed on a vacant residential lot
contiguous to a lot improved with a primary structure,
provided that the two lots are under the same ownership
and said fence encloses both lots so as not to create a
physical barrier between the two lots. The authority herein
granted shall expire within one (1) year following the date
on which ownership of the adjacent lots is separated,
unless the new owner receives a building permit and
initiates construction of a primary structure on the vacant lot
during that term.
b. Opacity: Fences and gates shall contain no greater than 60%
opaque materials, as measured horizontally along each foot of
the length of the fence facing each yard, unless further
modified in this Section below:
(i) Lots with primary structures which have a front yard on Half
Day Road or Riverwoods Road may have solid fences,
provided that such fences are located no further from either
arterial road than the rear façade of the primary structure.
(ii) Lots with primary structures which have rear yards on Half
Day Road or Riverwoods Road may have solid fences,
provided that such fences are located along the rear
property line that is adjacent to Half Day Road or
Riverwoods Road.
(iii) Lots with primary structures which have a corner side yard
on Half Day road or Riverwoods Road may have solid
fences provided they are along the corner side property
line. (Amd. Ord. 14-3328-55 eff. 06-09-14).
(iv)Lots with primary structures that are adjacent to an
incompatible land use may have solid fences.
c. Height:
(i) Yard fences that are constructed of a non-metallic or
ornamental metal material shall not exceed four feet (4’)
in height, except that yard fences designed of an
ornamental metal material on lots in the R1 and R2
Single-Family Residence Zoning Districts shall not
exceed six feet (6’) in height.
(ii) That portion of a fence that is parallel to the right-of-way
and is located on a lot with a primary structure which has a
front yard on Half Day Road or Riverwoods Road and that
is located no further from either arterial road than the rear
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 5
façade of the primary structure shall not exceed six feet (6')
in height.
a. Fences along the rear property line of a lot that has a primary
structure which has a rear yard adjacent to Half Day Road or
Riverwoods Road shall not exceed six (6’) in height.
b. Lots with a corner side yard adjacent to Half Day Road or
Riverwoods Road shall be permitted to have a fence along
the corner side property line not exceeding six (6’) in height.
(Amd. Ord. 14-3328-55 eff. 06-09-14).
Illustration for 6-15-3-A-1(c)(ii)
Illustration for 6-15-3-A-1(c)(iii)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 6
Illustration for 6-15-3-A-1(c)(iv)
c. Fences that are provided for the purpose of separating
residential properties from an incompatible land use shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in height.
d. Materials; Appearance:
(i) Materials: Subject to subparagraphs (ii) and (iii), yard
fences shall be constructed of non-metallic or ornamental
metal materials. All fences taller than four feet (4’) adjacent
to Riverwoods Road shall be designed of non-metallic
materials only.
(ii) Half Day Road Fences: Fences taller than four feet (4’)
located on lots on Half Day Road shall be constructed of
wood with a natural wood finish. All solid fences shall be
designed based on the following design concepts:
1. A traditional style solid wood fence with post end caps.
2. A traditional style solid wood fence with square lattice
on top and post end caps.
3. A traditional style solid wood fence with diagonal
lattice on top and post end caps.
4. A traditional Board and Batten style solid wood
fence with post end caps.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 7
(iii) Ornamental Metal Fences: Ornamental metal yard fences
shall be constructed of a metal material and be designed
based on the following design concepts:
1. An ornamental metal fence with a top rail(s).
2. An ornamental metal fence with a top rail(s) and an
extended bottom baluster.
3. An ornamental metal fence with a top rail(s), extended
bottom baluster and decorative finials.
4. An ornamental metal fence with a top rail(s) and
decorative rings and finials.
1. A Traditional style solid wood fence
with post end caps.
2. A Traditional style solid wood fence
with square lattice on top and post end
caps.
3. A Traditional style solid wood fence
with diagonal lattice on top and post
end caps.
4. A Traditional Board and Batten style
solid wood fence with post end caps.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 8
2. Swimming Pool Fences: Swimming pool fences are regulated by
Section 5-5-6 of Title 5, Building Regulations.
3. Tennis Court Fences:
a. Location: Tennis court fencing shall be located along both
ends of a tennis court and may completely enclose the
tennis court to achieve a four-sided enclosure. Tennis court
fences shall not be permitted in any required setbacks.
b. Height and Opacity: Tennis court fences shall not exceed ten
feet (10') in height and shall be of the open type.
c. Materials: Tennis court fences may be constructed of a
metallic material, including chain link. Chain link fences shall
be a minimum of eleven gauge wire with a mesh size not to
exceed one and a half inches (1-1/2").
B. Pet Enclosures:
1. Location: Pet enclosures are prohibited in any required yard
setback area and shall not extend beyond the front and cornerside
facade of the primary structure and shall not be visible from
the public way.
1. An ornamental metal fence with a
top rail(s).
2. An ornamental metal fence with a top
rail(s) and an extended bottom baluster.
3. An ornamental metal fence with a top
rail(s), extended bottom baluster and
decorative finials.
4. An ornamental metal fence with a top
rail(s) and decorative rings and finials.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 9
2. Number: Only one (1) pet enclosure shall be permitted on a lot.
3. Height and Size: Pet enclosures shall not exceed six feet (6') in
height and 250 square feet in area.
4. Materials: Pet enclosures may be constructed of a metallic or nonmetallic
material. Chain link fencing may be used, provided that it
is a minimum of eleven gauge wire with a mesh size of no more
than one and a half inches (1-1/2").
C. Underground Electronic Pet Enclosures (Dog Fences): Electronic
pet enclosures placed underground are regulated by Section 8-3-9(E)
of Title 8, Public Ways and Property.
D. Non-Residential Fences:
1. Location: Fences in non-residential areas of the Village may be
permitted subject to the recommendation of the Architectural
Review Board and approval by the Village Board. Non-residential
fences that are taller than 4’ in height shall be placed a minimum
of four feet (4') inside a property line to allow adequate space for
required landscaping.
2. Height: Fences in non-residential areas shall not exceed six feet
(6') in height, except as permitted in Section 6-15-3(A)(1)(c)(iv).
3. Landscaping: Fences in non-residential areas that are taller than
four feet (4’) in height shall be screened with landscaping which
complies with Section 13-2-3 of the Village Code.
E. Screens
1. Ground-Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Public Utility: Public
Utility ground-mounted equipment, which is placed in a required
yard setback, in the event that no feasible location exists
outside the required setback, shall be screened. Screens shall
consist of plant material that provides full year-round
concealment at the time of installation. The installation of such
equipment and required landscaping shall not infringe on the
visibility triangle, as depicted in Section 12-8-1(A)(4) of the
Village Code, except to the extent required to comply with
workplace safety standards.
2. Ground-Mounted Mechanical Equipment--Other Than Public
Utility:
a. Location: Ground-mounted mechanical equipment and
associated screens are prohibited in required yard setback
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 10
areas and shall not extend beyond any front or corner-side
facade of the primary structure.
b. Height: Screens shall be a minimum of six inches (6") above
the highest point of the ground-mounted equipment being
screened and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height in
non-residential districts and six feet (6') in height in residential
districts.
c. Materials:
(i) Residential Screens: Ground-mounted mechanical
equipment (including, but not limited to, satellite antennas,
ancillary power generators and pool-related equipment)
shall be screened by plant material or berms, unless a
permanent screen wall is constructed to be compatible with
the design of the primary structure on the lot. Heating, air
conditioning units and satellite antennas that are 1 meter
(39.37”) in width/diameter or less in residential zoning
districts shall be exempt from the screening requirements of
this Chapter.
(ii) Non-Residential Screens: Screens shall be constructed of
materials which blend with the surroundings or are
complementary to those used in the primary structure on
the lot. Plant materials or berms used as a screen must
provide full and complete concealment at the time of
installation and throughout the year.
3. Privacy Screens:
a. Location: Screens for privacy purposes shall not be erected
within a required yard setback and shall not extend beyond the
front or corner-side facade of the primary structure. The
location of a screen is further restricted to areas adjacent to
patios or decks and one end of each screen must be
immediately adjacent to the primary structure on the lot.
b. Height: Privacy screens shall not exceed a height of six feet
(6') above the existing grade where such screen is erected.
c. Length: The cumulative length of all privacy screens on a lot
shall be limited to twenty-four (24) linear feet, measured along
the center line of the screen.
4. Refuse and Recycling Screens:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 11
a. General: Refuse and recycling screens shall be required for
all non-residential uses.
b. Location: Screens may be erected in any areas of a lot,
provided that the screen does not extend beyond the front or
corner-side facade of the primary structure. The location of the
required screen shall not be within five feet (5') of any property
line.
c. Height: Screens shall be a minimum of six inches (6") above
the highest point of the object being screened and shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height.
d. Design and Materials: Screens shall consist of three solid sides
and a solid gate on the fourth side. Screens shall be
constructed of materials which blend with the surroundings or
are complementary to those used in the primary structure
served by the refuse or recycling containers.
6-15-4: PERMITS, VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
A. Permit Applications: Application for a fence or screen permit shall be
on a form designated by the Village and shall be accompanied by the
following information:
1. Three (3) copies of an accurate plat of survey which indicates the
proposed location of such fence or screen and any other
structures and paved surfaces on the lot.
2. Three (3) copies of a cross-section/elevation which indicates the
depth of the posts, total height, material and method of attachment
for the fence.
3. A Landscape Plan must be submitted for review and approval with
all applications for non-residential fences that are taller than 4’ in
height. In addition, a landscape plan must be submitted for review
and approval with all applications for public utility and non-public
utility residential and non-residential ground-mounted mechanical
equipment where landscape screening is proposed. The
Landscape Plan shall indicate:
a. The location, size and type of any existing and proposed plant
material that will obscure said fence or ground-mounted
mechanical equipment from adjacent properties and public
way(s) and
b. That the plant material will provide visual relief throughout
the year. A letter from the property owner or a signed
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-15: FENCES AND SCREENS
Revised 06/09/2014 Page 12
contract must be submitted with all Landscape Plans
which indicates the date the required plant material will be
installed.
4. An approved easement waiver on a form provided by the Village is
required when any improvement defined in this Chapter is to be
erected in, over or upon an easement. The letter will be recorded
with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds by the Village; and
5. Any additional information as requested by the Village.
B. Variations and Exceptions: The Village Board may authorize a
variation for a different height, length, material, location or color of a
fence or screen if substantial proof of practical difficulties or particular
hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this
Chapter is provided by the petitioner in the manner required for other
variations of the Village's Zoning Code as listed in Chapter 14 of the
Title.
Any fence or screen for which a building permit has been legally
issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter as required by law
may be maintained or repaired provided the cost of the improvement
is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of erecting a new fence or
screen. If the cost of improvement is fifty-one percent (51%) of the
cost of erecting a new fence or screen, the provisions of this Chapter
must be met when such fence or screen is repaired or maintained. All
other persons to whom a permit is issued after the effective date of
this Ordinance must follow its provisions.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 16
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION
6-16-1 Purpose, Interpretation and Procedure
6-16-2 Placement of Personal Wireless Service Facilities
6-16-3 Co-location of Personal Wireless Service Facilities
6-16-4 Design Issues
6-16-5 Other Standards
6-16-6 Temporary Facilities
6-16-7 Abandonment and Removal
6-16-8 Prohibited Placement of Personal Wireless Service Facilities
6-16-9 Non-conformities
6-16-1: PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND PROCEDURE
A. The purpose of this Chapter 16 is to provide specific regulations for the
placement, construction and modification of personal wireless
telecommunications facilities. The provisions of this Chapter 16 are not
intended and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this
Chapter 16 be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate
between the various different companies that provide personal wireless
services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this Chapter 16 are
inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision of this Title, the provisions of
this Chapter 16 shall control.
B. In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this
Chapter made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install
personal wireless service facilities, the Board of Trustees shall act within a
reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the Village, taking
into account the nature and scope of the request. Any decision to deny such a
request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in
a written record.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 2
C. Should the application of this Chapter 16 have the effect of
prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal wireless service
to all or a portion of the Village, such provider may petition the Board
of Trustees for an amendment to this Chapter 16, in the manner
provided in Section 6-14-13. The Board of Trustees, upon receipt of
such a petition, shall promptly undertake review of the petition, taking
into account the nature and scope of the petition. Any decision to
deny such a petition shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record.
D. All requests for approval of a personal wireless service facility will be reviewed
by the Architectural Review Board, in the manner provided in Sections 2-3-4
and 2-3-5. Those personal wireless service facilities that require Special Use
permits will be reviewed by the Zoning Board, in the manner provided in
Section 6-14-14, in addition to the Architectural Review Board.
6-16-2: PLACEMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES:
A personal wireless service facility, as referenced in Section 6-2-2, may be
erected or installed only in accordance with this Title 6, Chapter 16 of the
Village Code. The personal wireless service facility shall conform to all
minimum setback, yard and height requirements (except where otherwise
noted in this chapter) of this Title 6, and to all applicable Federal laws and
regulations concerning its use and operation. Any personal wireless service
facilities, whether Aimpact@ or Ano impact,@ that are not attached to an existing
principal structure shall be permitted on a single lot with that existing principal
structure ( as per section 6-3-1), provided that 1) the existing principal structure
was not constructed for a personal wireless service facility; and 2) the personal
wireless service facility being proposed is a maximum of 25' from the nearest
part of the existing principal structure (this may extend to fifty feet (50') upon
the written concurrence of the Village Engineer certifying that the personal
wireless service facility cannot be constructed within 25' of the principal
structure due to structural reasons); and 3) no more than one structure
carrying a personal wireless service facility or facilities that is not attached to
an existing principal structure is permissible on a single lot. No more than one
(1) Aimpact@ facility will be permitted on a single lot. No freestanding antenna
poles shall be permitted except in the M1, O/Ic and O/Id Zoning Districts. A
personal wireless service facility may be created or installed only in the
following zoning districts and only according to the accompanying standard:
A. M1, O/Ia, O/Ib, O/Ic and O/Id. A personal wireless service facility may be
erected or installed in the M1, O/Ia, O/Ib, O/Ic and O/Id Zoning Districts, but
only under the following conditions:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 3
1. No Impact Facility (as referenced in Section 6-2-2) - A personal wireless
service facility that is a Ano impact@ facility, may be installed in the M1,
O/Ia, O/Ib, O/Ic and O/Id Zoning Districts. A personal wireless service
facility that is affixed to an existing structure, and meets the definition
of a Ano impact@ facility, does not require a Special Use permit. All
other Ano impact@ facilities in the M1, O/Ia, O/Ib, O/Ic, and O/Id zoning
districts will require a Special Use permit.
2. Impact Facility - A personal wireless service facility that is not a @no
impact@ facility shall be considered an Aimpact@ facility, and may be
installed in the M1, O/Ic and O/Id Zoning Districts, but only as a Special
Use, and only behind the front plane of an existing principal structure.
Impact facilities, such as a free-standing antenna pole (as referenced in
Section 6-2-2), shall not exceed a height of 115' above grade
B. B1, B2, E, R4 and R5. A personal wireless service facility may be erected or
installed in the B1, B2, E, R4 and R5 Zoning Districts. A personal wireless
service facility in these zoning districts must meet the definition of a Ano
impact@ facility.A personal wireless service facility that is affixed to an existing
structure, and meets the definition of a Ano impact@ facility, does not require a
Special Use permit. All other Ano impact@ facilities in the B1, B2, E, R4 and R5
zoning districts will require a Special Use permit.
C. R1, R2, R2A and R3. A personal wireless service facility may be erected or
installed in the R1, R2, R2A and R3 Zoning Districts only as a Special Use. A
personal wireless service facility may not be located on a lot used for
residential purposes or a vacant lot in the R1, R2, R2A and R3 zoning districts.
A personal wireless service facility in these zoning districts must meet the
definition of a Ano impact@ facility.
6-16-3: CO-LOCATION OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
A. In considering a request for approval of a Special Use to permit the installation
of personal wireless service facilities. TheZoning Board or the Board of
Trustees, as the case may be, shall, in addition to the Standards for Review
set forth in Sections 6-14-11 and 6-14-14 of this Title 6, also give due
consideration and weight to whether the plans submitted will provide for colocation
of other personal wireless service equipment on the same structure,
so as to minimize the proliferation of antenna-supporting structures. The best
available information on existing personal wireless service facilities within onethousand
(1,000) feet, as measured from the property line on which the
personal wireless service facility is proposed, shall accompany any request to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 4
locate a new personal wireless service facility.
B. Due consideration shall also be given as to whether the applicant has sought
and been denied the opportunity to co-locate its personal wireless service
facility on an existing antenna-supporting structure. The applicant must
demonstrate the necessity for locating a personal wireless service facility on
any site being proposed in the Village.
C. In considering a request for approval of a Special Use or variations to permit
the installation of personal wireless service facilities, theZoning Board or the
Board of Trustees, as the case may be, may, by express condition, require
that the applicant allow, on a commercially reasonable basis, other providers of
personal wireless telecommunications services to co-locate additional personal
wireless services facilities on a free-standing structure which is part of the
applicant=s proposed personal wireless service facility, where such co-location
is technologically and structurally feasible.
6-16-4: DESIGN ISSUES
A. COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT BUILDINGS OR CABINETS - These support
structures shall, whenever practical, be located within a lawfully pre-existing
structure. If this is not possible, then these structures shall have an exterior
finish compatible with the natural or built environment surrounding the site.
B. SCREENING - The Village may require any combination of existing and
additional vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features to
achieve the goal of minimizing the visual impact of the site. All requirements for
screening, as referenced in Title 6, Chapter 15, shall apply to ground-mounted
antenna poles and support structures. However, rooftop screening must be
accomplished in accordance with the rooftop screening requirements, as
referenced in Title 5, Chapter 1-10.
C. FENCING - All fencing shall be in compliance with the requirements of Title 6,
Chapter 15 of this code. If fencing is utilized, the landscape strip, as required in
Title 13, Chapter 2, must be placed outside of any fencing.
6-16-5: OTHER STANDARDS
A. SIGNAGE - The following signage is permitted: 1) Signage mandated by
applicable law or regulations, 2) A single sign, per antenna structure, erected
at eye level or below, which provides only the name of the company and an
emergency phone number, and 3) a single ANo Trespassing@ sign. The
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 5
maximum permitted size for each of these signs is one (1) square foot, unless
a larger size is mandated by applicable laws or regulations.
B. LIGHTING - No lighting of any towers shall be allowed, other than that which is
specifically mandated by Federal or State law or regulations.
C. COMPLIANCE - All personal wireless service facilities must maintain
compliance with the plans and specifications approved by the Board of
Trustees. If the personal wireless service facility becomes non-compliant with
approved plans and specifications due to, but not limited to: discoloration,
cracking, missing components, rusting, settling, damage or general disrepair;
then the owner of the personal wireless service facility and the owner of the
building or lot on which the personal wireless service facility is located will be
jointly and severally responsible for remedying the specific non-conformities.
These non-conformities must be remedied within forty-five (45) days after
written notice, detailing those non-conformities, is sent by the Village to the
owner of the personal wireless service facility and the owner of the building or
lot. Failure to remedy all of the cited non-conformities, within the forty-five (45)
day time period, shall be subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive
Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff.
3/22/10)
D. PROTECTION - Every personal wireless service facility shall be protected
against unauthorized climbing or other access by the public.
E. STORAGE - Vehicular and outdoor storage associated with personal wireless
service facilities is prohibited on any site containing said facilities.
F. INTERFERENCE - In considering a request for approval of a Special Use or
variations to permit the installation of personal wireless service facilities, the
Zoning Board or the Board of Trustees, as the case may be, may require that
the applicant demonstrate that the proposed personal wireless service facilities
will not interfere with any existing Village public safety communication systems,
or residential or commercial application including, but not limited to, television
and radio broadcast signals.
G. ENGINEERING - No personal wireless service facility may be located within
the Village unless the Applicant has provided to the Village the written
certification of a professional engineer licensed by the State of Illinois that the
structure upon which the facility is located is sufficient from a structural
engineering standpoint to bear the load. In instances of free-standing
structures, this shall include a certificate that the foundation of the structure is
built, constructed and engineered to take into account the existing soil
conditions. A licensed professional engineer shall also certify that in the event
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 6
of a fall or collapse, that the facility is designed and manufactured to fall
entirely within the boundary lines of the lot on which it is located, and it has
been erected in accordance with manufacturers specifications.
H. HEIGHT
1. Height Exceptions of Less Than 50% - If an applicant desires a height
exception of less than fifty percent (50%) of the maximum permitted
height for that zoning district, set forth in this Chapter 16, that applicant
shall file a Certificate of Necessity executed by an Engineer acceptable to
the Village and not in the employ of the applicant. The Certficate of
Necessity shall provide a statement, from the Engineer, that the relief
requested is the minimum necessary to accomplish the applicant=s
purpose and that unless the relief is granted, the signals to be sent or
received by this facility will be substantially impaired or obstructed within
the transceiving cell or service area. The Certificate of Necessity shall
also state that there is not another location reasonably available that
would require a lesser degree of exception, or no exception.
2. Exceptions of 50% or Greater - A height exception varying the standards
set forth in this Chapter 16 may be granted, where requested exceptions
are 50% of the maximum permitted height or greater, upon the holding of
a public hearing before the Zoning Board and approval by the Village
Board. Notice of the Public Hearing shall be given in the same manner as
is required in Chapter 14 for zoning variations. In addition, no exceptions
may be granted pursuant to this subparagraph 2 unless the Village is
provided with a Certificate of Necessity as set forth in subparagraph 1,
above, along with a sealed survey by a licensed surveyor showing the
location and height of the obstructing structures or vegetation. The
Certificate of Necessity shall provide clear proof, from the Engineer, that
the relief requested is the minimum necessary to accomplish the
applicant=s purpose and that unless the relief is granted, the signals to be
sent or received by this facility will be substantially impaired or obstructed
within the transceiving cell or service area. The Certificate of Necessity
shall also state that there is not another location reasonably available that
would require a lesser degree of exception, or no exception. For purposes
of this subparagraph 2 a mere differential in the cost of one location over
another shall not by itself meet the standard of not being Areasonably
available@ although a difference in cost may be considered along with
other factors. The applicant must also provide to the Village a written
affidavit detailing the efforts made by the applicant to fulfill the need for
this antenna with a structure requiring less than a 50% exception.
I. INSURANCE - The provider must tender to the Village of Lincolnshire, on an
annual basis, proof of public liability insurance covering the facility in an
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 7
amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00).
J. ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY=S - A distance of one-thousand feet (1,000') must be
maintained between personal wireless service facilities located in a road rightof-
way; whether local, state or federal. The applicant will be required to
demonstrate that this requirement has been satisfied. Personal wireless
service facilities in road right-of-ways will be required to conform to the
regulations of Section 6-16-2(C). Road right-of-ways are not zoned property,
however, all such right-of-ways will be regulated as though they are in singlefamily
residential districts, and will comply with all applicable sections of this
Chapter 16.
6-16-6: TEMPORARY FACILITIES:
Temporary personal wireless service facilities shall conform to all of the
setback and yard requirements of the district in which they are located, as well
as sections 6-16-5A & 6-16-5B of this code, relating to signage and lighting. A
temporary personal wireless service facility shall not exceed the height of the
facility previously approved for the property, or 100' in the case of a special
event. Only one temporary personal wireless service facility will be allowed per
site at any one time, unless the approved facility on the subject site allows for
co-location, in which case the permissible number of temporary facilities on
that site shall be the number approved for that facility. A temporary personal
wireless service facility must be located behind the front plane of any principal
structure that is on the lot. A temporary personal wireless service facility may
be allowed in single-family residential areas only in conformance with the
restrictions in this section and those in section 6-16-2C.
A request for a temporary personal wireless service facility may be granted
only by the Village Manager, or his designee, in such reasonable numbers and
with such reasonable conditions as the Manager or designee may deem
appropriate. Any request for additional time beyond that set forth in these
paragraphs (A) and (B) shall be subject to review by the Zoning Board and
approval of the Village Board.
A. Special Events - Temporary personal wireless service facilities shall be
permitted for each licensed provider for special events (temporary sporting or
entertainment events) of a period of not to exceed twelve (12) weeks in a three
(3) year time period.
B. Repairs & Equipment Upgrading - If a permanent personal wireless service
facility is under repair or equipment is being upgraded, a temporary facility shall
be permitted for each licensed provider for a period of up to ninety (90) days.
The owner of the facility must certify in writing the necessity for the repair or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-16: PERSONAL WIRELESS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 8
equipment upgrade.
6-16-7: ABANDONMENT & REMOVAL:
When a personal wireless service facility and related equipment is not operated
for the provision of personal wireless services for a continuous period of six (6)
months or more, such personal wireless service facility and related equipment
may be deemed to be abandoned by the Village. The owner of such personal
wireless service facility and related equipment shall remove such items within
forty-five (45) days following mailing of written notice that removal is required.
Such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to such owner at the last known address of such
owner. If two (2) or more providers of personal wireless services use the
personal wireless service facility or related equipment to provide personal
wireless services, then the period of non-use under this provision shall be
measured from the cessation of operation at the location of said personal
wireless service facility and related equipment by all such providers.
6-16-8: PROHIBITED PLACEMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITIES:
The relative location of properties zoned as commercial in the Village enables
a provider of personal wireless service to provide service to the Village without
the need to locate any such facilities on a lot used for residential purposes in
the R1, R2, R2A and R3 Zoning Districts. A personal wireless service facility
shall be considered a prohibited use on a lot used for residential purposes in
such zoning districts. No variation or Special Use Permit shall be granted to
permit such a facility on a lot used for residential purposes in these zoning
districts.
6-16-9: NON-CONFORMITIES:
Any personal wireless service facility installed and operating prior to the
enactment of this Chapter 16, which would be prohibited under Chapter 16,
shall be considered a legal non-conforming use and/or a legal non-conforming
structure, as the case may be, and shall be subject to the rules on nonconformities
provided in Chapter 13 of this Title 6. (Amd Ord. 06-2014-05, eff.
2/13/06)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
TITLE 6
CHAPTER 17
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Section:
6-17-1 Purpose and Intent
6-17-2 Definitions
6-17-3 General Wind Energy Systems Regulations
6-17-4 Micro Wind Energy Systems (MWES)
6-17-5 Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES)
6-17-6 Solar Energy Systems (SES)
6-17-7 Decommissioning and Restoration Plan (Abandonment and Removal)
6-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Purpose and Intent of this Chapter 17 is hereby declared:
A. To provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification
of alternative energy collection systems. The provisions of this Chapter shall
not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between the
various different companies that provide alternative energy collection systems.
To the extent that any provision or provisions of this Chapter are inconsistent
or in conflict with any other provision of this Title, the provisions of this Chapter
17 shall control.
B. To facilitate energy cost saving and economic opportunities for local residents
and businesses.
C. To promote the supply of alternative energy in support of increasing
sustainable energy production from renewable energy sources.
D. To establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation, location,
maintenance, installation, and decommissioning of alternative energy collection
systems to minimize their potentially adverse effects on the community.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 2
E. To preserve the aesthetics of the respective zoning districts for the purpose of
preserving property values and protecting the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare of the Village.
6-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
Alternative Energy
Collection System
Any above-ground device which captures wind or solar
energy to be converted into electricity or heat for public or
private use.
Blade The extended vanes of a Wind Turbine which move in a
circular direction caused by passing wind or connected
motor.
Decommission and
Restoration Plan
A report which outlines the plan and financing for removal
of an inoperable and/or abandoned alternative energy
collection system and restoration of disturbed land and
improvements caused by the installation and removal of
any such system.
FAA The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
Horizontal Axis Turbine A wind turbine that rotates on a horizontal axis, typically
with propeller blades. This definition includes reference to
the illustration of such turbine on this page for explanatory,
but not limiting, purposes.
Monopole Tower A single pole structure that supports a Wind Turbine,
without the use of guy wires or similar support system.
Micro Wind Energy
System (MWES)
A wind powered mechanical energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine component, support tower, and
associated control or conversion electronics which is
professionally manufactured and installed and intended for
small, private use purposes.
Off-Grid An Alternative Energy Collection System that is not
connected to the utility electric grid.
Rotor Diameter The measurement of blade rotation which is formulated by
a straight line passing through the center of the circular
path of blade travel and terminating at the periphery. This
definition includes reference to the illustration of such
measurement on this page for explanatory, but not limiting,
purposes.
Shadow Flicker The on-and-off strobe light effect caused by the shadow of
moving turbine blades cast by the sun passing through the
rotating turbine.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 3
Small Wind Energy
System (SWES)
A wind powered mechanical energy conversion system
consisting of a wind
turbine component, support tower, and associated control
or conversion electronics which is professionally
manufactured and installed, and operated in any nonresidential
development or multi-family residential
development.
Solar Panel A panel containing solar cells or heat-absorbing plates
which convert and/or collect and store sunlight into heat or
electricity.
Solar Energy System
(SES)
A professionally manufactured system which uses solar
panels made of solar cells, heat-absorbing plates or other
elements to convert sunlight directly into electricity or for
electric storage and use.
Sun Reflection The return of light after striking any portion of an Alternative
Energy Collection System, also referred to as GLARE.
Total extended Height The height above grade to the highest point of travel of a
Wind Turbine.
Tower Height The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind turbine itself.
Vertical Axis Turbine A wind turbine that rotates on a vertical axis with blades
forming a spiral or helical shape. This definition includes
reference to the illustration of such turbine on this page for
explanatory, but not limiting, purposes.
Wind Turbine A machine having a rotor, usually with vanes or blades
mounted horizontally or vertically, driven by the wind for the
purposes of converting wind into electricity for public or
private use.
6-17-3: GENERAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS REGULATIONS
A. GENERAL: A Micro Wind Energy Collection System (MWES) and Small Wind
Energy System (SWES), as referenced in Section 6-17-2, may be erected or
installed only in accordance with this Title 6, Chapter 17 of the Village Code
and conform to all Federal laws and regulations, as amended from time to
time, concerning its use and operation, and shall be further subject to the
following standards:
1. Shall be installed primarily for the production and consumption of energy
on the parcel upon which it is installed; energy produced in excess of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 4
consumption may be sold back to the electric utility service provider that
serves the proposed site for use with the existing energy grid.
2. Shall be finished in a non-reflective color to prevent Sun Reflection. The
exterior color shall be camouflaged so as to blend into the surroundings to
such an extent to be unobtrusive to the casual observer.
3. Shall not have any advertisement material, writing, picture, or signage
other than warning notification(s) and/or equipment identification.
4. All wiring between a Wind Turbine and the principal structure shall be
underground or contained within conduit which matches the principal
building materials and shall conform to Title 5, Chapter 4 of the Village
Code.
5. No habitable portion of an existing adjacent structure shall be subject to
Shadow Flicker from a Wind Turbine, unless mitigation has taken place
and has been agreed upon by the owner/operator and neighboring
property owner(s). Shadow Flicker onto an adjacent roof and/or exterior
wall which does not contain any windows, doors, and like openings shall
be acceptable. Such mitigation agreement must be recorded with the
Lake County Recorder=s Office with a copy provided to the Village=s
Department of Community Development. If no such mitigation agreement
has been established, the operation of an Alternative Energy Collection
System shall cease during those times which cause the Shadow Flicker.
This requirement shall apply even where the adjacent property affected
by Shadow Flicker is under common ownership at the time of
construction, provided that in lieu of a mitigation agreement the owner
shall record a notice, in the form described in Appendix A, against the
adjacent commonly owned parcels affected by the Shadow Flicker.
6. No portion of an Alternative Energy Collection System shall be artificially
illuminated except to the extent required by the FAA or other applicable
authority.
7. Any Free-Standing Alternative Energy Collection System shall be
protected against unauthorized access by the public and no climbing foot
pegs or rungs shall be permitted below twelve feet (12=) to prevent
unauthorized climbing.
8. Shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants shall submit
certificates of design compliance that manufacturer=s have obtained from
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 5
Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Det Norske Vertias (DNV), Germanischer
Lloyed Wind Energie (GL), or an equivalent third party.
9. Shall be equipped with manual and/or automatic controls and mechanical
brakes to limit rotation of blades to a speed below the manufacturers
designed limits. A licensed professional engineer or authorized factory
representative must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design
and fabrication conform to good engineering practices. No changes or
alterations from the certified design shall be permitted unless
accompanied by a licensed professional engineer=s or authorized factory
representative=s statement of certification.
B. PERMITS: No such Micro Wind Energy Collection System (MWES) and Small
Wind Energy System (SWES), as referenced in Section 6-17-2, shall be
erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a building
permit from the Department of Community Development. An application for a
building permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Department of
Community Development, signed by the Applicant, and contain or have
attached thereto the following information:
1. Name of person, firm, corporation or association constructing and
erecting the wind energy system.
2. Site plan showing the location of the wind energy system upon the lot and
copies of the manufacturer=s specifications for the wind energy system.
3. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the name of
a responsible party in the case of corporate applications.
4. Written consent of the owner of the building structure or land on which the
wind energy system is to be erected.
5. Elevation(s) of the existing structural improvements and the proposed
wind energy system showing the size and design details of the Wind
Turbine and the Total Extended Height above grade.
6. Evidence that the electric utility service provider that serves the proposed
site has been notified of the owner=s intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned electricity generator. Off-grid wind energy systems shall
be exempt from this requirement.
7. Four (4) sets of plans and specifications showing the method of
construction, location, support, and attachment to the ground or structure.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 6
8. If required by the Department of Community Development, a copy of
stress sheets and calculations prepared by a professional engineer
licensed by the State of Illinois showing that the wind energy system is
designed for the deadload and wind pressure in any direction, in the
amount required by the manufacturer and all other laws and ordinances
of the Village Code.
9. A line drawing of the electrical components, as supplied by the
manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
manner of installation conforms to the Village Code.
10. Such other information that the Department of Community Development
shall require to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of
the Village.
11. Every wind energy system must be accompanied with a written
certification of a professional engineer licensed by the State of Illinois that
the structure upon which the facility is located is sufficient from a
structural engineering standpoint to bear the load. Free-standing wind
energy systems shall include a certificate that the foundation on which the
structure is built is constructed and engineered to take into account the
existing soil conditions. The professional engineer shall also certify that in
the event of a fall or collapse, that the facility is designed and
manufactured to fall entirely within the boundary lines of the lot on which it
is located and that installation meets or exceeds the minimum
construction and installation standards set forth by the manufacturer.
6-17-4: MICRO WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (MWES)
Micro Wind Energy Collection System (MWES), as referenced in Section 6-17-
2, may be erected or installed only in accordance with this Title 6, Chapter 17
of the Village Code and shall be further subject to the following standards:
A. Sound levels shall not exceed forty-five decibels (45 dB(A)) as measured at a
height of five feet (5=) directly above the adjoining property lines during
operation.
B. BUILDING-MOUNTED MWES:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 7
1. Shall be permitted in the R1, R2, R2A, R3, R4, and R5 Zoning Districts
and limited to one (1) Vertical Axis Turbine or one (1) Horizontal Axis
Turbine with a maximum Rotor Diameter of ten feet (10=).
a. The Wind Turbine shall be permitted to extend a maximum of
five feet (5=) above the principal structure.
b. May be mounted onto the roof or structurally attached to the side
of the principal structure, and shall not extend into the required
building setbacks.
2. Shall be permitted in the B1, B2, E, and O/I Zoning Districts, subject to
review by the Architectural Review Board and limited to one (1) Vertical
Axis Turbine or one (1) Horizontal Axis Turbine with a maximum rotor
diameter of ten feet (10=).
a. The Wind Turbine shall be permitted to extend a maximum of
twenty feet (20=) above the principal structure, or the maximum
structure height permitted by the zoning district in which the
facility is located, whichever is less.
b. May be mounted onto the roof or structurally attached to the side
of the principal structure, and shall not extend into the required
building setbacks.
C. FREE-STANDING MWES:
1. Shall be permitted only as a Special Use for authorized non-residential
uses in R1 Zoning District with a minimum lot size of twenty (20) acres.
2. Shall be permitted in the B1, B2, E, and O/I Zoning Districts only as a
Special Use and subject to review by the Architectural Review Board and
approved or denied by the Village Board.
3. Shall be limited to one (1) Vertical Axis Turbine or one (1) Horizontal Axis
Turbine with a maximum Rotor Diameter of ten feet (10=) with a monopole
tower.
4. SETBACKS:
a. At no point shall a free-standing MWES be permitted within the
front yard or project beyond the front plane of the principal
structure.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 8
b. The base of the tower of a free-standing MWES shall be located
a minimum distance equal to the Total Extended Height from all
side, corner side, and rear property lines. A MWES may be
allowed closer to a side or rear property line than its Total
Extended Height provided the abutting property owner(s) grant
written permission, which must be recorded with the Lake
County Recorder=s Office, with a copy provided to the
Department of Community Development. This requirement shall
apply even where the adjacent property owner affected by the
Total Extended Height is under common ownership at the time of
installation.
5. HEIGHT:
a. Shall be permitted to extend a maximum of twenty feet (20=)
above the principal structure, or shall be subject to the maximum
structure height permitted by the zoning district in which the
facility is located, whichever is less.
D COMPLIANCE: Every MWES must maintain compliance with the plans and
specifications approved by the permit. If a MWES becomes non-compliant
with approved plans and specifications due to, but not limited to: discoloration,
cracking, missing components, rusting, settling, damage or general disrepair;
then the owner/operator of the MWES and the owner of the building or lot on
which the MWES is located will be jointly and severally responsible for
remedying the specific non-conformities. These non-conformities must be
remedied within forty-five (45) days after receipt of written notice sent by the
Village to the owner/operator of the MWES and the owner of the building or lot.
Failure to remedy all of the cited non-conformities, within the forty-five (45) day
time period, shall be subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine
Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
6-17-5 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES)
As referenced in Section 6-17-2, may be erected or installed only in
accordance with the Title 6, Chapter 17 of the Village Code and shall be further
subject to the following standards:
A. Shall be permitted in the R4, R5, B1, B2, E, and O/I Zoning Districts only as a
Special Use and subject to review by the Architectural Review Board and
approval or denial by the Village Board.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 9
B. Shall be limited to one (1) Vertical Axis Turbine or one (1) Horizontal Axis
Turbine with a Monopole Tower, with a Rotor Diameter greater than ten feet
(10=).
C. Sound levels shall not exceed fifty-five decibels (55 dB(A)) as measured at a
height of five feet (5=) directly above any adjoining property line. Sound levels
from an SWES which abuts a residence shall not exceed forty-five decibels (45
dB(A)), as measured at a height of five feet (5=) directly above the adjoining
property line.
D. Ground-mounted equipment shall be screened pursuant to Section 6-15-5-B-2.
E. SETBACKS/LOCATION
1. At no point shall a free-standing SWES be permitted within the front yard
or project beyond the front plane of the principal structure.
2. A SWES may be attached to an existing principal structure, provided all
minimum yard requirements applicable to the principal structure are also
satisfied for the SWES.
3. The base of the tower of a free-standing SWES shall be located a
minimum distance equal to the Total Extended Height of the SWES from
all side, corner side, and rear property lines. A SWES may be allowed
closer to a side or rear property line than its Total Extended Height
provided the abutting property owner(s) grant written permission, which
must be recorded with the Lake County Recorder=s Office, with a copy
provided to the Department of Community Development. This
requirement shall apply even where the adjacent property affected by the
Total Extended Height is under common ownership at the time of
installation.
4. At no point shall a SWES be located within any required yards.
5. Any SWES which abuts a residence shall be located a minimum distance
equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of its Total Extended
Height, as measured from the base of the tower to the nearest abutting
residence property line.
6. Any SWES shall be located a minimum distance equal to the Total
Extended Height from the nearest above ground public utility lines and/or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 10
Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facility, as measured from the
base of each.
F. HEIGHT
1. The Wind Turbine shall be permitted to extend a maximum of twenty feet
(20=) above the principal structure, or shall be subject to the maximum
structure height permitted by the zoning district in which the facility is
located, whichever is less.
1. The lowest point of the arc of the blade of a SWES shall have a minimum
ground clearance of twenty feet (20=) from grade.
2. Height Exceptions: If an Applicant desires a height exception greater than
the maximum permitted height for the zoning district in which the SWES
is located, the Applicant shall file a Certificate of Necessity executed by a
licensed professional engineer acceptable to the Village and not in the
employ of the Applicant. The holding of a public hearing before the
Zoning Board and approval by the Village Board shall be required. Notice
of a public hearing shall be given in the same manner as is required in
Chapter 14 of this Title 6 for Zoning Variations. The Certificate of
Necessity shall provide a statement, from the engineer, that the relief
requested is the minimum necessary to accomplish the Applicant=s
purpose and that unless relief is granted, the wind to be received by this
system will be substantially impaired or obstructed within the selected
installation area. In addition, no exceptions may be granted pursuant to
this subparagraph unless a sealed survey by a licensed surveyor is
submitted along with the Certificate of Necessity showing the location and
height of the obstructing structures or vegetation and its effects on wind
and turbulence.
3. Compliance Reports: Any SWES for which a height exception is
necessary that exceeds the maximum building height permitted for the
zoning district in which a SWES is located must submit the following
compliance reports contemporaneously with the holding of a public
hearing for a height exception described is subparagraph 3 above:
a. The Applicant shall file a certificate of compliance that no portion
of a SWES will project above any airspace surfaces described by
the FAA guidance on airspace protection or that it shall be
permitted and illuminated in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 11
b. A wildlife study shall be conducted by a qualified professional not
in the employ of the Applicant, such as an ornithologist or wildlife
biologist, to determine if there is any potential impact the SWES
may present to migratory birds and wildlife species. In cases
where the wildlife study indicates that a protected natural
resource will be adversely affected by an SWES, the Village shall
consult with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR),
in accordance with Title 17 of the Illinois Administrative Code
Part 1075, to determine whether the protective measures
outlined in the study are deemed acceptable. A final decision on
the application shall not be made until such consultation with
IDNR is resolved.
G. COMPLIANCE: Every SWES must maintain compliance with the plans and
specifications approved by the Village Board of Trustees. If a SWES becomes
non-compliant with approved plans and specifications due to, but not limited to:
discoloration, cracking, missing components, rusting, settling, damage or
general disrepair; then the owner/operator of the SWES and the owner of the
building or lot on which the SWES is located will be jointly and severally
responsible for remedying the specific non-conformities. These nonconformities
must be remedied within forty-five (45) days after receipt of written
notice sent by the Village to the owner/operator of the SWES and the owner of
the building or lot. Failure to remedy all of the cited non-conformities, within
the forty-five (45) day time period, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
the amount described per day that the violation continues, pursuant to Chapter
4 of Title 1 of the Village Code.
H. ENGINEERING CERTIFICATION: No SWES may be located within the Village
unless the Applicant has provided to the Village the written certification of a
professional engineer licensed by the State of Illinois that the structure upon
which the facility is located is sufficient from a structure engineering standpoint
to bear the load. In instances of free-standing structures, this shall include a
certificate that the foundation on which the structure is built, is constructed and
engineered to take into account the existing soil conditions. A licensed
professional engineer shall also certify that in the event of a fall or collapse,
that the facility is designed and manufactured to fall entirely within the
boundary lines of the lot on which it is located, and that installation meets or
exceeds the maximum construction and installation standards set forth by the
manufacturer.
6-17-6: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS (SES)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 12
A. GENERAL REGULATIONS: A Solar Energy System (SES), as referenced in
Section 6-17-2, may be erected or installed only in accordance with this Title 6,
Chapter 17 of the Village Code. Any SES shall conform to all Federal laws and
regulations concerning its use and operation, and may be installed only in the
following zoning districts and standards:
1. Shall be permitted in the R1, R2, R2A, and R3 Zoning Districts. Any
attached single-family residential development and mixed-use
development which contains residential housing units shall require review
by the Architectural Review Board prior to being approved or denied by
the Village Board.
2. Shall be permitted in the R4, R5, R6, B1, B2, E, and O/I Zoning Districts,
subject to review by the Architectural Review Board prior to being
approved or denied by the Village Board.
B. PERMITS: No such Solar Energy System (SES), as referenced in Section 6-
17-2, shall be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a
building permit from the Department of Community Development. An
application for a building permit shall be made upon forms provided by the
Department of Community Development, signed by the Applicant, and contain
or have attached thereto the following information:
1. Name of person, firm, corporation or association constructing and
erecting the solar energy system.
2. Site plan showing the location of the solar energy system upon the lot and
copies of the manufacturer=s specification for the solar energy system.
3. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the name of
a responsible party in the case of corporate applications.
4. Written consent of the owner of the building structure or land on which the
solar energy system is to be erected.
5. Elevation(s) of the existing structural improvements and the proposed
solar energy system showing the size and design details.
6. Four (4) sets of plans and specifications showing the method of
construction, location, support, and attachment to the structure.
7. If required by the Department of Community Development, a copy of
stress sheets and calculations prepared by a licensed professional
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 13
engineer showing that the solar energy system is designed for the
deadload, in the amount required by the manufacturer and all other laws
and ordinances of the Village.
8. A line drawing of the electrical components, as supplied by the
manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
manner of installation conforms to the Village Code.
9. Such other information that the Department of Community Development
shall require to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of
the Village.
C. PLACEMENT OF SES:
1. Shall be limited to roof-mounted installations on a permitted structure,
provided that the installation method shall be compatible and harmonious
with the aesthetic qualities of the structure to which the device is attached
so as to not abruptly alter the architectural character of the structure.
a. Shall be attached directly to the exterior of the roof structure to
ensure the lowest profile permissible. All components of the
SES shall not extend above the maximum building height
permitted by the zoning district and beyond the existing limits of
the roof.
c. No component of the SES, including mounting racks, shall be
permitted to tilt or rotate at a slope greater or less than the roof
to which the device is attached.
d. Shall be designed and installed to prohibit Sun Reflection
towards vehicular traffic and any habitable portion of an adjacent
structure. Sun Reflection onto an adjacent roof shall be
acceptable.
e. Shall occupy not more than fifty-percent (50%) of the outside
roof area to which the device is attached. If an SES is installed
on multiple roofs on a single structure, the SES shall occupy not
more than thirty-percent (30%) of each outside roof area to
which the device is attached.
f. With the exception of Solar Panels, mounting racks, pipe runs,
and electrical wire connections, no portion of an SES shall be
installed on the outside of the roof.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 14
g. No trees or vegetation shall be removed or pruned to reduce or
eliminate shading from the sun, unless warranted for good
forestry practices, as determined by the Village Forester.
6-17-7: DECOMMISSIONING AND RESTORATION PLAN:
A. MICRO WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (MWES) AND SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEMS (SES): When a MWES or SES is not operated for a continuous
period of at least nine (9) months, such Alternative Energy Collection System
and all related equipment shall be deemed abandoned by the Village. The
owner of such Alternative Energy Collection System shall remove all items
within forty-five (45) days following receipt of written notification that removal is
required. Such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to such owner at the last known address of
such owner. A principal structure or lot for sale, lease, or in foreclosure may
be exempt, provided that the MWES and/or SES are maintained pursuant to
this Title 6, Chapter 17 of the Village Code.
B. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES)
1. Prior to receiving a Special Use Permit for the installation of a SWES, the
owner and/or operator must include a Decommissioning and Restoration
Plan with the application request to ensure such Alternative Energy
Collection System and all related equipment is property decommissioned.
The owner of the SWES and the underlying property owner(s) shall be
jointly liable for the removal of all equipment associated with the SWES at
the end of the Special Use permit period, if any, the useful life of the
facility, or when the facility is abandoned or otherwise out of operation for
continuous period of at least nine (9) months. The Decommissioning and
Restoration Plan shall state how the facility will be decommissioned and
how the site will be restored, and shall further provide:
a. Provisions for removal of the SWES and all related equipment,
including those below the soil surface.
b. Provisions for the restoration of the property and improvements
upon completion of the decommissioning of the Alternative
Energy Collection System and all related equipment.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 15
c. An estimated cost of decommissioning certified by a licensed
professional engineer and the financial resources to be used to
accomplish decommissioning.
d. The Village is granted the right of entry onto the site, pursuant to
reasonable notice and, upon request, a prompt due process
hearing, to effect or complete decommissioning and/or
restoration.
2. All SWES which remain erected more than nine (9) months after the end
of the Special Use permit period, if any, the useful life of the facility, or the
facility is abandoned or otherwise out of operation shall be deemed a
nuisance.
3. Lien on Costs of Removal
a. If the Village incurs any costs to enforce or perform the
Applicant=s Decommissioning and Restoration Plan, then that
cost is a lien upon that underlying parcel.
b. To perfect a lien under this section, the Village must, within one
year after the cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the Office of
the Lake County Recorder. The notice must consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
i. A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently
identifies the parcel;
ii. The amount of the removal cost; and
iii. The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by
the Village.
If, for any one parcel, the Village engaged in any
enforcement activity or performed plan activities on more
than one occasion during the course of one year, then the
Village may combine any or all of the costs of each of those
activities into a single notice of lien.
c. The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail, to the
Applicant and the person to whom received the tax bill for the
general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 16
preceding the removal activities. The notice must (i) state the
substance of this section; (ii) identify the underlying parcel, by
common description; and (iii) describe the Village=s activity.
d. A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action
to foreclose a lien under this section must be commenced within
2 years after the date of filing notice of lien.
e. A failure to file a foreclosure action does not, in any way, affect
the validity of the lien against the underlying parcel.
f. Upon payment of the lien cost by the Applicant or owner of the
underlying parcel after notice of lien has been filed, the Village
shall release the lien, and the release may be filed of record by
the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of filing
notice of lien.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 17
APPENDIX A
NOTICE OF SHADOW FLICKER
SEE ATTACHED FORM
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 18
Prepared By and
After recording, return to:
Village of Lincolnshire
Attn: Community Development
One Olde Half Day Road
Lincolnshire, Illinois 60069
File No. ___________________
NOTICE OF SHADOW FLICKER
The undersigned, being the owner of the real property commonly known as
___________________________________, more fully described in Exhibit A attached
hereto and incorporated by reference (the AServient Property@), hereby gives notice that the
subject property suffers from a condition commonly known as AShadow Flicker,@ the onand-
off strobe light effect caused by the shadow of moving turbine blades cast by the sun
passing through the rotating turbine. The Shadow Flicker arises from the presence of a
Wind Turbine located on the property commonly known as
___________________________________________, and more fully described in Exhibit
B, attached hereto and incorporated by reference (the ADominant Property@); which at the
time of the recording of this notice is under common ownership with the subject property.
Upon the transfer of title of the Servient Property to an unaffiliated, bona fide good
faith purchaser, the owner of the Dominant Property shall be required to negotiate a
Amitigation agreement@ pursuant to the provisions of Title 6, Chapter 17 of the Village of
Lincolnshire Municipal Code, which Agreement shall be recorded with the Lake County
This space reserved for Recorder's use only.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 6-17: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 19
Recorder. Following presentation of evidence of recording a mitigation agreement, the
Village of Lincolnshire shall issue a release of this Notice of Shadow Flicker. Absent a
mitigation agreement, the operation of the Wind Turbine shall cease during those times
which result in Shadow Flicker.
OWNER:
[INSERT IDENTITY OF FEE SIMPLE OWNER]
__________________________________
By:
Its:
Date:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) ss
COUNTY OF LAKE )
I, ________________________________, a Notary Public in and for said County in the
State aforesaid, do hereby certify that ____________________________________ who is
personally known to me as _________________of ___________________ and to be the
same person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such, appeared
before me this day in person and acknowledged that he/she signed, sealed, and delivered
the said instrument of writing as his/her free and voluntary act, and as the free and
voluntary act of said ________________ for the uses and purposes therein set forth,
pursuant to authority given by the ___________________ of said
_____________________.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal on ________________________________.
____________________________________
Notary Public
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Title
7-1-2: Purpose
7-1-3: Jurisdiction
7-1-4: Definitions
7-1-5: Acreage Fees
7-1-5A: Conservancy Area Monuments
7-1-6: Subdivision Improvement Deposit
7-1-7: Insurance, Legal Responsibility and Public Safety
7-1-8: Variations
7-1-9: Penalties
7-1-10: Separability
7-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as THE LINCOLNSHIRE
SUBDIVISION CODE.1
7-1-2: PURPOSE:
This Code regulating the subdivision of land is hereby made a part of the
Official Plan of Lincolnshire and contiguous area. It is to provide for the
harmonious development of the Village and its environs; for the coordination of
streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets; to
establish design and construction standards for the subdivision improvements;
for the dedication and acceptance of land required for schools, parks,
playgrounds, and other public uses; for the preparation of subdivision plans
and the procedure for the submittal, approval, and recording of subdivision
plats in and about the Village in accordance with the authority vested in the
municipality under the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code.1
1Ordinance 75-414-44 re-enacted and repassed the Lincolnshire Subdivision Code as amended.
165 ILCS 5/11-15-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 2
7-1-3: JURISDICTION:
Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the
incorporated limits of the Village or up to one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond
the incorporated boundary of the Village, the subdivider thereof or his agent
shall submit both a preliminary plan and a final subdivision plat to the Village.
Said plans and plats, proposed improvements, and all procedure relating
thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations hereafter
contained in this Code.
All lands offered to the Village for use as streets, highways, alleys, parks and
other public use, shall be referred to the Lincolnshire Plan Commission for
review and recommendation before being accepted by the Village Board or by
any other governing authority. (Ord. 66-142-4)
The provisions of this Code shall also apply to all planned unit developments
whether residential, commercial, industrial or any combination thereof, and to
any and all other developments whether a subdivision is required or not under
the laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governmental body or
agency having jurisdiction or control, and regardless of whether the same is
labeled a subdivision or not, it being the intent of this Code to apply to all types
of development, both within the Village of Lincolnshire and to areas lying within
one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 83-
784-38)
7-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
ACCEPTED PUBLIC STREET Any street duly accepted by the Board of Trustees of
the Village for maintenance by said Village.
ALLEY A right of way, with a width
not exceeding twenty four feet (24') which affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
APPROVED STREET Any street, whether public or private, meeting
standards and specifications of the Village.
BUILDING L INE A line within a lot or other
parcel of land, so designated on the plat of the
proposed subdivision.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 3
BUILDING SEWER The horizontal pipe extending from the sanitary sewer
main to the building.
COLLECTOR STREET Those existing streets designated as such on the
Official (Secondary Street) Plan of the Village and
streets proposed as collector streets in new
subdivisions which are designed with a right of way of
eighty feet (80'), for access of traffic from several minor
streets to a major street.
CROSSWALKWAYS A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is
reserved across a block to provide pedestrian access
to adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC A street having one open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
EASEMENT A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of
land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain
person or persons for a specific purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT The drawings and documents described in Chapter 4
of this Title.
FRONTAGE All the property on one side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured
along the line of the street, or if the street is deadended,
then all the property abutting on one side
between an inter-secting street and the dead-end of
the street.
FRONTAGE ROAD A public or private marginal access roadway or paved
parking lot containing the necessary driveways or
trafficways which are located along the frontage
property, with regulations for purposes of establishing
minimum distances between points of access to the
accepted street, and eliminating parking of motor
vehicles on the accepted public street.
IMPROVEMENT Any improvement for which the Village or other
municipal body may ultimately accept a dedication or
bill of sale and assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, including but not limited to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 4
the following; streets, sanitary sewers, water mains,
storm sewers, street lighting, or which is constructed
for general public use or benefit, including the
landscaping required by Title 13, Chapter 2 (Ord. 15-
3370-97).
INDUSTRIAL STREET Any street included in any subdivision or plot of ground
to be used for industrial purposes as defined in the
Zoning Code of the Village.1
1See Title 6 of this Village Code.
INTERSECTION, STREET The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2)
highways which join one another at, or approximately
at right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other
angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes
two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided
highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded
as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing of
two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded
as a separate intersection.
LOT A parcel of land in a subdivision separated from other
parcels or portions by virtue of a plat of subdivision
recorded with the appropriate county office and
identifiable by reference to said plat of subdivision and
not dependent for such identification by metes and
bounds.
MAJOR STREET See "Primary Street".
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET A street which is parallel to and adjacent to primary
streets and highways and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection to local traffic from
fast, through-moving traffic on the primary streets.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 5
MINOR STREET A street intended primarily as access to abutting the
properties.
NATURAL OUTLET Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
OWNER The individuals, firms, associations, syndicates, copartnerships,
corporations, trusts, or any other legal
entities having sufficient proprietary interest of record in
the land sought to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the
Statutes of the State of Illinois or under the codes and
ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 79-581-28)
PHASED DEVELOPMENT Generally a large comprehensive development wherein
the developer has sought and obtained Village
approval of the developer's project in two (2) or more
separate and distinct phases or units with actual
development of such separate phases or units taking
place at different time intervals and where such
separate phases or units have been designated and
consecutively numbered on the approved development
plans. (Ord. 86-905-42)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or
more principal buildings, and which is at least twenty
(20) acres in area.
PLAT A map, drawing, or chart on which the sub-divider's
plans of the subdivision are presented and which he
submits for approval and intends to record in final form.
PONDlNG The creation of pockets or depressions which have no
surface drainage provided and which, in the event of a
failure on the part of inlets or storm sewers, will contain
standing water. That portion of surface waters which
are flowing will not be considered as ponding.
POTABLE WATER Water from a public or private water supply system
which is approved and accepted by proper and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 6
qualified authority as suitable for human consumption.
PRELIMINARY PLAN The drawings and documents described in Chapter 3
of this Title.
PRIMARY STREET (Major A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
Street) intended to serve as a major traffic artery between the
various sections of the Lincolnshire area, as shown on
the General Development Plan, made a part of the
Official Plan.
PUBLIC AGENCY Any public board created by authority of the Illinois
Revised Statutes.
PUBLIC STREET All primary, secondary and minor streets which are
shown on the subdivision plat and are to be dedicated
for public use.
ROADWAY or ROAD Wherever the words "road" or "roadway" are used in
this case, they shall be deemed the paved area
existing on the street right of way and not the street
right-of-way width.
SANITARY SEWER A pipe which carries sewage only, excluding storm,
surface and ground water.
SEPTIC TANK A watertight receptacle provided for the purpose of
sewage disposal where no public sewage system is
available.
SEWAGE The water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE ANALYSIS A. B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20 C),
expressed in parts per million by weight.
B. pH. The logarithms of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen in grams per liter of solution.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 7
STREET A publicly dedicated right of way not less than fifty feet
(50') in width or a permanently reserved easement of
access approved by the Board of Trustees, which
affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER Any individuals, firms, associations, syndicates,
corporations, copartner-ships, trusts, or other legal
entities commencing proceedings under this Code to
effect a subdivision of land. (Ord. 66-142-4)
SUBDIVISION The division of land into two (2) or more parts, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or building development, including all public
streets; alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds
and all the tracts, parcels or blocks, and numbering of
all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive numbers,
giving their precise dimensions. The term includes
resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided. The following subparagraphs A through D,
inclusive, shall not be considered a subdivision and
shall be exempt from the requirements of this Title.
A. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests
therein for use as right of way for railroads or other
public utility facilities which does not involve any new
streets or easements of access.
B. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or
other public utility which does not involve any new
streets or easements of access.
C. The conveyance of land for highway or other public
purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the
dedication of land for public use or instruments relating
to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
D. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior
conveyances.
All planned unit developments and any and all other
developments granted under the provisions of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 8
Lincolnshire Zoning Code shall also be considered and
deemed to be subdivisions for all the purposes of this
Subdivision Code and shall be under the jurisdiction of
this Subdivision Code, except where the con-text
clearly indicates otherwise, and all required public
improvements provided for in this Code shall be
required in said planned unit develop- ments except as
may otherwise be provided for in the Village
ordinances granting the special use for any such
planned unit developments and any and all other
developments.
All planned unit developments and any and all other
developments in unincorporated Lake County shall
also be considered and deemed to be subdivisions for
all the purposes of this Subdivision Code and shall be
under the jurisdiction of this Subdivision Code if any
portion of any such planned unit development and any
and all other developments are within one and one-half
(1-1/2) miles of the Village's boundaries. (Ord. 91-
1191-04)
SUSPENDED SOLIDS Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquid, and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermit-tently.
7-1-5: ACREAGE FEES:
A. Prior to the final approval of a subdivision, the subdivider shall pay the fee as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code to the Village to provide for the eventual improvement and
expansion of Village services because of the additional load placed on
operations, maintenance and administration of police service, streets, parks
maintenance, general Village service and water and sewer service. Such
acreage/impact fees shall be deposited in and to the credit of the General
Corporate Fund of the Village. (Ord. 80-601-08) (Amd. Ord. 96-1468-52 eff.
12/9/96)
B. The acreage fees required by this Section shall be in addition to all other fees,
licenses, permits or charges imposed by this or any other code or ordinance of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 9
the Village. (Ord. 75-396-25)
7-1-5A: CONSERVANCY AREA MONUMENTS:
Each corner and point of tangency of the deed restricted area on each lot shall
be identified by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer
of the State of Illinois with a monument marked "CONSERVANCY AREA".
Each monument shall be furnished by the Village at cost as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. All
markers for any subdivision or phase must be purchased prior to recording of
the plat of subdivision.
The penalty for removing, tampering with in any way, damaging or destroying
conservancy area monuments shall be subject to the fine set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1 per monument
plus the cost of re-establishing the conservancy area monuments. (Ord. 88-
1009-41) (Amd. Ord. 96-1468-52 eff. 12/9/96) (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff.
3/22/10)
7-1-6: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT DEPOSIT:
A. Purpose of Deposit: The subdivision improvement deposit in an amount equal
to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of
improvements required under this Code1 and Title 13, Chapter 2 shall be
placed in escrow in accordance with the terms of the escrow agreement
contained in Appendix I (at the end of this Title) for the purpose of:
1. To pay the actual costs of construction of the subdivision improvements.
2. To pay the engineering and inspection fees of the Village relating to the
public improvements and the subdivision.
3. To pay the cost of maintaining the subdivision improvements for a period
of three (3) years after acceptance.
4. To pay and discharge all claims made by any third party arising out of the
installation and construction of the public improvements; all such claims
must be paid prior to the Village's acceptance of the public improvements;
1See Chapter 6 of this Title.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 10
provided, however, that if the subdivider has insurance coverage in
sufficient amounts to pay such claims and the subdivider files with the
Village the insurance company's letter indicating that they acknowledge
coverage and accept defense of the claim and that the limits of the policy
are satisfactory to pay the claim if judgment: is entered in favor of said
third party, the Village may, in its discretion, accept the public
improvements and reduce the amount of the subdivision improvement
deposit for the required three (3) year maintenance period.
5. Any other customary expenses of the developer in meeting any
requirements of the Village pertaining to the subdivision, including but not
limited to reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Village in drafting,
administering and enforcing the subdivision improvement deposit
agreement.
B. Alternative Action; Distribution of Funds: A subdivider may elect to deposit an
amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost
of improvements directly with the Village. The Village, upon the certification of
the Village Engineer that the improvements have been completed or partially
completed, will pay to the contractor, in not more than three (3) payouts, the
amount due under the contract. The Village will also make the distribution of
funds from the deposit for the fees and cost of:
1. Engineering and inspection fees of the Village relating to the public
improvements and the subdivision.
2. Maintaining the subdivision improvements for a period of three (3) years
after acceptance.
3. To pay and discharge all claims made by any third party arising out of the
installation and construction of the public improvements; all such claims
must be paid prior to the Village's acceptance of the public improvements;
provided, however, that if the subdivider has insurance coverage in
sufficient amounts to pay such claims and the subdivider files with the
Village the insurance company's letter indicating that they acknowledge
coverage and accept defense of the claim and that the limits of the policy
are satisfactory to pay the claim if Judgment is entered in favor of said
third party, the Village may, in its discretion, accept the public
improvements and reduce the amount of the subdivision improvement
deposit for the required three (3) year maintenance period.
4. Any other costs or expenses in meeting the requirements of the Village,
including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 11
Village in drafting, administering and enforcing the subdivision
improvement deposit agreement. Nothing in this subsection 7-1-6B will
relieve the subdivider of bearing the full cost for the subdivision
improvements and expenses required by the Village. (Ord. 79-581-28)
C. Refunding Deposit: After completion and acceptance of the subdivision
improvements, the Village will authorize the refund of any residue remaining
except for ten percent (10%) of the original deposit or the amount stipulated in
the escrow agreement. The retained amount shall be used for maintenance of
the Improvements for a period of three (3) years after the date of acceptance
and then any balance remaining will be refunded. (Ord. 66-142-4; amd. Ord.
82-734-41)
D. Form of Deposit: The subdivision improvement deposit shall be posted by such
owner or subdivider with the Village Clerk prior to approval of the final plat.
Such deposit shall be in the form of an irrevocable straight commercial letter of
credit from a bank approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and shall be
in a penal sum in an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%)
of the estimated cost of the subdivision improvements required under this
Code or, in lieu of a letter of credit, a deposit of cash must be acceptable to the
Mayor and Board of Trustees, including a completion bond, or its equivalent.
The subdivision Improvement deposit shall be established for a period of not
less than three (3) years and may be reduced from time to time by the Village
Engineer as the subdivision improvements are accepted by the Village. Any
such deposit in lieu of a letter of credit or cash, or other security or guarantee
must; be acceptable to the Mayor and Board of Trustees in their sole
discretion. Any irrevocable letter of credit shall be substantially in the form
contained in Appendix II (Chapter 7 of Title 7). In the event such deposit in lieu
of a letter of credit or cash is accepted, the owner or subdivider shall reimburse
the Village, prior to and as a condition of the Village Clerk's execution of the
subdivision plat, for all of Village's expenses, legal and otherwise, directly or
indirectly resulting from such deposit in lieu of a letter of credit, Including but
not limited to, any agreements relating thereto. Such cost for the completion of
the required subdivision improvements shall be in accordance with cost
estimates prepared by the Village Engineer and approved by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees. If a completion bond or other security or other guarantee is
posted, there shall be good and sufficient surety thereon, as approved by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees and be in such form as approved by the Village
Attorney and conditioned upon the installation and acceptance of said
improvements. The owner or subdivider is wholly responsible for ensuring that
any irrevocable letter of credit or alternative funding mechanism used to secure
or guarantee the project remains in full force. The owner or subdivider shall
renew said letter of credit or provide replacement funds a minimum of fifteen
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 12
(15) days prior to the expiration of said letter of credit for the full value then in
effect. Should replacement funds not be received fifteen (15) days prior to the
expiration of the instrument, the Village shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to draw upon the letter of credit for the effective amount without
further notice to the owner or developer. (Amd. Ord. 09-3110-33, eff. 9/14/09)
7-1-7: INSURANCE, LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY AND PUBLIC SAFETY:
A. Insurance Requirements: The subdivider or permit holder shall secure and
maintain such insurance from an insurance company authorized to write
casualty insurance in the State where the work is located and with a minimum
"Best" Insurance rating of B+ as will protect himself, his subcontractors, the
Village, its officers, employees and agents and the Engineer and his
employees from claims for bodily injury, death or property damage which may
arise from subdividing the property. The Village, its officers, employees and
agents, shall be named as a primary, non-contributory additional insured.
The subdivider or permit holder shall not commence work until he has obtained
all insurance required under this paragraph and shall have filed the certificate
of insurance and the certified copy of the insurance policy with the Village.
Each insurance policy shall contain a clause providing that it shall not be
canceled by the insurance company without thirty (30) days' written notice to
the Village of intention to cancel. Failure of the subdivider or permit holder to
supply a valid certificate of insurance, or if a previously valid certificate of
insurance has expired and is not replaced, is grounds for issuance of stop
work order until such time as a valid certificate of insurance is provided.
Failure of the Village to collect or demand a certificate of insurance shall not be
deemed a waiver of the requirement to provide one.
The amount of such insurance shall be not less than the following:
1. Workmen's Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance shall be
secured and maintained as required by the State.
2. General liability Insurance including general aggregate coverage,
products aggregate coverage, personal and advertising injury, and each
occurrence; a minimum limit two million dollars ($2,000,000.00 ) for each
item.
3. Automobile and truck public liability including bodily injury (per person),
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 13
bodily injury (per accident) and property damage; a minimum combined
single limit of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) .
4. Excess liability umbrella coverage of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00 )
for each occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate.
(Ord. 90-1118-02, Ord. Amd. 05-1958-22, eff. 03/14/05)(Amd. Ord. 05-
1958-22, eff. 3/14/05)
B. Fire insurance: in addition to such fire insurance as the subdivider elects to
carry for his own protection, he shall secure and maintain in the name of the
Village policies upon such structures and material and in such amounts as
shall be designated. The policies shall be secured from a company which is
satisfactory to the Village and delivered to the Village (Ord. 66-142-4)
C. Indemnity: The subdivider shall indemnify and save harmless the Village, its
officers, employees and agents and the Engineer and his employees from and
against all losses and all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, recoveries
and judgments of every nature and description brought or recovered against
him by reason of any omission or act of the subdivider, his agents or
employees, in the execution of the work or in the guarding of it. The subdivider
shall obtain in the name of the Village and shall maintain and pay the
premiums for such insurance in such amount and with such provisions as will
protect the Village from contingent liability and a copy of such insurance policy
or policies shall be delivered to the Village. Full compliance by the Village with
the terms and provisions of such insurance policy or policies shall be a
condition precedent to the Village's right to enforce against the subdivider any
provisions of this Title. (Ord. 66-142-4; amd. Ord. 90-1118-02)
7-1-8: VARIATIONS:
The Plan Commission may recommend a variation of the application of the
regulations of this Code in harmony with their general purpose and intent and
in accordance with the rules therein contained in cases where there are
particular difficulties or peculiar hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of any such regulations relating to the subdividing of land, and may
recommend to the Village Board that said Village Board approve said plat of
subdivision in spite of failure to strictly comply with the strict letter of any of the
regulations, stating the reasons for said recommendations. Such
recommendations for variations shall be communicated in writing to the Village
Board, giving full particulars for the allowance of the variation. (Ord. 66-142-4;
amd. Ord. 87-950-36)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-01: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Revised 06/22/15 Page 14
7-1-9: PENALTIES:
All persons violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the fine set
forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1.
Each day such violation is continued or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Amd. Ord. 10-
3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
7-1-10: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Board of Trustees of
the Village that the several provisions of this Code are separable, in
accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Code not
specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any
provision of this Code to a particular property, building, or other structure, such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,
building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 66-142-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-2: GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Approval of Subdivisions
7-2-2: Subdivisions Outside Village Limits
7-2-3: Interpretations
7-2-4: Parcel Subdivisions and Lot Sizes
7-2-5: Exceptions
7-2-6: Flood Damage Prevention
7-2-7: Construction Standards
7-2-1: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS:
A. After the adoption of these regulations, no land shall be subdivided or filed for
record nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to the land, until
the plan or plans of the subdivision or street improvements shall have been
certified to and approved by action of the Village Board. This approval must
be in writing and placed on the original tracing of the final plats according to
the procedures outlined in Chapter 4 of this Title.
B. No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be offered for
sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or given until such
subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the Lincolnshire Zoning
Board and officially approved by the Village Board.
C. No improvements such as water supply, storm water drainage, sewerage
facilities, lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be
made within any such subdivision by any owner or owners or his or their
agent until the plats for the subdivision and also the plans for improvements
thereto have been formally recommended by the Lincolnshire Zoning Board
and approved by the Village Board.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-2: GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 2
7-2-2: SUBDIVISIONS OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
A. Subdivisions of land lying outside the Village and within one and one-half (1-
1/2) miles of the Village limits shall also be required to conform with the
requirements of this Code.
B. Where the proposed subdivision is located outside the Village boundaries,
the subdivider shall meet all the requirements of this Code, including the
installation of improvements.
7-2-3: INTERPRETATIONS: All interpretations of these rules and regulations are
reserved to the administrative bodies referred to herein.
7-2-4: PARCEL SUBDIVISIONS AND LOT SIZES:
A. Where a tract of land is proposed for subdivision that is part of a larger,
logical subdivision unit, in relation to the Village as a whole, the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees may cause to be prepared a plan of the entire area;
such plan to be used by the Plan Commission and the Village Board as an
aid in judging the proposed plat.
B. Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one to three (3) acres,
inclusive, and there are indications that such lots will eventually be
resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the
street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor
streets can be opened which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
7-2-5: EXCEPTIONS: The Village Board, in accordance with Section 7-1-8, may
vary and make exceptions as set forth herein in instances where there is
sufficient evidence, in its opinion, of hardship caused by topographic
conditions, or where any other reasonable deterrents prevail, provided the
variations or exceptions are in substantial conformance with the standards of
design of this Code. (Ord. 66-142-4)
7-2-6: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION: The provisions of Title 5, Chapter 7 of the
Village Code are hereby incorporated by reference as regulations governing
all development under this Code, and such provisions shall apply to the full
extent as if set forth at length herein. (Ord. 80-640-47)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-2: GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 3
7-2-7: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The developer shall maintain all
construction sites in approved subdivisions in a neat, clean and orderly
manner at all times. In addition, the developer shall keep all public streets in
the area of construction free and clear of all dirt, mud and debris resulting
from any of his construction activities. (Ord. 82-725-32)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-3: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLATS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Filing Requirements
7-3-2: Plat Requirements
7-3-3: Preliminary Improvement Plans
7-3-4: Procedure for Approval
7-3-1: FILING REQUIREMENTS: Any person owning land within the limits of the
Village or within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of such wishing to:
A. Divide the land into lots for the purpose of sale; or
B Dedicate a part or parts thereof for streets, alleys, or other public use; or
C. Re-divide land previously subdivided; or
D. Change the boundaries of any lot or parcel thereof; shall file ten (10) copies
of his preliminary plat of proposed subdivision with the Village Clerk for
transmittal to the Village Plan Commission. In those instances where the
preliminary plat specified residential development, thereby requiring a park
donation, the developer shall also file an additional copy with the Village
Clerk to be transmitted directly to the Park Board for its review and
recommendations. (Ord. 66-142-4; amd. Ord. 82-732-39)
7-3-2: PLAT REQUIREMENTS: The preliminary pat shall be drawn to scale of not
less than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') and shall contain the
following:
A. The proposed name of the subdivision.
B. Its location as forming a part of some larger tract or parcel of land referred to
in the indexes of the records of the County Clerk.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-3: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
C. Sufficient information to accurately locate the plat. Reference to existing
streets, plats, etc. may be used. If there are none within a reasonable
distance of the proposed subdivision, a vicinity plat on a small scale should
accompany the preliminary plat.) (Ord. 66-142-4)
D. The description and location of all existing survey monuments erected in the
subdivision shall be shown. (Ord. 72-260-4)
E. A certificate showing ownership of the property described in preliminary plat.
F. The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided accurate in scale and
bearing and the total approximate area encompassed thereby.
G. The location, widths and other dimensions of all existing platted streets and
other important features, such as railroad lines, watercourses, existing
easements, exceptional topography, etc., contiguous to the tract to be
subdivided.
H. The location, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys,
easements, parks and other open spaces, building lines and lots.
I. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
J. North point and scale and date of preparation.
K. Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots.
L. Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
M. Easements for any and all public utilities. Proper continuity for the utilities
from block to block shall be maintained.
N. Name of the subdivider.
O. Contours at an interval of two feet (2') and high water levels on all courses.
7-3-3: PRELIMINARY IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
A. At the time of submission of a preliminary plat, plans of public improvements
shall also be submitted. These preliminary plans shall be submitted in
triplicate and shall include at least the following items: (Ord. 66-142-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-3: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
1. Preliminary layout of grading and drainage showing the approximate
method of lot drainage and street drainage throughout the subdivision.
Preliminary detention and drainage calculations, including inverts, must
be included. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
2. Preliminary layout of sanitary sewerage facilities showing approximate
sizes and lengths of sanitary sewers, location of treatment facilities,
depths and gradients of sewers, and other pertinent information
concerning the sanitary sewer system.
3. Preliminary layout of water mains, showing sizes and locations of mains,
valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances.
4. Preliminary layout of storm sewers, showing locations, sizes, gradients,
and depths of all storm sewers.
5. Preliminary layout of streets, showing cross section and grades and
gradients of all streets proposed within the subdivision.
6. A statement concerning the materials to be used in the construction of the
above.
B. Upon receipt of the preliminary plans, the Plan Commission shall refer same
to the Village Engineer for his review and comments. The Village Engineer
shall review these plans for general compliance with the overall requirements
of the Village and shall return them, together with his recommendation, to the
Plan Commission within forty five (45) days from the time they were filed with
the Plan Commission. One set of the reviewed plans shall be returned to the
subdivider together with his preliminary plat. (Ord. 66-142-4)
C. Preferably, all preliminary plans shall be submitted on twenty four inch by
thirty six inch (24" x 36") size drawings and shall bear the signature and seal
of the Illinois registered professional engineer under whose direction they
were prepared. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
D. The fee for filing the preliminary plat is as established in the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. (Ord. Amd. 96-
1468-52 eff. 12/9/96)
E. The Village Clerk shall notify the Village Board of the filing of each
preliminary plat and its transmittal to the Plan Commission.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-3: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 4
7-3-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
A. The Plan Commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat shall be
approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved, and shall give notice
to the subdivider of its determination. If approved, the Commission shall so
note on the face of the plat, and shall thereupon forward said plat to the
Village Board, notifying the subdivider of the action. If approved with
modifications, or if disapproved, the Commission shall attach to the original
plat a statement of the reasons for such action and shall return the original of
said plat to the subdivider, retaining one copy thereof for its records.
B. The approval of a preliminary plat by the Plan Commission is strictly
tentative, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout submitted.
This approval shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months,
unless upon application of the developer the Village Board grants an
extension. If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the
preliminary plat must again be submitted for approval.
C. The Village Board shall, upon receipt of the report from the Plan Commission
and four (4) copies of the preliminary plat, upon motion and majority vote,
approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, and, if approved, give permission
to prepare detailed plans and specifications of the subdivision and public
improvements in accordance with the preliminary plat, and within the
requirements of this Code.
D. The approval of a preliminary plat by the Village Board is tentative only,
involving merely the general acceptability of the layout as submitted and must
have designated thereon the words "This is a Preliminary Plat, of No Legal
Effect, and Not to be Recorded".
E. The Plan Commission may recommend, or the Village Board may require
during consideration of a preliminary plat, such changes or revisions as are
deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community.
F. No plat will be approved for the subdivision of land which is subject to
periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage facilities and
which would make adequate drainage of the streets impossible. However, if
the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the
Village Engineer or upon the recommendation of the Department of Public
Works and Buildings of the State of Illinois, make the area completely safe
for residential occupancy and provide adequate street drainage, the
preliminary plat of the subdivision may be approved.
G. One print of the approved preliminary plat, signed by the Mayor and the
Village Clerk, shall be retained in the Village Clerk's office and two (2) copies
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-3: PRELIMINARY PLATS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 5
in the office of the Village Engineer, and one copy in the files of the Plan
Commission. One signed copy is authorization for the subdivider to proceed
with the preparation of plans and specifications for the minimum
improvements required in these rules and regulations and with the
preparation of the final plat.
H. The preliminary plat and documents in support thereof shall be filed at least
ten (10) days before a regular Plan Commission meeting. The Plan
Commission shall, not less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the second
regular meeting following the submission of the pat, forward its
recommendations for approval or disapproval to the Village Board.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLATS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Plat Requirements
7-4-2: Required Documents
7-4-3: Approval of Final Plat
7-4-4: Required Certificates and Other Documents
7-4-5: Building Permits
7-4-1: PLAT REQUIREMENTS: The final plat shall contain the following:
A. Name of subdivision.
B. Location by township, section and range, or by other legal description.
C. Scale one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger (shown graphically).
D. Date and north point.
E. Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angles and lineal
dimensions.
F. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat.
Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and
named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
G. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official
monuments (not less than three), which shall be accurately described in the
plat.
H. Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the
subdivision by distances and angles.
I. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of
all arcs.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 2
J. All easements for right of way provided for public service and utilities.
Easements approved by applicable public utility.
K. All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.
L. Permanent monument or bench marks shall be placed at all corners and at
points of tangency of curve lines along the boundary of the subdivision.
M. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or
reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any area
to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners.
N. Building setback lines accurately shown by dimension.
O. An endorsement on the final plat by the County Clerk, that he finds no
delinquent general taxes, unpaid current general taxes, delinquent special
assessments or unpaid current special assessments against the land shown
thereon.
P. A summary on its face of all restrictions applicable to any part of said
subdivision relating to building restrictions, use restrictions, building lines or
otherwise.
Q. A deed of dedication in the form set out in subsection 7-4-4B.
R. A blank certificate of approval as set out in Section 7-4-3.
S. Such final plat may be for a unit of a proposed subdivision provided that:
1. A preliminary plat had previously been approved as to the whole
subdivision;
2. Such unit shall contain no less than ten (10) lots if a residential
subdivision;
3. Approval by the Village Engineer as to the feasibility of such unit
construction;
4. The public improvements for at least one unit shall be submitted and
completed within each calendar year from the date of approval of the final
plat for the unit;
5. The plat of each unit shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for its
approval;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 3
6. Failure to comply with the terms of this subsection will require
resubmission of the requirements of Chapter 3 of this Title.
7-4-2: REQUIRED DOCUMENTS: Accompanying documents shall consist of:
A. Approval of subdivider's preparations for improvements required by Chapter
6 of this Title.
B. Approval by the Plan Commission of names of the proposed streets and of
the proposed system of addresses along such streets.
C. Plans and specifications for the improvements which shall include at least the
following:
1. A title sheet showing the name of the project, section, township, and
range, an index of sheets, a tabulation of symbols, location of
benchmarks, and a graphic location with respect to nearest traveled
streets and roads. (Ord. 66-142-4)
2. A detailed grading plan indicating the vertical elevations of all houses, lot
corners, and points of change in gradient. Directions of flow of surface
waters will be delineated with arrows and the gradient of the land
indicated above with arrows. Curb elevations will be indicated opposite
each lot corner and at all changes in gradient. (Ord. 72-260-4)
3. A detailed plan of street improvements showing horizontal and vertical
locations of all street improvements and including horizontal and vertical
locations of all points of curvature, points of intersection, points of
tangency, points of vertical curvature, points of vertical intersection, and
points of vertical tangency. Radii of intersection of streets will be shown
on this plan.
4. A detailed plan of storm improvements showing horizontal and vertical
location of all manholes, catch basins, inlets, headwalls, and the like and
indicating lengths, types, and grades and gradients of all storm sewers.
Manholes, catch basins and inlets will be dimensioned from lot corners.
5. A detailed plan of sanitary sewer improvements showing horizontal and
vertical locations of all manholes, and indicating lengths, types and
grades and gradients of all sanitary sewers. Manholes will be
dimensioned from lot corners. (Ord. 66-142-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 4
6. A detailed plan of water system improvements indicating horizontal and
vertical location of all fire hydrants and valve vaults and showing lengths,
sizes, and locations of all water mains. Fire hydrants and valve vaults will
be dimensioned from lot corners. (Ord. 72-260-4)
7. Plans and profiles drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') horizontally and one inch to ten feet (1" 10')
vertically indicating additional horizontal and vertical location of streets,
sewers, appurtenances and the existing grade.
8. Such additional details are necessary to clarify the extent or manner of
construction.
9. Detailed material and construction specifications concerning the work to
be performed including general conditions of the contract acceptable to
the Village.
10. A detailed cost estimate of the work to be performed. (Ord. 66-142-4)
11. A detailed erosion control plan showing clearing, stockpiling, construction
sequences, configuration of erosion controls and areas to be landscaped
or lawns established. Proposed schedules for restoration must be
submitted with the plan. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with
the "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control in Illinois", latest edition.
12.Existing and proposed cross sections at intervals not more than one
hundred feet (100') of proposed roadways where roadway grading and
alignments will impact on undisturbed ground must be provided.
Upon receipt of these final plans, the Village Board shall refer same to the
Village Engineer for his comments and corrections. The Village Engineer
shall review these plans for compliance with the requirements of the
Village and shall return them together with his recommendations, to the
Village Board. One set of the reviewed plans with suggested changes
shall be returned to the subdivider at time of final approval. The Village
Engineer may, at his discretion, confer with the engineer for the developer
concerning correction to the final plans prior to his final approval. All final
plans shall be submitted on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36")
size drawings and shall bear the signature and seal of the Illinois
registered professional engineer under whose directions they were
prepared. No substantial deviations from these plans and specifications
will be allowed without the written permission of the Village Board. Field
changes will be allowed by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 5
shall be empowered to require such field and laboratory tests as may be
necessary to insure the quality of the work. The costs of such tests shall
be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
D. Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a
survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist
as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct in the
form set out in subsection 7-4-4A.
E. Notarized certification by owner or owners, and by mortgages or lien-holder
of record, acknowledging the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
F. Approved by signatures of Village, County and State officials concerned with
the specifications of utility installation.
G. An agreement executed by the owner and subdivider to make and install the
improvements provided for in Chapter 6 in accordance with the plans and
specifications accompanying the final pat.
H. Posting of deposit with the Village as required under Section 7-1-6.
I. Payment to the Village of all review fees and acreage fees.1
J. One tracing and one copy of the final plat of the subdivision as executed by
the Plan Commission, drawn in ink on tracing cloth. Following execution by
the Mayor and the Village Clerk, the subdivider shall provide fifteen (15)
copies of such final pat bearing the required signatures.
7-4-3: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
Within a reasonable time, the Village Board shall, upon motion and majority
vote, approve the final plat and authorize the Mayor and Village Clerk to sign
the original tracing. The certificates on the final plat shall be in the following
form with the signatures of the chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Lake
County, and the County Clerk to be necessary only where the plat covers land
in the unincorporated area or where the dedication of land for County or State
highways is involved.
1See Section 7-1-5 of this Title.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 6
See next page
Under the authority provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes, enacted by the State
Legislature and on motion adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village, this
plat was given approval by the Village of Llncolnshlre and MUST BE RECORDED WITHIN
SIX (6) MONTHS OF THE DATE OF APPROVAL BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 7
TRUSTEES OTHERWISE IT IS NULL AND VOID.
Approved by the Lincolnshire Plan Commission at a meeting held
_____________________________
------------------------------------
Chairman
------------------------------------
Secretary
Approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lincolnshire at a meeting
held ________________________________
------------------------------------
Mayor
-----------------------------------
Village Clerk
Approved by the County Board of Supervisors of Lake County, Illinois at a meeting held
____________________________________
------------------------------------
Chairman
------------------------------------
County Clerk
(Ord. 66-142-4)
7-4-4: REQUIRED CERTIFICATES AND OTHER DOCUMENTS:
A. Each final plat submitted to the Village for approval shall carry the following
certificates:
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATES:
1. STATE OF ILLINOIS)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 8
SS
COUNTY OF LAKE)
This is to certify that I, ___________________________, a Registered Illinois Land
Surveyor, No. ________________, have surveyed and subdivided the property as
described and as shown by the annexed plat, which is a correct representation of
said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof.
I hereby designate the Village of Lincolnshire to record this document with the
County of Lake, Recorder of Deeds.
Given under my hand and seal at ______________________________ ILLINOIS,
this _________ day of ________________ A.D., 20_____
(SEAL) ____________________________________
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
(Ord. 66-142-4, amd. Ord. 92-1253-31 eff. 6/8/92, amd Ord. 97-1485-09 eff.
4/14/97)
2. STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF LAKE )
I, __________________________________, an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor
No. _____________, hereby certify that the land Included on this plat Is within the
corporate limits of the Village of Lincolnshire, which has adopted a Village plan and
Is exercising the special powers authorized by Division 12 of Article 11 of the
Municipal Code of the Illinois State Statutes. I further certify that a part of the
property covered by this subdivision is - is not situated within 500 feet of any surface
drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
____________________________________
Illinois Land Surveyor,
No._______
Lincolnshire, Illinois ______________________,20___________
3. ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE:
Approved this ___________ day of _______________, A.D. 20_____ by the Village
Engineer of the Village of Lincolnshire, Lake County, Illinois.
-------------------------------
-
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 9
Village Engineer
(Ord. 66-142-4)
4. COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF LAKE )
I, ___________________________, County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois do hereby
certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, unpaid current general taxes,
delinquent special assessments or unpaid current special assessments against any
of the land included in the described property. I further certify that I have received
all statutory fees in connection with the plat.
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois.
This _______ day of __________, AD. 20____.
------------------------------ Lake County Clerk
(Ord. 89-1076-43, Amend Ord. 08-3033-16, eff. 4/28/08)(Amd. Ord. 11-3212-34, eff.
9/12/11)
5. MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF LAKE )
Collector for the Village of Lincolnshire, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent
or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments
thereof that have not been apportioned against the tract of land included in the
annexed plat.
Dated at,________________________ Illinois, this ______ day of
____________AD., 20_____
-------------------------------
--
Collector
6. This is to certify that I__________________________________as owner of the
property described as the __________________________________Subdivision and
legally described on the plat of the same name, have determined tot he best of my
knowledge the school district in which each of the following lots lies.
LOT NUMBERS(S) SCHOOL DISTRICTS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 10
Elementary High School
______________________________
Owner
State of Illinois)
SS
County of Lake)
I, _________________________________, a Notary Public, do hereby certify
that______________________________, owner of the property commonly known
as___________________________Subdivision, appeared before me this day in
person and acknowledged the execution of this statement as his free and voluntary
act.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this_____________day
of__________________, 20__.
_________________________________
Notary Public
(Ord. 98-1540-02, eff. 02/09/98)
7. SURVEYOR=S CERTIFICATE
I further certify that the attached plat is a true and correct representation of said
survey and subdivision. All distances shown in feet and decimals parts thereof, that
the property hereon shown and described is within the corporate limits of the Village
of Lincolnshire, Lake County, Illinois, and that said property is designated as AZone -
C@ defined as areas of minimal flooding as shown in the flood insurance rate map
Community Panel No. _____________, dated _______________ as published by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 98-1603-65, eff. 10/12/98)
B. Deed Requirements: Each final plat submitted to the Village for approval
shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form:
We the undersigned (Name), do hereby certify that we are the owners of the real
estate shown and described herein and do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide said real
estate in accordance with the within plat. This subdivision shall be known and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 11
designated as (Name), an addition to the Village of Lincolnshire, Lake County,
Illinois. All streets and alleys and public open spaces shown and not heretofore
dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public. Front yard building setback lines are
hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines
of the streets there shall be erected or maintained no building or structure. There are
strips of ground (Number) feet in width, as shown on this plat and marked
"Easement" reserved for the use of utilities for the installation of water and sewer
mains, surface and subsurface drainage, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject at all
times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No permanent
or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land but
owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their titles subject to the rights of the
public utilities, and to the rights of the owners of other lots in this subdivision.
(Additional dedications and restrictions would be inserted here upon the subdivider's
initiative or the recommendation of the Plan Commission or Village Board important
provisions are those specifying the use to be made of the property and public
grounds, minimum elevation and other restrictions imposed by the Village.)
WITNESS our Hands and Seals this _______ day of______________,20 ___
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF LAKE )
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public in and for the County and State, personally
appeared (Name), (Name) and each separately and severally acknowledged the
execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed for the
purposes therein expressed.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal this ___ day of _______ 20___
----------------------------------
Notary Public
C. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications, as may be
required by the Lincolnshire Plan Commission or the Village Board in these
enforcement regulations.
AGREEMENT AND NOTICE RE: CASH CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE VILLAGE OF
LINCOLNSHIRE, ILLINOIS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-4: FINAL PLATS
Revised 09/12/2011 Page 12
As a condition of approval of this Plat of Subdivision, the undersigned owner agrees
with the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, and all parties who shall hereafter acquire
from the subdivider any land described in this Plat shall be held to agree with the
Village of Lincolnshire, to comply with the terms and provisions contained in Chapter
7 of the Subdivision Title of the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois Village Code relating to
the payment of a cash contribution for school, park and library purposes.
Notice is hereby given to all persons, including corporations, who acquire any land
from the subdivider hereof, that unless the aforesaid cash contribution has been
previously paid to the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, in connection with this
subdivision no permits will be issued by the Village for any development or
construction on the subject property.
In witness whereof, the undersigned owner has here unto signed and sealed this
instrument this ________ day of ___________________, 20_______
________________________________
OWNER
(Amend. Ord. 94-1366-50)
7-4-5: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot in
said subdivision until there has been filed with the Building Official a certified
copy of said plat of subdivision as recorded or registered in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles; as the case may be. Nor shall a
building permit be issued for the improvement of any lot until the plans and
specifications for the public improvements have been approved by the Mayor
and Board of Trustees and until cash, bond or security approved by the Village
Board as provided by this Code are posted with the Village.
One building permit may be issued by the Building Official for a proposed lot
shown on the preliminary plat of subdivision, but the building may not be sold
(unless sold with the entire parcel), occupied, or used until the final plat is
approved and recorded. (Ord. 66-142-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
7-5-1: General Development Plan Conformance
7-5-2: Street Widths and Design Standards
7-5-3: Easements
7-5-4: Residential Block Standards
7-5-5: Residential Lot Standards
7-5-6: Park, School and Library Donations (Rep. By Ord. 94-1366-50)
7-5-6-1: Criteria for Requiring School Site Dedication
7-5-6-2: Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreation Land Dedication
7-5-6-3: Criteria for Requiring Contribution in Lieu of
Park and School Sites
7-5-6-4: Criteria for Requiring Library Contributions
7-5-6-5: Density Formula (Rep. by Ord. 88-1028-60)
7-5-6-6: Land Conditions and Use
7-5 6-7: Agreement and Notice of Ordinance to be Placed
on all Plats
7-5-6-8: Requirements for Application and Compliance
7-5-6-9: Indemnification and Covenant Not to Sue
7-5-7: Adoption of Open Space Landscaping Standards
7-5-7-1: Landscaping Standards for Open Space
7-5-1: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN CONFORMANCE:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade, and location of all streets, alleys, or other land to be dedicated for public
use shall conform to the General Development Plan of the Village as and
adopted by the Village Board, and shall be to topographic conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 2
of the land to be served by such streets, and shall be curvilineal except primary
streets.
7-5-2: STREET WIDTHS AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
The minimum widths of right of ways for streets to be dedicated or established
after the effective date of this Code within the Village or the environs under
jurisdiction of this Code shall conform to the following standards:
Primary Streets and Major Streets 100'
(located in accordance with Master Street Plan)
Secondary or Collector Street or Industrial Street 80'
Minor Street 60'
Cul-de-sac 50' radius
Cross-walkways 10'
(Ord. 66-142-4)
Utility Easements 15'
(Ord. 72-260-4)
A. The minimum widths of rights of way for minor streets in single-family
developments shall be sixty feet (60').
B. When minor streets adjoin unsubdivided property, a street not less, however,
than fifty feet (50') in widthmay be dedicated and whenever a later subdivision
of property adjoins said street the remainder of the street shall be dedicated at
the time of platting.
C. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.Where a marginal or access street is used as a minor street in a
residential subdivision with the lot having frontage on both theminor street and
a primary, major, secondary, or collector street, the installation of driveways
along the property line of the lot which forms the line of a primary, major,
secondary or collector street shall be prohibited.
D. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125') shall be avoided.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 3
Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the street shall be provided
for at least three hundred feet (300') on all primary streets, two hundred feet
(200') on secondary streets, and at least one hundred feet (100') on all other
streets.
E. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage
safe traffic flow.
F. Alleys:
1. Alleysmay be required in commercial and industrial districts. The Zoning
Board shall refer any variations to the Board of Trustees for waiving this
requirement if provisions are made for service access such as off-street
loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
2. Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas.
3. The width of an alley shall not exceed twenty four feet (24').
G. The maximum length cul-de-sac shall be eight hundred feet (800') for
subdivisions measured along the center line from the intersection at origin,
through center of circle, to end of right of way. Each cul-de-sac shall have a
terminus of nearly circular shape with aminimumdiameter of one hundred feet
(100').
H. Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of
these regulations; and where the Mayor and Board of Trustees finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half-street is adjacent to a tract: to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be placed within such tract. No
strip or area shall be reserved along any portion of a street, half-street, or
alley, which will prevent adjacent property owners access thereto, except by
consent of the Village Board.
I. No street names may be used which will duplicate or be confused with the
names of existing streets in the Deerfield Postal District. Existing street names
must be projected wherever possible. Street names in residential areas shall,
following the established pattern, carry out the English theme.
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may require a marginal access street
or reversed frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 4
reservation, which shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') along the rear
property line; or other treatment as may be adequate for protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
K. If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part thereof lies adjacent
to a highway over which the Division of Highways of the State of Illinois has
jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and as entrance
or entrances are desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadways, or
alleys in such proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the Village
Engineer a written permit from the said Division of Highways granting his
permission to obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances. (Ord. 66-
142-4)
7-5-3: EASEMENTS:
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
for utilities and street lighting and drainage, where necessary, and shall be at
least fifteen feet (15') wide. The easement shall be so laid out that a proper
continuity may be had from lot to lot and from block to block in addition, due
provisions for extension of easements to adjacent areas shall be made.
Written approval of the utility easement layout by the public utility companies
shall be required on the final pat. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the lines
of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose and approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 66-142-
4; amd. Ord. 72-260-4)
7-5-4: RESIDENTIAL BLOCK STANDARDS:
A. The maximum lengths of blocks that may be permitted is eighteen hundred
feet (1,800'). Blocks over eight hundred feet (800') may require crosswalk
easements. Crosswalk easements not less than ten feet (10') in width shall be
provided where deemed necessary by the Zoning Board at she approximate
centers of the blocks. The use of additional cross walkways in any instance to
provide safe and convenient access to schools, parks, or other similar
destinations may be recommended by the Zoning Board.
B. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit
easily into the overall plan of the Village and their design must evidence
consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and public areas.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Revised 07/25/2011 Page 5
7-5-5: RESIDENTIAL LOT STANDARDS:
A. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to the straight street lines, or radial to
curved street lines unless other angles will give a better street and lot plan.
Lots with double frontage shall be avoided. All residential lots shall abut on a
street.
B. Where corner lots back upon lots facing the side street, the corner lots shall
have a front and side building line of thirty feet (30') on street sides of the lot.
Extra widths should be provided on all corner lots irrespective of whether they
rear upon lots facing the side streets. (Ord. 66-142-4)
7-5-6: (Amend. Ord. 94-1366-50)
7-5-7: ADOPTION OF OPEN SPACE LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
It is hereby adopted by reference that a certain document known as the
"Landscaping Standards for Open Space", containing the standards,
specifications and procedures for the landscaping of open space, as set out in
Exhibit A, attached to and made a part of Ordinance 88-1031-63, and as may
be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference, three (3)
copies of said document being kept on file in the Department of Community
Development for public inspection.
7-5-7-1: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS FOR OPEN SPACE:
All open space conveyed to the Village or open space guaranteed by a
restrictive covenant running with the land established for the purpose of
benefiting the owners, residents and adjacent property owners shall be
improved in accordance with the Village's open space landscaping standards.
(Ord. 88-1031-63)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Regulations for Public Improvements
7-6-2: Monuments
7-6-3: Street Construction
7-6-4: Underground Improvements
7-6-4-1: General
7-6-4-2: Sanitary Sewers
7-6-4-3: Water Mains
7-6-4-4: Storm Sewers
7-6-4-5: Street Lights
7-6-5: Public Utilities
7-6-6: Procedure for Approval and Acceptance of Improvements
7-6-1: REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. All public improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this Section, including special assessments, Municipal
projects or subdivisions.
All design of the improvements shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State
of Illinois, Division of Highways, current edition.
2. Rules and Regulations of the State of Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
3. Rules and Regulations of the State Department of Public Health,
Circular No. 829. (Ord. 72-260-4)
4. Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
in Illinois, current edition. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
B. The Village Engineer shall, from time to time, review the specifications for
improvements required by this Section and prepare any additions or
modifications of such specifications and submit such additional or modified
specifications to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees for adoption.
All specifications adopted by the Village for the improvements required by
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 2
this Section are incorporated in the applicable subsections by reference,
and all improvements shall comply with the specifications adopted by the
Village.
C. In case of re-subdivision or areas to be subdivided where any of such
improvements are already installed which meet the requirements of this
Section, no further provision to duplicate such installation shall be required;
provided, however, that where such installations have become worn out,
broken, defective, or do not meet Village standards, the subdivider shall be
required to repair and correct such defects.
D. If property for which an application to subdivide has been presented abuts
on or contains an existing public street which has width or pavement less
than required by Section 7-5-2, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate
additional land, sufficient to provide additional pavement to bring roadway
widths up to the minimum standards contained in Section 7-5-2 before the
approval of the property for subdivision or resubdivision.
The Village Engineer shall determine that proper adjustment is made where
the widenings merge with the existing narrow widths of pavement at the
boundary of the property and to require that the lanes are painted to
designate driving and parking lanes. The widening of the paving shall not be
required where there is less than seven hundred feet (700') of frontage.
(Ord. 66-142-4)
7-6-2: MONUMENTS:
A minimum of three (3) permanent monuments shall be placed at corners of
the subdivision. Permanent monuments shall be of concrete with minimum
dimensions of four inches by four inches (4" x 4") at top, six inches by six
inches (6" x 6") at bottom, and thirty six inches (36") long, with a copper
dowel three-eighths inch (3/8') in diameter, at least two and one-half inches
(2-1/2") imbedded so that the top of the dowel shall be flush with the
surface and at the center of the monument.
All lot corners not marked by concrete monuments shall be marked by
galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches
(18") iIn length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of
the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground.
(Ord. 72-260-4).
7-6-3: STREET CONSTRUCTION:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 3
A. All new streets within the corporate limits of the Village dedicated or platted
after the effective date of this Code shall be improved with roadway paving
and bordered by Portland Cement Concrete curbs, in accordance with the
following dimensions:
1. Pavement Width:
Width to
R.O.W. Back of Curb Crown
Arterial (Primary 100 2-24' roador
(Streets ways divided
Industrial by a 3' median
strip 3"
(Secondary
(Streets 80 35 feet 5"
Non- (Minor Streets 60 27 feet 3"
Arterial (Cul-de-Sacs 60 27 feet 3"
Paved cul-de-sac radii shall be 40" - 0" to back of curb.
2. Street Design:
a. Street gradients shall be connected with vertical parabolic curves if
the algebraic difference in grade exceeds one percent (1.00%).
Minimum length in feet of these curves for minor streets shall be
fifty (50) times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade. For
arterial streets the minimum length shall be one hundred (100)
times the algebraic difference. (Ord. 66-142-4)
b. The minimum pavement grade shall be five-tenths percent (0.5%).
(Ord. 88-1032-64)
c. The maximum grade for arterial streets shall be five per cent
(0.5%)
d. A minimum radius of thirty feet (30') shall be used at the
intersection with all arterial streets. The minimum radius for all
nonarterial streets shall be twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 66-142-4)
e. All streets shall have a minimum elevation of six hundred forty six
feet (646').
B. Pavement improvements shall be in accordance with standards of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 4
Village as follows: (Ord. 72-260-4)
Arterial or Industrial Streets Nonarterial or Residential
Streets
Base Surface Base Surface
4" aggregate subbase,
type B,
Section 301
8" portland
cement concrete,
jointed reinforced
with mesh, with
integral curb,
Section 408
7" portland cement
concrete, jointed
reinforced, with
integral curb
OR OR
4" aggregate subbase,
type B,
Section 301, plus 8"
bituminous base
course, Section 308
4" bituminous
wearing course
(Class I) Section
406
12" crushed
aggregate base
course, type A,
Section 301
3" bituminous
wearing course
(Class I, Section
406
OR
4" aggregate subbase,
type B,
Section 301, plus
6" bituminous base
course, Section
308
2" bituminous
wearing course
(Class I) Section
406
(1984 Code)
The subgrade for all pavements shall have a soil bearing value of not less than CBR-4
as determined by the California Bearing Ratio Test. Where, in the opinion of the Village
Engineer the CBR may be less than four (4), he may require the developer to provide a
laboratory report stating the CBR value of the subgrade in question. This work shall be
done at no cost to the Village. Where the CBR of the subgrade is less than four (4), the
developer shall submit a new pavement design to the Village Engineer for his approval.
1. All streets shall be designed using a "positive drainage principle"
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 5
where possible. No low points shall be allowed which would cause
greater than eight inches (8") of ponding in event of a complete storm
sewer failure.
2. Sidewalks: No sidewalks shall be permitted within the single-family
residential area of the Village except when approved by the Village
Board. (Ord. 72-260-4)
3. Street Signs: Shall be installed at all intersections within the
development. The signs shall be bolted to a five inch by five inch (5" x
5") western red cedar post. The post shall be set in concrete to a
depth of at least three feet (3'). An eight inch (8") diameter concrete
mow strip shall be installed around the base of the post. The street
sign shall be at least seven feet (7') above grade. The signs shall be
made of aluminum blade type, mounted to the post in brackets. The
type style for all street signs shall be "Zipatone" Benguiat Book
Lettering and shall consist of capital and small lettering configuration.
The size of the letters shall be two and one-eighth inches (2'/g"). The
street signs and posts shall conform to the Village of Lincolnshire
Signage Program, Design Guidelines, latest edition. (Ord. 89-1076-43)
4. Street Gradients: Shall be designed with proper continuity for collector,
secondary and major arteries without abrupt changes, and all
intersections shall be properly platformed to prevent hazards. Said
platform shall be subject to review by the Village Engineer. The
adjustment of the grade of private driveways with the public roadways
shall be subject to review and approval by the Village Engineer and
shall avoid abrupt changes or drainage pockets.
5. Parkways: Shall be graded in accordance with the grading plan and
seeded upon completion of the underground and surface
improvements. (Ord. 72-260-4)
6. Regulatory Traffic-Control Devices: Shall be installed as per the
requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Illinois
Department of Transportation standards and at locations and as
directed by the Village Engineer. The traffic-control devices may
include, but are not limited to, speed limit, yield, right of way, stop, no
parking, weight restrictions, pedestrian crossings, or other regulatory
traffic signs and necessary traffic pavement markings. All signs and
marking shall conform to the standards in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and of the Illinois Department of
Transportation. Sign post and fasteners shall be of a type equal to the
current Village standard. The Village Engineer shall make the
determination as to when such signs shall be erected. All signs and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 6
pavement markings shall be maintained by the developer until the final
surface course is accepted by the Village Board. (Ord. 89-1038-05)
7. Curbs: All new streets in the Village shall be constructed with type
B6.12 combination concrete curb and gutter conforming to article 616
of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in
Illinois, latest edition, prepared by the Illinois Department of
Transportation. A depressed curb shall be provided for each proposed
or new driveway.
8. Bike Paths: Bike path construction shall conform to applicable sections
of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in
Illinois, latest edition, prepared by the Illinois Department of
Transportation. The following bike path designs shall be considered for
approval:
a. Bituminous Path: Base course shall be constructed in
accordance with article 301 and shall be six inch (6") type B
aggregate base course. The surface course shall be
constructed in accordance with article 406 and shall be three
inch (3") class I type 2 bituminous concrete.
b. Concrete Path: Base course shall be constructed in
accordance with article 301 and shall be four inch (4") type B
aggregate base course. The surface course shall be
constructed in accordance with article 624 and shall be four
inch (4") class X concrete.
c. Stone Path: A stone path shall consist of a minimum thickness
of eight inches (8") of compacted stone over compacted
subgrade. A barrier shall be provided to delineate the stone
path from the adjacent area and to maintain separation of the
aggregate and the surrounding soil.
The type of path construction and width shall be determined
by the Village Board.
9. Pavement Marking: Pavement marking shall be provided at locations
determined by the Village Engineer. All pavement marking shall be
thermoplastic conforming to the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois,
latest edition. (Ord. 89-1076-43)
7-6-4: UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 7
No subdivision shall be approved without water supply and sanitary sewer
and sewage treatment facilities in accordance with the following minimum
standards or the posting of security approved by the Village Board
guaranteeing said improvements in accordance with Section 7-1-6.
7-6-4-1: GENERAL:
A. The underground improvements shall be installed in the parkway whenever
possible. (Ord. 66-142-4)
B. The allowable loading on pipes shall be determined from the appropriate
tables in the appropriate manufacturer's manual. The pipe shall be
designed for a fifteen thousand (15,000) pound wheel load. (Ord. 72-260-4)
C. All sewer and water main trenches shall be undercut three inches (3") and
the pipe laid on a three inch (3") cushion of approved granular material.
This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Village Engineer.
D. All underground improvements shall be completed prior to any surface
improvements. (Ord. 66-142-4)
E. All manhole covers shall be imprinted with the following legends:
1. Village of Lincolnshire, and
2. A description of the particular utility involved such as water, storm
sewer or sanitary sewer. (Ord. 82-725-32)
7-6-4-2: SANITARY SEWERS:
A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the
development allowing for the extension of the Village sewer system to
adjacent areas.
A. Only sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
B. Sewage lift stations will not be permitted unless specifically authorized by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village, upon recommendation of
the Village Engineer.
C. The minimum size public sanitary sewer shall be eight inches (8") in
diameter. (Ord. 66-142-4)
D. All sanitary sewers and services shall be constructed of extra strength
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 8
vitrified clay pipe conforming to ASTM C700 with joints conforming to ASTM
425-60 type 1 or 3, or PVC type PSM conforming to ASTM D-3034 and
shall be SDR 35, or ABS, "Truss", conforming to ASTM D-2680, or ductile
iron pipe conforming to ANSl A21.51 (AWWA C-151), Class 52 per ANSl
A21 .50 (AWWA C-150) and tar (seal) coated and cement lined per ANSl
A214 (AWWA C-104). (Ord. 88.1032-64)
E. Minimum cover on any sanitary sewers shall be three feet zero inches
(3'0"). Sewers in excess of twenty feet zero inches (20'0") cover shall
require special bedding as approved by the Village Engineer. Risers, shall
be required where sewers are over twelve feet zero inches (12'0") deep or
more, and shall extend to within eight feet zero inches (8'0") grade. (Ord.
66-142-4)
F. All sanitary sewer manholes shall be a minimum of four feet zero inches
(4'0") in diameter, of the precast concrete type, with an elastomeric ban']
seal and rubber boot, and spaced not more than four hundred feet (400')
apart. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
G. All sanitary sewers shall be located in the parkway, on the north or east side
of the street, five feet zero inches (5'0") from the property line. (Ord. 72-
260-4)
H. Maximum allowable infiltration shall be two hundred (200)
gallons/day/inch/diameter/mile of sewer. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
I. A sanitary building sewer shall be installed at the center of each residential
lot at the time of the sanitary sewer installation, and shall extend to within
one foot (1') of the property line. The building sewer shall be four inches (4")
in diameter and shall be installed at a minimum grade of one-eighth inch
(1/8") per foot and maximum grade of one inch (1") per foot. (Ord. 66-142-
4)
J. Wye branches shall be factory manufactured permanently affixed to the
main sewer. (Ord. 72-260-4)
K. Curvilinear sanitary sewers shall not be allowed except upon approval by
the Village Engineer. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
7-6-4-3: WATER MAINS:
A complete system of water mains shall be constructed throughout the
development sized to permit for future extension of the village water system
to adjacent areas.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 9
A. The water system shall be designed so that it will be circulating whenever
possible.
B. Water mains shall not be less than eight inches (8") internal diameter,
except where the main serves a cul-de-sac or is a minor branch main, the
size can be reduced to six inches (6") upon the approval of the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 66-142-4)
C. Valves shall be located so that in the event of a single break not more than
one thousand feet (1,000') of main will be out of service and require the
closing of not more than three (3) valves. Valves shall conform to the
following requirements:
1. Valves up to and including ten inches (10") in diameter shall be either:
a. A disc type conforming to the latest standards of AWWA C500
for gate valves, or
b. Conform to the latest standards of AWWA C509-80 for
resilient seated gate valves.
2. Valves twelve inches (12") in diameter and larger shall conform to the
latest standards of AWWA C504, Class 150B for butterfly valves.
All valves shall be installed in a forty eight inch (48") precast vault and
shall not be located under streets, driveways or other pavements.
(Ord. 88-1032-64)
D. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire development, located
at intervals not to exceed four hundred feet (400') and no house shall be
greater than two hundred feet (200') from a hydrant. (Ord. 66-142-4)
E. Water mains shall be constructed of ductile, iron pipe conforming to ANSl
A21.51 (AWWA C-151), to thickness class 52 per ANSl A21.50 (AWWA C-
150) and tar (seal) coated and cement lined per ANSl A21.4 (AWWA
C°°
104). (1984 Code)
F. The depth between the finished grade and the top of the water main shall
be not less than five feet (5') or more than six feet (6'). Where conflicts arise
with other underground improvements, greater depths will be allowed. (Ord.
66-142-4)
G. All water mains shall be located in the parkway, on the south and west side
of the street, ten feet zero inches (10'0") from the property line. (Ord. 72-
260-4)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 10
H. Connections to the existing water system shall be made by pressure tap.
(Ord. 66-142-4)
I. Hydrants and valves shall be of a type conforming to that used in the
Village. Hydrants to be Waterous Pacer Model WB-67 with breakaway
flange or approved equal with two (2) two and one-half inch (2 1/2") and
one four and one-half inch (4-1/2") fire hose connections with National
Standard Threads.
J. Building service connections from the b-box to the structure shall be made
only at the time of building construction. All service taps shall be either with
a manufactured tap coupling or double strap bronze saddle. (Ord. 88-1032-
64)
K. All commercial water meters must have bypass valves which do not
interfere with access to the water meter for purposes of removing the meter
for testing and/or repair. Such valves must be installed and maintained so
that they may be sealed in the closed position, and not opened without
breaking the seal.
7-6-4-4: STORM SEWERS:
A complete system of storm sewers shall be constructed to drain the
development and any contiguous drainage areas. The developer shall
submit to the Village Engineer two (2) copies of the storm drainage
computations. In addition, the developer shall submit a drainage and storm
water runoff impact analysis on a form to be provided by the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 82-725-32)
A. No increase in storm water runoff shall be directed to any existing
watercourse, or drainage system, unless the Village Engineer shall have
determined that the receiving watercourse, or drainage system, shall have
adequate capacity to receive such increased flow. (Ord. 66-142-4)
B. The rational method shall be employed when computing storm runoff. A ten
(10) year storm shall be used for design purposes. The storm system shall
be designed with "positive street and swale drainage" such that in the event
of a complete storm system failure, storm water runoff will be provided
overland to the storm water detention area and will cause no property
damage due to flooding. (Ord. 85-847-31)
C. Storm sewers shall be designed to flow full, using Manning's Formula, with
a roughness coefficient of 0.013. When the storm sewer system discharge
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 11
is determined to be submerged, the sewers shall be designed using the
"hydraulic profile" and a maximum water level elevation in manholes of one
foot zero inches (1 '-0") below the flow line of the gutter. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
D. Storm sewers shall be designed, when flowing full, to have a minimum
velocity of two and one-half feet (2-1/2') per second and a maximum
velocity not to exceed the critical flow. (Ord. 66-142-4)
E. All inlets shall be installed so that the distance between each inlet shall not
exceed two hundred fifty feet (250') and each inlet shall drain a maximum
street gutter length of two hundred fifty feet (250'). Where the inlet is
located at a low point, additional inlets may be required by the Village
Engineer. No more than two (2) inlets shall be interconnected. Inlets shall
be so located that storm water runoff will not "pond". Depressed street
crowns to facilitate drainage will not be allowed. ('3rd. 86-907-44)
F. Rear yard catch basins shall be placed where required by the Village Board.
G. The minimum size storm sewer shall be twelve inches (12") in diameter,
and minimum size inlet connections shall be ten inches (10") in diameter.
H. Minimum cover shall be three feet zero inches (3'0") for all. storm sewers
unless special precautions are taken to protect the pipe, as approved by the
Village Engineer (Ord. 66-142-4)
I. Storm sewers shall be concrete sewer, storm drain and culvert pipe
conforming to ASTM C 14 or C76 with mastic joints. All inlet connections
shall be reinforced concrete pipe, ASTM C76 Class Ill. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
J. All storm sewers shall be located in the parkway, on the north and east side
of the street, thirteen feet zero inches (13'0") from the property line. (Ord.
72-260-4)
K. All manholes, inlet manholes, inlets and catch basins, and headwalls shall
be designed in accordance with the standard details of the Village. (Ord.
66-142-4)
L. Storm retention, if required, is subject to the review of the Village Engineer.
In concept, the detention pond shall have a high-water level based on a
100-year design storm and shall have an outlet which allows runoff with an
intensity no greater than the land in its natural state prior to development.
The detention area shall have a single emergency overflow to drain waters
in excess of the volume provided in the detention area. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
M. Storm sewers shall be available to each lot to connect to each lot's sump
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 12
pump, and all sump pumps shall be so connected to storm sewers. Sump
pumps shall not be connected to sanitary sewers. (Ord. 82-725-32
N. All sites no longer in a natural undeveloped state, undergoing development
resulting in a significant increase in the rate of storm water runoff and not
providing storm water detention must provide detention meeting the
requirements of subsection 7-6-4L above. Detention to be provided shall be
for the entire site evaluated in its natural state. (Ord. 88-1032-64)
7-6-4-5: STREET LIGHTS:
A complete system of street lights shall be constructed at those locations
deemed necessary by the Village Board. The developer shall submit to the
Village Engineer two (2) copies of street lighting calculations as well as
copies of proposed equipment for installation.
A. Street lighting shall be designed in accordance with the American National
Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting published by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America, latest edition.
B. All material used in construction shall meet the requirements of the National
Electrical Code, latest edition and be Underwriters Laboratory (U.L.)
approved.
C. Street lighting poles for corporate and business areas shall be of a hinged
type to allow access to luminaries from the ground (as manufactured by QL
Inc. or approved equal).
D. Street lighting poles, luminaries and fixtures, if required for residential
areas, shall be at locations and of a style approved by the Village Board.
E. All street light wiring shall be underground and in unit duct. Direct cable
burial will not be allowed. Conduit is required under all roadways, driveways
and sidewalks.
F. Unit duct shall meet the requirements of the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association. Electric cable shall meet the requirements of
the National Electrical Code, rated for 600 volts, for underground service.
G. Conduit shall be galvanized steel meeting the requirements of ANSl, C80.1,
UL tested and labeled.
H. All lighting shall be photocell controlled unless directed by the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 89-1038-05)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 13
7-6-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All public utility distribution lines for telephone, gas and electric service shall
be placed entirely underground. All above-ground appurtenances relating
thereto, shall be placed in rear lot line easements, or in areas as designated
by the Village Engineer. Consideration for placement of utilities in areas
other than rear lot line easements shall be given only in instances of safety,
floodplain infringement, preservation of existing wooded areas, and conflict
with Village utilities. Installation of such facilities shall be made in
compliance with the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective and the subdivider shall
be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations, now and hereafter
effective and filed with said Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public
Utilities Act, of any public utility whose service will be required for the
subdivision with respect to the provision of such facilities.
B. Where a subdivider plans for the development of a subdivision within the
corporate limits of the Village, the subdivider shall submit a utility plan
showing the location of all public utility distribution lines and all aboveground
appurtenances relating thereto, for approval by the Village Engineer,
before submitting his final plat for approval. In those instances where
approval of a final plat is not necessary, the developer shall submit a utility
plan for approval by the Village Engineer at the time a building permit is
requested.
C. All above-ground appurtenances including transformers, junction boxes,
relief valves, and all structures associated with the installation and function
of the utilities shall be fully screened from public view by walls, berming or
landscaping to be approved by the Village Forester.
D. Underground telephone, electric and gas service facilities, including
conduits and cables, shall be placed within easements or dedicated public
ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services.
Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
E. All utility lines and facilities for water and sewer service shall be placed in
appropriate easements and entirely underground.
F. As a condition precedent and in consideration of the Village's approval to
place public utilities in other than rear lot line easements, the subdivider
shall include a covenant on the face of his plat of subdivision that the
owners of all lots within the subdivision shall be responsible for the
perpetual maintenance of the walls, berming or landscaping approved by
the Village Forester as provided for in subparagraph C above. The
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 14
covenant shall read as follow:
G.
PERPETUAL MAINTENANCE COVENANT
The owners of all lots within this subdivision are jointly and severally
responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the screening, as approved by
the Village Forester, of all above-ground public utility appurtenances
including transformers, junction boxes, relief valves, and all structures
associated with the installation and function of such utilities. This covenant
shall constitute a covenant running with the land and shall be binding upon
all successor owners of record and shall run to the benefit of the Village of
Lincolnshire. This covenant shall be enforceable by the Village of
Lincolnshire in any court of competent jurisdiction by an appropriate action
in law or in equity to secure the performance of the covenants herein
contained. (Ord. 87-929-15)
7-6-6: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Where a subdivider plans for the development of a subdivision within the
corporate limits of the Village, the subdivider shall, before submitting his
final plat for approval:
1. Make provision for the installation and construction of improvements
required by this Chapter.
2. Submit his provisions for installation and construction of improvements
required by this Chapter to the Village Engineer for his
recommendation.
3. Submit his provisions for installation and construction of improvements
required by this Chapter, along with the recommendation of the Village
Engineer to the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village for their
approval. (Ord. 66-142-4)
4. Preliminary and Final Plan Review Fees: Prior to the review of any
preliminary development or site plan, the potential developer shall
deposit funds with the Village equal to the cost of the estimated
engineering plan review expenses necessary to review the proposed
plans. Prior to the final approval of any final subdivision plans, the
developer shall pay the fee for review of plans to the Village equal to
two and one-half percent (2-1/2%) of the estimated cost of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 15
construction, less the funds previously paid for engineering review of
his preliminary plan. If this fee is insufficient to cover the costs of plan
review, the applicant shall pay the difference.
All costs connected with the inspection of subdivision improvements
shall be paid by the subdivider. Such costs, include, but are not limited
to, time of inspections, testing expense, televising of underground
improvements, soil testing reports and analyses, concrete analyses
and related tests as deemed to be reasonable and required by the
Village Engineer.
In addition, the Village will be furnished by the developer's engineer a
reproducible sepia of all specifications and standards and details.
(Ord. 78-548-38)
B. The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village shall not approve a
subdivider's provisions for improvements unless the provisions for
improvements required by this Chapter comply with the specifications for
these improvements as outlined herein. All improvements required by this
Chapter shall be inspected for compliance with this Code, and the contract
specifications during construction by the Village Engineer. No such
improvements shall be accepted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees
unless the Village Engineer shall certify that the improvements comply with
thin Code and the contract specifications, and unless the owner of the
property has tendered to the Village a fully executed bill of sale covering all
water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and street lights constructed as
public improvements. All costs connected with the inspection of subdivision
improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 66-142-4; amd. Ord.
87-945-31)
C. The public improvements, including the water mains, sanitary sewers, the
entire above and below ground storm drainage system including detention
and retention areas, curb and gutter and binder roadway surface course,
and any approved landscaping, if applicable, as required by this Subdivision
Code, must be fully completed and accepted by the Village Board for each
separate phase or unit of a development prior to the issuance of any
occupancy permits for any buildings in any phase or unit.
If building permits are requested for buildings in any phase or unit prior to
the acceptance of the above listed public improvements, the building and/or
developer must:
1. Secure a permit from the Public Works Department for a temporary
road to serve the building or buildings under construction. The
roadway must be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 16
constructed of crushed stone aggregate to a minimum compacted
depth of eight inches (8"). The road must be kept in good repair during
the entire period of construction of the building or buildings. If at any
time the Director of Public Works is of the opinion that the roadway
does not meet the requirements stated above, construction will be
halted.
2. No construction work of a combustible nature shall be commenced
until water mains for the entire phase have been installed and the
Public Works Department has certified that they are in proper working
order and can be utilized for firefighting purposes. Prior to the
completion of the water improvements and the certification by the
Public Works Department, only foundation permits may be issued for
any phase or unit in accordance with all the requirements in this Code.
3. No service connections shall be made to any of the above listed public
improvements until the improvements have been accepted by the
Village Board.
4. In a residential development the public improvements, including the
water mains, sanitary sewers, the entire above and below ground
storm drainage system including detention and retention areas, curb
and gutter and binder roadway surface course, and any approved
landscaping, must be fully completed and accepted by the Village
Board of Trustees for each separate phase or unit of a phased
development prior to the issuance of any building permits for buildings
in any subsequent phase or unit.
5. The final roadway surface course is to be added upon substantial
completion of construction within a phase. The Director of Public
Works will make the determination of when the final roadway surface
is to be installed based upon the size and type of development under
consideration and the availability of other construction traffic routes.
The purpose of this requirement is to avoid undue stress upon any
roadways as a result of construction traffic.
6. Prior to the issuance of any foundation or building permits when the
public improvements listed above have not been completed and
accepted, the developer must provide the Public Works Department
with an installation schedule for these public improvements. The
developer will then be expected to adhere to this schedule unless
unusual circumstances are encountered. If the developer fails to
adhere to the schedule, the Village may be required to complete the
public improvements utilizing the irrevocable letter of credit submitted
by the developer in accordance with escrow agreement required by the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 17
subdivision regulations. (Ord. 86-905-42)
D. Whenever a proposed subdivision coming within the jurisdiction of this
Code has an area of more than ten (10) acres, the subdivider may be
required to reserve up to ten percent (10%) of the area, exclusive of public
streets and alleys, for public use. The location of the area shall be referred
to the Zoning Board for approval and the area shall be appropriately
marked on the plat prior to approval of the plat. (Ord. 66-142-4)
Intentionally Left Blank
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 18
APPENDIX I
ESCROW AGREEMENT
This Agreement, made and entered into this _____ day of _____________ 20
_____, by and between ____________________, a ________________ banking
association, as Trustee under Trust Agreement dated ________________ and known
as Trust Number ______, ____________________________, an Illinois Corporation,
Subdivider/Owner
as sole beneficiary of the aforesaid Trust Number ________ and as such corporation,
hereinafter sometimes referred to collectively as "Owner", and the Village of
Lincolnshire, a municipal corporation in Lake County, Illinois, hereinafter sometimes
referred to as "Village", and ________________________ a _______________
banking association, hereinafter referred to as "Escrowee";
W I T N E S S E T H:
WHEREAS, Owner is the owner of a certain parcel of real property located in
the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, and legally described in Exhibit A attached hereto
and made a part hereof;
WHEREAS, Owner has submitted, or caused to be submitted, for final approval
by Village a Plat of Subdivision entitled __________________________ approved by
the Village Engineer on ____________________, subdividing the property described in
Exhibit A;
WHEREAS, the Village of Lincolnshire Subdivision Code, as amended,
requires as a condition of such approval and recording of said plat, among other things,
the guaranteeing of installation of certain public improvements in accordance with plans
and specifi-cations approved by and on file with the Village Engineer or Village Clerk,
and in accordance with the ordinances of said Village; and
WHEREAS, the Village has approved said Plat of Subdivision subject to the
deposit of security to guarantee the payment of various costs relating to installation of
certain public improve-ments in said subdivision in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by and on file with the Village Engineer and the Village, said plans
and specifications entitled ________________________ prepared by
____________________ of ________________, dated ___________________ and
consisting of _______ sheets, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "plans and
specifications";
WHEREAS, the Village ordinance requires a completion bond or other security
in lieu of bond in the amount of _________, which amount is 125% of the Village
Engineer's estimate of the cost of installation of the public improvements to be provided
in accordance with the plans and specifications;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 19
WHEREAS, Owner has requested Village to waive the furnishing of the
completion bond required by Village ordinance to secure installation of the public
improvements and to accept in lieu thereof a letter of credit;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements
herein contained, and other good and valuable consideration, the parties hereto do
covenant and agree with each other as follows:
Section 1: That in lieu of the completion bond required by Village ordinance,
Owner shall cause to be deposited with the Village Clerk as security for the public
improvements an irrevocable letter of credit (hereinafter referred to as the "security")
issued by the ______________________, in a form acceptable to Village, in the
amount of ________________. The security shall be drawn upon from time to time as
hereinafter provided for payment of the following, which shall hereinafter be referred to
as "subdivision costs":
(a) Installation of the public improvements described in the plans and
specifications;
(b) All engineering and inspection fees of the Village in relation to the
public improvements and the subdivision;
(c) Maintenance and repair of the public improvements for a period of
three (3) years after the date of acceptance of the public improvements by
Village, sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "three-year maintenance
period";
(d) To pay and discharge all claims made by any third party arising out
of the installation and construction of the public improvements; all such claims
must be paid prior to the Village's acceptance of the public improvements;
provided, however, that if the Owner has insurance coverage in sufficient
amounts to pay such claims and the Owner files with the Village the insurance
company's letter indicating that they acknowledge coverage and accept
defense of the claim and that the limits of the policy are satisfactory to pay the
claim if judgment is entered in favor of said third party, the Village nay, in its
discretion, accept the public improvements and reduce the amount of the
subdivision improvement deposit for the required three-year maintenance
period;
(e) Any customary expense of the Owner in meeting any requirement
of the Village pertaining to the subdivision to the extent such expense has not
already been paid by Owner;
(f) Expenses of the Village, including but not limited to reasonable
attorneys fees in drafting, administering and enforcing this Agreement.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 20
Village or Escrowee shall not be required to investigate the propriety of any
payout orders other than they deem necessary in their own interest. However, for
accounting purposes, the Village Engineer shall send to Owner a copy of the
Engineer's estimates for payment. Each payout order shall be accompanied by all
appropriate sworn statements, affidavits and supporting waivers of lien required by
Escrowee for full compliance with the Illinois Mechanics' Lien Law.
Section 2: The security shall be drawn upon from time to time upon payout
orders issued in writing by the Village Engineer and presented to Escrowee. The payout
orders shall be issued upon request of the Owner in writing to the Village Engineer,
provided that the portion of the public improvements for which the payout orders are
requested has been completed in conformance with the plans and specifications as
reasonably determined by the Village Engineer, and provided further that the amount of
the security remaining is sufficient to pay for the remaining subdivision costs as
reasonably determined by Village Engineer. Payout orders may also be issued in
writing by the Village Engineer in the circumstances hereinafter provided in Sections 3,
4 and 6 of this Agreement without the request or consent of Owner; provided, however,
that the Owner shall first be notified of any such payout order and the general purpose
thereof. The amount of the security deposited hereunder shall be reduced by the
amount of any payout order and may be reduced by the mutual agreement of Village
and Owner.
Section 3: Owner shall complete the public improvements in accordance with
the plans and specifications within two years from the date of Village's approval of the
subdivision plat. In the event Owner fails to o complete the public improvements within
c~ch time, Village shall have one (1) year from the close of the two-year period to
complete the public improvements in a manner acceptable to Village. At the close of
said one (1) year period, any portion of the security deposited hereunder remaining
undisbursed shall be disbursed to Owner, except such amount as is hereinafter
provided to be retained by the Escrowee up[n acceptance of the public improvements
by Village. Village may pay for such completion and all other subdivision costs out of
the security deposited hereunder with the Escrowee in the manner provided in Section
2 of this Agreement without the request or consent of Owner.
Section 4: Upon acceptance of the public improvements by the Village,
whether completed by Owner or by Village, the Escrowee shall disburse to Owner any
of the security
deposited hereunder remaining after payment in full of the subdivision costs provided
for in Subsections (a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) of Section 1 of this Agreement, except the
amount of _________ which shall be retained to pay the subdivision cost provided for in
Subsection (c) of said Section 1 with respect to said three-year maintenance period and
the subdivision costs provided for in Subsections (b), (d), (e) and (f) of said Section 1.
Any of such retained security not expended by Village and remaining at the expiration
of said three-year maintenance period shall be disbursed by Escrowee to Owner.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 21
Village may pay for such Subsections (b), (d), (e) and (f) subdivision costs out of the
security deposited hereunder with the Escrowee in the manner provided in Section 2 of
this Agreement without the request or consent of Owner.
Section 5: If at any time prior to the acceptance of the public improvements by
the Village the amount of the security deposited hereunder is deemed, in the sole
judgment of Village, insufficient to cover the subdivision costs, or if for any reason the
security deposited hereunder shall be withheld or otherwise become unpayable or
unavailable to Village, Owner shall, upon notice from Village, cause to be deposited
with the Escrowee such additional security in a form and an amount reasonably
deemed by Village to be sufficient to pay the subdivision costs. Such additional security
shall be deposited within ten (10) days of said notice.
Section 6: If at any time during the installation by Owner of the public
improvements the Village determines, in its sole judgment, that Owner has failed to
install the public improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications, or if, in
the sole judgment of Village, Owner fails to properly maintain or repair said
improvements, Village may take such action as it deems necessary to correct such
failure; provided that Village shall first notify Owner of such failure and the general
nature thereof and permit Owner sixty (60) days to correct such failure, provided further
that Owner's right to 60 days to correct any such failure shall terminate, with respect to
completion of the public improvements, three years after approval of the subdivision
plat by the Village and, with respect to the maintenance and repair period, 60 days prior
to expiration thereof. Provided further, however, that in the event any such failure
occurs within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the security, Village shall only be
required to give notice of such failure before Village may take corrective action. Village
may pay for any corrective action out of the security deposited hereunder with the
Escrowee in the manner provided in Section 2 of this Agreement without the request or
consent of Owner.
Section 7: The Village shall execute the Plat of Subdivision when, but not
before, Owner has executed this Agreement, deposited with the Escrowee the security
provided for hereunder, and satisfied all other requirements of the Village pertaining to
the subdivision.
Section 8: Any notice required to be given in this Agreement shall be in writing
and given or served personally, or deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the
party to be notified, postage prepaid, registered or certified, with return receipt
requested. Notice deposited in the mail in the manner hereinabove provided shall be
deemed given or served upon deposit in the mail. For the purposes of this notice, the
addresses of the parties shall, until changed by appropriate notice hereunder, be as
follows:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 22
If to Owner:
If to Village:
If to Escrowee:
Section 9: This Agreement shall terminate at the close of three (3) years after
acceptance of the public improvements as provided in Section 4 of this Agreement;
otherwise, if the public improvements have not been accepted by the Village, this
Agreement shall terminate at the close of the one (1) year period provided for in Section
3 of this Agreement. If Owner is required by Village to deposit additional security
pursuant to Section 5 of this Agreement, notwithstanding the applicability of either of
the foregoing termination dates, this Agreement shall terminate no earlier than five (5)
days after the date of deposit of such additional security.
Section 10: This Agreement shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit
of each of the respective parties hereto and their respective successors, assigns, heirs
and executors.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement the day
and year first above written.
OWNER:
----------------------------
a ____________ banking association, as
Trustee under Trust Agreement dated _______
and known as Trust Number ________
By: ______________________________
President
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Secretary
________________________________ an
Illinois Corporation, as sole beneficiary of the
aforesaid Trust Number _________ and as
such corporation
By:________________________________
President
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 23
ATTEST:
____________________________
Secretary
VILLAGE:
Village of Lincolnshire, a municipal corporation
in Lake County, Illinois
By: ________________________________
Village Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________
Village Clerk
ESCROWEE:
___________________________________ a
_______________ banking association
By: _______________________________
President
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Secretary
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 24
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF )
I,__________________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that _________________ ____________ President of the
___________________, as Trustee under Trust Agreement dated _____________ and
known as Trust Number ________, and ____________________' __________
Secretary of said Bank, personally known to me to be the same persons whose names
are subscribed t, the foregoing instrument as such _____________ President and
________ Secretary respectively, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and delivered the said instrument as their free and
voluntary act, and as the free and voluntary act of said Bank, for the uses and purposes
therein set forth; and the said _________ Secretary did also then and there
acknowledge that he, as custodian of the corporate seal of said Bank, did affix the said
corporate seal of said Bank to said instrument as his own free and voluntary act and as
the free and voluntary act of said Bank, for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this ______ day of ___________, 20____
? --------------------------------?
My commission expires: Notary Public
--------------------------------------
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF )
I, ______________________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that ___________________, President of
________________________ and _____________________, Secretary of said
corporation, personally known to me to be the sane persons whose names are
subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such President and Secretary respectively,
appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and
delivered the said instrument as their free and voluntary act, and as the free and
voluntary act of said corporation, for the uses and purposes therein set forth; and the
said Secretary did also them and there acknowledge that he, as custodian of the
corporate seal of said corporation, did affix the said corporate seal of said corporation
to said instrument as his own free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act of
said corporation, for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this _______ day of _________, 20___
? --------------------------------?
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 25
My commission expires: Notary Public
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF )
I, _________________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that ______________, Mayor of the Village of Lincolnshire,
Lake County, Illinois, and ___________, Clerk of said Village, personally known to me
to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as
such Mayor and Clerk respectively, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and delivered the same instrument as their free and
voluntary act, and as the free and voluntary act of said Village, pursuant to authority
given by the Board of Trustees of said Village, for the uses and purposes therein set
forth, and the said Clerk did also then and there causa the corporate seal of said Village
to be affix- thereto, pursuant to authority given by the Board of Trustees of said Village
as her free and voluntary act, and as the free and voluntary act of said Village, for the
uses anti purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this ____ day of __________, 20_____
? --------------------------------?
My commission expires: Notary Public
-------------------------------
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF )
I, __________________________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the
State aforesaid, do hereby certify that ________________ ___________ President of
the __________________, and _____________________ __________ Secretary of
said Bank, personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are
subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such ________ President and ________
Secretary respectively, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that
they signed and delivered the said instrument as their free and voluntary act, and as the
free and voluntary act of said Bank, for the uses and purposes therein set forth; and the
said _________ Secretary did also then and there acknowledge that he, as custodian
of the corporate seal of said Bank, did affix the said corporate seal of said Bank to said
instrument as his own free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act of said
Bank, for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hard and notarial seal this _____ day of ____________, 20____
? --------------------------------?
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 26
My commission expires: Notary Public
APPENDIX II
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
No. ________
ISSUER: DATE OF ISSUANCE:
BENEFICIARY: DATE OF EXPIRATION:
Village of Lincolnshire
One Olde Half Day Road
Lincolnshire, Illinois 60069
Re: (Name of Project)
(Purpose)
Gentlemen:
At the request of (client’s name and address), we hereby establish in your favor our
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT NO. _________, in the amount of $______________,
which is available for negotiation of your drafts at sight, signed by the Engineer of the Village of
Lincolnshire, drawn on (bank), bearing the clause
"Drawn under (bank), Letter of Credit No. _________ in accordance with the
(Annexation/Improvement/Escrow) Agreement made and entered into on the
________ day of ____________ 20_____, between ____________________
and the Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois, in regard to the above-captioned
improvement.”
The undersigned shall notify the Engineer for the Village, by certified mall, return receipt
requested , or by overnight courier, dispatched at least thirty five (35) days prior to said
expiration date that said Letter of Credit is about to expire.
In no event shall this Irrevocable Letter of Credit or the obligations contained herein expire
except upon said prior written notice, it being expressly agreed by the undersigned that the
above expiration date shall be automatically extended as shall be required to comply with this
notice provision.
The undersigned further agrees that this Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall remain in full force
and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be made from
time to time to the plans, specifications, and agreements for the improvement, without prior
notice from the Village of such amendments or modifications.
All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this Irrevocable Letter of
Credit have been completed.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 07-06: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Revised 07/08/12 Page 27
The (bank) hereby undertakes and engages that all demands made in conformity with this
Irrevocable Letter of Credit will be duly honored upon presentation. If within ten (10) days of the
date any demand is presented we fail to honor the same, we agree to pay all attorney fees,
court costs and other expenses incurred by the Village in enforcing the terms of this Letter of
Credit.
This Letter of Credit shall be reduced from time to time by an amount equal to the payments
made by (bank) in accordance herein. This Letter of Credit may be reduced to such amount
specified in writing from time to time by the Engineer of the Village of Lincolnshire, if signed
notice on the Village of Lincolnshire letterhead is supplied to (the bank), pursuant to the terms
of said (Annexation/Improvement/Escrow) Agreement.
All drafts and documents should be presented in one lot by courier to our offices at: (enter bank
name and address).
Except insofar as otherwise expressly stated herein, this letter of credit is subject to the Uniform
Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, 2007 Revision, International Chamber of
Commerce Publication No. 600.
Very truly yours,
(bank)
Attest: __________________ By:______________________________
(Authorized Officer)
(Amd. Ord. 09-3110-33, eff. 9/14/09)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
DONATIONS
7-7 Donations
7-7A School Donations
7-7B Park Donations
7-7C Library Donations
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
CHAPTER 7
DONATIONS
SECTION:
7-7-1: General Information
7-7-2: Requirements for Compliance
7-7-3: Indemnification and Covenant Not to Sue
7-7-4: Appeals
7-7-1: GENERAL INFORMATION:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, final plat or final site
plan for a planned unit development each subdivider or developer shall be
required to:
! Dedicate land for park and school sites, make a cash contribution in lieu
of actual land dedication, or provide a combination of both, and
! Make a cash contribution for library purposes to serve the immediate and
future need of the residents of the development in accordance with the
criteria and formula in this Chapter. All donations required hereunder
shall be made prior to, and as a condition of, approval of the subdivision
plat by the Village unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
All land dedications and cash contributions shall be made by the subdivider or
developer upon approval of a final plat or plan by the Corporate Authorities
unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter. No plat or plan shall be recorded
with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds until said donations have been made
in accordance with the provisions of the Chapter.
It is recognized that local conditions change over the years and the variables
used in calculating the land dedication and cash contributions may require
periodic review and amendment if necessary.
7-7-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLIANCE:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
A. REFERRAL: Upon referral of a subdivision or planned unit development by the
Corporate Authorities to the applicable Boards, Commission and Districts for
review, the subdivider or developer shall consider one of the following methods
for compliance with the terms of this Chapter.
1. Donation Requirements: The subdivider or developer shall agree to make
all land dedications and pay all cash contributions as required in this
Chapter of the Village Code.
2. Written Agreement: The subdivider or developer shall negotiate the
donation and present a written agreement to the Corporate Authorities for
consideration.
If the development is determined by the Administrative Staff to be a
substantial size and it will be completed in logical phases, the subdivider
or developer may petition the Corporate Authorities to allow payment of
the cash contribution by phases of development. Said Agreement shall
contain the dates and amounts of subsequent payments. The Corporate
Authorities may require that sufficient security be deposited with the
Village for any such delayed contribution to insure that actual payment is
made in sufficient time to meet the impact of the subdivision or planned
unit development.
The negotiation of donations may occur between the:
a. Village of Lincolnshire and Subdivider/Developer: The
subdivider or developer shall enter into an Agreement with the
Village after a negotiated donation has been presented for
consideration whereby the amount of the park, schools, and/or
library donations and the date of payment shall be established
based on the following:
1) An independent consultant will be selected and retained by
the Village at the developer's expense to study the actual
impact the proposed development will have on each
applicable taxing district and shall include at a minimum:
a) A review of each taxing district's capital budget.
b) The ability of each taxing district to provide
services to new residents at the same level of
service provided to the existing households.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 4
c) The Capital Improvement Plan for the taxing
district.
d) Any other information the Village may require to
make an informed decision.
If the independent study indicates a higher
contribution per residential unit than established by
the provisions of this Chapter the subdivider or
developer may negotiate a settlement with each
taxing district provided however, that the
negotiated donations are no less than what the
requirements of this Chapter.
b. Taxing District and Subdivider/Developer: The subdivider or
developer may negotiate a land dedication, cash contribution or
combination of both, with one or more of the taxing districts and
present the written agreement to the Corporate Authorities for
consideration at the time of final plat/plan approval. The
subdivider or developer shall be responsible for obtaining and
providing the Village with a separate written confirmation of the
agreed final contribution signed by a representative of the
individual taxing district.
B. CONSIDERATION: During consideration of the development proposal the
developer or subdivider shall submit written verification that indicates the
predominant (50% or more) residence size by bedroom anticipated for the
subdivision or planned unit development. This information will be used by the
Village to calculate the amount of donations.
The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for making additional cash
contributions when the residence size for the number of dwelling units actually
constructed in the subdivision or planned unit development is greater than the
donations made upon approval of the development. The subdivider or
developer may file a written appeal for a partial refund of donations when the
residence size for the number of dwelling units actually constructed is less than
that used to calculate the donations.
C. APPROVAL: Prior to consideration of a final plat of subdivision or planned unit
development by the Corporate Authorities, the Plan Commission, Park Board,
Site Plan Review Board and School Districts shall make a recommendation
regarding whether the donation should be land, cash in-lieu of land, or a
combination of both. The recommending Boards, Commission and Districts
shall base their recommendation on the criteria established in the specific
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 5
regulations of this Chapter.
7-7-3: INDEMNIFICATION AND COVENANT NOT TO SUE:
The Village is not obligated to cause the payment of money or the transference
of land to School Districts, or other Districts that could benefit from donations
made by developers and subdividers. Therefore any School District, Library
District and any other District for which donation is collected by the Village for
said District's use recognizes that the Village may, at its sole discretion, amend
its ordinances or annexation agreements or its practices so as to discontinue
the payment of donations to the said District(s), and, as a condition of receiving
donations hereunder, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village from
any loss, claims, debts, causes of actions or liabilities of every kind incurred by
the Village as either a direct or indirect result of the passage of this Chapter,
the administration or enforcement thereof, or the failure to administer or
enforce the same including any incurred as a result of a lawsuit brought or
threatened by any such District. The Village shall undertake the defense
against any suit or claim, subject to indemnification and reimbursement of fees
and costs from the Districts whose donations are involved or gave rise to the
claim or suit. The costs of said defense shall be borne proportionately by all
Districts whose donations are involved, concerned or gave rise to the suit or
claim, and shall be paid promptly upon billing.
In the event that a final determination is made by a court of competent
jurisdiction that contributions of land or money received by the District(s)
receiving the donation(s) are, in whole or in part, excessive, the receiving
District(s) shall promptly repay to the person who procures such a judgement
against the Village or the District(s), together with such other amounts judged
by the court to be owing from the Village and/or District(s).
Lincolnshire-Prairie View Elementary District No. 103, Aptakisic-Tripp
Elementary School District No. 102, Adlai E. Stevenson High School District
No. 125, and the Vernon Area Public Library District further covenant and
agree, in addition to the indemnification and reimbursement undertaken herein,
not to sue the Village of Lincolnshire for any claim arising directly or indirectly
out of the passage of this Chapter or the administration or enforcement thereof,
or the failure to administer or enforce the same in return for the Village
considering the requirement that developers and subdividers make donations
to them.
7-7-4: APPEALS:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 6
Within ten days from the receipt of the determination of the amount in
donations due under this Chapter from the Village, a subdivider or developer
may appeal the amount of the donation(s) in a writing filed with the Village
Clerk. The Notice of Appeal must include evidence falling into substantial
question the amount(s) determined by the Village to be due. Upon the Notice
of Appeal, containing the required showing, and the deposit as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
on account for fees and costs, the Village will retain an independent consultant
at the subdividers' or developers' expense, to review the estimated population
to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development, and impact
that the proposed development or subdivision will have on the applicable taxing
district. The Corporate Authorities retain the authority to make the final
determination on the proper amount of donation(s) based on the information
supplied with the Notice of Appeal, by the Districts to be benefitted, in the
Village records, and by the independent consultants.
A subdivider, developer, and/or taxing district shall have the right to appeal the
established Fair Market Value of Land on file with the Village of Lincolnshire.
Said appeal shall be determined in the same manner as donations, but the
independent consultant shall be qualified as an M.A.I. appraiser.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 7
CHAPTER 7
DONATIONS
ARTICLE A. SCHOOL DONATIONS
SECTION:
7-7A-1: General Information
7-7A-2: Variables For Calculation
7-7A-3: Land Dedication Criteria
7-7A-4: Cash Contribution Criteria
7-7A-5: Combination Land Dedication and Cash Contribution Criteria
7-7A-1: GENERAL INFORMATION:
The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned
unit development shall bear directly upon the amount of land dedication, cash
contribution, or combination of both required for the school donation.
The school district shall be notified that the Village is considering a residential
subdivision or planned unit development by means of an elected school board
member representing the district as an ex-officio member of the Lincolnshire
Plan Commission, or through correspondence by the Department of
Community Development in accordance with the State of Illinois law.
7-7A-2: VARIABLES FOR CALCULATION:
The land dedication, cash contribution, or combination of both for school
donations shall be calculated independently for each school classification
identified in this Section: Elementary, Junior High, and High School utilizing
the following variables:
A. TABLE OF SCHOOL SIZE SITES BY GRADE CLASSIFICATION: School
classifications and size of school sites within the Village shall be determined in
accordance with the established criteria in the following table:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 8
Table of School Size Sites by Grade Classification
School Classification
by Grade
Maximum Number of
Students for Each
Such School
Classification
Minimum Number of
Acres of Land for
Each School Site of
Such Classification
Elementary Schools,
Grades - Kindergarten
through 5th (K-5)
600 students 11 acres
Junior High Schools
Grades 6th through
8th (6-8)
900 students 29 acres
High Schools, Grades
9th through 12th
(9-12)
2,500 students 50 acres
B. TABLE OF ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT: The
following table of estimated ultimate school populations per dwelling unit is
generally indicative of current and short-range projected trends in school
population per dwelling unit and shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or cash contributions. This data shall be
used unless a written appeal is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or if a Written Agreement
otherwise establishes an acceptable dedication or contribution.
In applying the following table of population density to a subdivision for which
the types of units and number of bedrooms cannot reasonably be determined
from the data on file with the Village at the time of approval of the subdivision
plat, the following types of units and bedroom data shall be used.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 9
Table of Estimated Ultimate School Population Per Dwelling Unit1
Elementary
Grades K-5
5-10 Years
Junior High
Grades 6-8
11-13 Years
High
Grades 9-12
14-17 Years
Detached Single Family
2 Bedroom .122 .041 .020
3 Bedroom .346 .138 .142
4 Bedroom .470 .303 .303
5 Bedroom .314 .231 .212
Attached Single Family
1 Bedroom 0 0 0
2 Bedroom .095 .077 .037
3 Bedroom .237 .064 .066
4 Bedroom .345 .155 .168
Apartments
Efficiency 0 0 0
1 Bedroom .002 .001 .001
2 Bedroom .082 .041 .042
3 Bedroom .230 .123 .116
1Source: Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.;
Naperville, IL, 1993
C. FAIR MARKET VALUE OF LAND: The present fair market value of improved
land in and surrounding the Village for one (1) acre of land based on an
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 10
appraisal completed by an M.A.I. appraiser shall be maintained on file in the
Department of Community Development and as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
Said figure shall be used in making any calculation herein.
7-7A-3: LAND DEDICATION CRITERIA (SCHOOLS):
A. FORMULA: The required school land dedication shall be determined in
accordance with the formula below based on the established criteria in the
"Table of School Size Sites by Grade Classification" and the "Table of
Estimated School Population per Dwelling Unit". The end product shall be the
acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve
the estimated increase in the number of children for each school classification.
Estimated Ultimate School
Population per Dwelling Unit X Minimum # Acres of Land
Maximum # Students for Needed for School Classification
School Classification
B. LAND CONDITIONS: Land Dedications for school sites shall at a minimum
meet the following criteria.
1. Topography and Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes.
2. Improved Sites: All sites must be dedicated in a condition ready for full
service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or
acceptable provision made therefor.
3. Reservation of Additional Land: Where the Village of Lincolnshire
Comprehensive Plan or adopted plan of an applicable school district
indicates a larger amount of land for a school site in a particular
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the affected school district(s)
designated by the Village. Such acquisition shall be made by the school
district within one year from the date of approval of the final plat or plan.
4. Combining with Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or
planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, a school site which
is to be dedicated should be combined with dedications from adjoining
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 11
developments if possible in order to produce usable school site without
causing a hardship on a particular developer.
C. CRITERIA FOR LOCATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS: The
Comprehensive Plan of the Village or the standards adopted by the affected
school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
D. SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY: The subdivider or
developer shall be responsible for providing the following information to the
Village prior to consideration of final approval of a plat or plan.
1. Dedication of land on the Plat of Subdivision or Plat of Dedication.
2. Title or Warranty Deed transferring the land from the subdivider or
developer to the applicable taxing district. Titles shall be shown to be free
of all liens, encumbrances, easements, covenants and restrictions or
other matters as may impair the ability of the appropriate governmental
unit to use the property for its intended purpose as determined by the
Corporate Authorities. A commitment for title insurance issued by a
company authorized to do business in Illinois may be required as
evidence of clear title.
3. Legal description in an 8-1/2" x 11" format.
E. SCHOOL DISTRICT RESPONSIBILITY: Written acceptance from the school
district shall be submitted to the Village of Lincolnshire (Department of
Community Development) within 15 days of receipt of title for the dedicated
land.
7-7A-4: CASH CONTRIBUTION CRITERIA (SCHOOLS):
The Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution
as provided herein in lieu of the land dedication requirement when:
! The subdivision or development is small and the resulting land dedication
for school purposes would not meet the criteria set forth in this Chapter,
or
! The available land is of a nature and/or location inappropriate for a school
site as determined by reference to adopted plans of the Village and
school district and based on such factors as topography, shape of site,
accessibility, proximity to other parks, schools and Municipal services,
safety and other environmental and use factors.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 12
The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of
the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein that otherwise would
have been dedicated as a school site.
A. METHOD OF CALCULATION: The cash contribution in lieu of school land
dedication shall be determined by multiplying the minimum number of acres of
land needed for the school classification times the fair market value of one acre
of improved land as determined by an M.A.I. appraiser.
B. SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY: In those cases where a
cash contribution is required to be paid to the Village an Agreement and Notice
as specified in this Title shall be placed on all final plats of subdivision.
The cash contribution and all development review fees shall be paid to the
Village prior to the recording of the final plat of subdivision or plan at the office
of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and before any development occurs on
the subject property. Cash contributions shall be deemed made upon deposit
with the Village of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or security approved by
the Corporate Authorities.
C. SCHOOL DISTRICT RESPONSIBILITY:
1. Conditions of Acceptance:
a. The school district agrees that the contribution shall be solely for
the purposes set forth in Title 7: Subdivisions and Land
Development, of the Lincolnshire Village Code. Specifically, the
school district agrees that the contribution shall be for the use in
the acquisition of land to serve the immediate or future needs of
residents from that subdivision or development; for the capital
improvement of any existing school facility which already
services such needs; or for the construction of any buildings or
additions thereto necessary to serve such needs.
In the event a school district refuses to accept the cash
contribution under the established terms and conditions, the
cash contribution shall be immediately returned to the
subdivider/developer.
b. The cash contribution shall be held by the affected school district
in a special trust fund. Any interest which accrues on said
special trust fund shall also be used solely for the purposes set
forth in this Chapter.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 13
c. The school district agrees that if any portion of a cash
contribution is not expended for the purposes set forth herein
within ten (10) years from the date of receipt it shall be refunded
to the subdivider or developer who made such contribution. The
developer shall file a written request with the Village within one
year after expiration of the ten (10) year period specifying the
portion not so expended.
2. Obligations after Acceptance:
a. Immediate: Written acceptance from the school district shall be
submitted to the Village of Lincolnshire (Department of
Community Development) within 15 days of receipt of the cash
contribution.
b. Annual: The school district shall annually account to the Director
of Financial Systems of the Village for all expenditures made and
interest earned from said cash contributions. The annual
accounting shall be made within sixty (60) days of the end of the
districts fiscal year. Cash contributions will be withheld until said
report is received by the Village.
7-7A-5: COMBINATION LAND DEDICATION AND CASH CONTRIBUTION
CRITERIA (SCHOOLS):
In the event an identified school site is:
! Located on more than one development parcel or property, or
! Only a portion of the development property is needed to complete a
designated school site
A combination of land dedication and cash contribution for a subdivision or
planned unit development may be necessary and shall be in accordance with
all regulations of this Title, and the following:
Land Dedication: That area designated for a school site on the development
parcel shall be dedicated.
Cash Contribution: The cash contribution shall be based on the difference
between the acres of land which will be dedicated for the school site and the
total acres required for school site land dedication in the development.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 14
CHAPTER 7
DONATIONS
ARTICLE B. PARK DONATIONS
SECTION:
7-7B-1: General Information
7-7B-2: Variables For Calculation
7-7B-3: Land Dedication Criteria
7-7B-4: Cash Contribution Criteria
7-7B-5: Combination Land Dedication and Cash Contribution Criteria
7-7B-1: GENERAL INFORMATION:
The ultimate population to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land dedication, cash
contribution, or combination of both required for the park donation.
The Village of Lincolnshire Park Board and Plan Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Corporate Authorities based on the criteria set forth in
this Chapter as to the preferred park donation. Said recommendation shall be
made after full consideration of all adopted plans have been reviewed in the
context of accepted site planning, zoning, environmental, maintenance and
other issues of concern which will effect the Village in the future.
7-7B-2: VARIABLES FOR CALCULATION:
The land dedication, cash contribution, or combination of both for the park
donation shall be calculated utilizing the following variables:
A. POPULATION RATIO: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall
bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total
requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of
ultimate population.(Ord. Amd. 08-3012-40, eff 12/10/07)
B. ULTIMATE POPULATION OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT: The ultimate
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 15
population will be determined by multiplying the number of residential units
times the mean number of persons per occupied housing unit average in the
Village as determined by the latest United States Census Bureau or Special
Census statistics on file in the Department of Community Development.
# Dwelling Units X Mean # of Persons per=Ultimate Population of
Occupied Housing Unit Proposed Development
C. FAIR MARKET VALUE OF LAND: The present fair market value of improved
land in and surrounding the Village for one (1) acre of land based on an
appraisal completed by an M.A.I. appraiser shall be maintained on file in the
Department of Community Development and as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
Said figure shall be used in making any calculation herein.
7-7B-3: LAND DEDICATION CRITERIA (PARKS):
A. FORMULA: The required park land dedication shall be determined in
accordance with the formula below based on the population ratio and ultimate
proposed population of the proposed development. The product shall be the
acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for park sites to serve the
estimated increase of residents from the new development.
Ultimate Population of
Proposed Development X 10 acres = # Acres of Park Land
1,000 Ultimate Population to be dedicated
B. LAND CONDITIONS:
1. Topography: The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as
well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes.
a. Grading: The park site shall be rough graded in accordance with
the present Village requirements for final grading and in
accordance with grading plans approved by the Village Engineer.
b. Drainage: Positive drainage must be insured as indicated on a
master drainage plan. The storage of overburden on a park site
is prohibited though temporary storage may be granted in some
cases provide the terms of such temporary storage have been
determined by the Village Engineer.
2. Improved Sites:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 16
Utilities: At the time of installation of public improvements in the
subdivision or planned unit development, the subdivider or developer
shall install all required public utilities throughout the park site in
accordance with the Village approved engineering plans. This work shall
be completed prior to acceptance by the Village of the public utilities in
the subdivision or planned unit development which includes said park site.
3. Reservation of Additional Land: Where the Comprehensive Plan or the
standards of the Village call for a larger amount of park site in a particular
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the Village, provided that such
acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final
plat.
4. Combining with Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or
planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, a park which is to
be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from
adjoining developments in order to produce usable park site without
hardship on a particular developer.
C. CRITERIA FOR LOCATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS: The following plans
shall be adhered to in determining the location(s) of park sites:
The Village of Lincolnshire Comprehensive Plan
The Village of Lincolnshire Parks and Open Space Master Plan
Lake County Open Space Plan
Northeastern Illinois Open Space Plan
Lake County Framework Plan
Des Plaines River Trail Master Plan
Additional guidelines which shall be considered in locating park sites include,
but are not limited to, the size of the subdivision, proximity of the site to other
parks, schools and Municipal services, topography of the site, shape of the
site, accessibility of the site, safety and other environmental and use
conditions.
The extent to which the design standards are adhered to will be the basis by
which the amount of park site credit will be determined. A reduced amount of
park site credit will be granted by the Corporate Authorities should a proposed
park site be deficient in one or more of the following park site design
standards.
1. Size: The size of a park shall be appropriate to the leisure and
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 17
recreational needs of the service population as defined by the Village of
Lincolnshire Comprehensive Plan and Parks and Open Space Master
Plan and shall be consistent with the required donations as set forth in
this Chapter.
2. Shape: Park sites should be rectangular or nearly rectangular in shape.
An irregular limit of a park may be allowed if defined by a river, lake,
pond, rock outcropping, forest, meadow, wetland or other natural feature.
3. Location: Whenever possible park sites shall be located at the geographic
center of the service areas. In areas where park sites and/or school sites
already exist or have been previously planned, the proposed park
donation shall, if possible be located adjacent to or provide appropriate
linkage with the existing sites.
4. Access: Access to the park site shall be provided for convenience of
pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress, as well as for visual identity.
The minimum required frontage of the park shall be equal to or greater
than the longest edge of the park. Any accessway shall be improved with
a hard surface walkway eight feet (8') in width constructed to Village
specifications. The number of accesses shall vary with the location and
type of park site and its relationship to surrounding land uses.
5. Linkage: The linkage of proposed parks with existing parks or with other
desirable land uses such as schools, libraries, convenience commercial
areas, cultural or institutional centers shall be encouraged. The method of
linkage shall include but not be limited to, bike paths and walkways. Land
used for linkage purposes shall be included in the calculations of total
donation.
6. Grading: Any proposed grading of the park site shall not differ greatly
from surrounding land uses. Grades less than two percent (2%) or more
than seven percent (7%) will not be acceptable. Exceptions to this may be
granted if the developer can show an acceptable secondary use for the
grading. Examples are earth berming for visual buffer or aesthetic
interest, a sled hill or toboggan run, backstop for special activities and the
like. Drainage on the proposed park site shall be such that the site can
be used for its intended purpose.
7. Vegetation: The donation of park land shall be planned and designed to
minimize impact on vegetation of ecological or aesthetic value. Existing
vegetation of value shall be identified by the Village Forester and
protected from damage during the construction process.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 18
Any areas disturbed as a result of construction activity shall be restored to
its original condition or in accordance with the Open Space Landscape
Standards as determined by the Village. The subdivider or developer
shall be responsible for removing invasive and dangerous plant species
as required by the Village. The Village shall be given the right to
remove/salvage from an area proposed for clearing any desirable plant
materials for which the developer has no intended use. The Village will
notify the developer of the plant material desired for removal prior to any
work commencing on the site and shall remove the plant material within
thirty (30) days following the final plan approval.
8. Erosion Control: The developer will be responsible for controlling erosion
on the park site until the park site is dedicated to the Village.
9. Water Retention/Detention: Land that is designated for water
retention/detention purposes within the area of the proposed development
shall not be considered appropriate as a park donation site. However, if
suitable recreational uses are shown for land otherwise designated for
retention/detention purposes and have been recommended for approval
by the Park Board and the Village Engineer as acceptable, then credit
may be extended as a park donation site, subject to final approval by the
Board of Trustees.
10. Debris: Any accumulated debris on the park site to be dedicated shall be
removed by the developer, at developer's expense, prior to acceptance of
the land by the Village.
D. SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY: The subdivider or
developer shall be responsible for providing the following information to the
Village prior to consideration of final approval of a plat or plan.
1. Dedication of land on the Plat of Subdivision or Plat of Dedication.
2. Title or Warranty Deed transferring the land from the subdivider or
developer to the applicable taxing district. Titles shall be shown to be free
of all liens, encumbrances, easements, covenants and restrictions or
other matters as may impair the ability of the appropriate governmental
unit to use the property for its intended purpose as determined by the
Corporate Authorities. A commitment for title insurance issued by a
company authorized to do business in Illinois may be required as
evidence of clear title.
3. Legal description in an 8-1/2" x 11" format.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 19
7-7B-4: CASH CONTRIBUTION CRITERIA (PARKS):
The Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution
as provided herein in lieu of the land dedication requirement when:
! The subdivision or development is small and the resulting land dedication
for park purposes would not meet the criteria set forth in this Chapter, or
! The available land is of a nature and/or location inappropriate for a park
site as determined by reference to adopted plans of the Village and based
on such factors as topography, shape of site, accessibility, proximity to
other parks, schools and Municipal services, safety and other
environmental and use factors.
The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market
value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein that
otherwise would have been dedicated as a park site.
A. METHOD OF CALCULATION: The cash contribution in lieu of park land
dedication shall be determined by multiplying the required number of acres of
park land to be dedicated times the fair market value of one acre of improved
land as determined by an M.A.I. appraiser.
B. SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY: In those cases where a
cash contribution is required to be paid to the Village an Agreement and Notice
as specified in this Title shall be placed on all final plats of subdivision.
The cash contribution and all development review fees shall be paid to the
Village prior to the recording of the final plat of subdivision or plan at the office
of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and before any development occurs on
the subject property. Cash contributions shall be deemed made upon deposit
with the Village of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or security approved by
the Corporate Authorities.
C. VILLAGE RESPONSIBILITY:
1. Conditions of Acceptance:
a. The Village of Lincolnshire agrees that the contribution shall be
solely for the purposes set forth in Title 7: Subdivisions and
Land Development, of the Lincolnshire Village Code.
Specifically, the Village agrees that the contribution shall be for
the use in the acquisition of land to serve the immediate or future
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 20
needs of residents from that subdivision or development; for the
capital improvement of any existing park facility which already
services such needs; or for the construction of any buildings or
additions thereto necessary to serve such needs.
In the event the Village refuses to accept the cash contribution
upon said condition, the cash contribution shall be immediately
returned to the subdivider/developer.
b. The cash contribution shall be held by the Village in a special
trust fund. Any interest which accrues on said special trust fund
shall also be used solely for the purposes set forth in this
Chapter.
c. The Village agrees that if any portion of a cash contribution is not
expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years
from the date of receipt it shall be refunded to the developer who
made such contribution. The developer shall file a written
request with the Village within one year after expiration of the ten
(10) year period specifying the portion not so expended.
7-7B-5: COMBINATION LAND DEDICATION AND CASH CONTRIBUTION
CRITERIA (PARKS):
In the event an identified park site is:
! Located on more than one development parcel or property, or
! Only a portion of the development property is needed to complete a
designated park, or
! The proposed park site donation is deficient in one or more of the park
site design standards resulting in a reduction in the amount of park site
credit granted (as determined by the Corporate Authorities)
A combination of land dedication and cash contribution for a subdivision
or planned unit development may be necessary and shall be in
accordance with all regulations of this Title, and the following:
Land Dedication: That area designated for a park site on the development
parcel shall be dedicated.
Cash Contribution: The cash contribution shall be based on the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 21
difference between the acres of land which will be dedicated for the park
site and the total acres required for park land dedication in the
development.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 22
CHAPTER 7
DONATIONS
ARTICLE C. LIBRARY DONATIONS
SECTION:
7-7C-1: General Information
7-7C-2: Variables For Calculation
7-7C-3: Cash Contribution Criteria
7-7C-1: GENERAL INFORMATION:
The Corporate Authorities have found that the public interest, convenience,
health, welfare and safety requires the continued support of and financial
assistance to the Vernon Area Public Library. The ultimate number of families
to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall therefore,
bear directly on the amount of the library donation.
7-7C-2: VARIABLES FOR CALCULATION:
The Vernon Area Public Library shall provide the Village of Lincolnshire
(Department of Community Development) with a basic level of contribution
established by projected capital expenditures directly resulting from new
residential construction in the Village, including but not limited to, facility
construction, expansion and upgrades; bookmobiles; and additional volumes
and equipment added to the collection per year.
7-7C-3: CASH CONTRIBUTION CRITERIA (LIBRARY):
The Village shall require the subdivider or developer to make a cash
contribution for library purposes as provided herein.
A. METHOD OF CALCULATION: The amount of the contribution for each
dwelling unit shall be equal to the basic contribution established by the Vernon
Area Public Library District and approved by the Corporate Authorities for the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 23
first bedroom, plus 1/2 the basic contribution for each additional bedroom. The
basic contribution approved by the Corporate Authorities shall be maintained
on file in the Department of Community Development and as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
B. SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY: In those cases where a
cash contribution is required to be paid to the Village an Agreement and Notice
as specified in this Title shall be placed on all final plats of subdivision.
The cash contribution and all development review fees shall be paid to the
Village prior to the recording of the final plat of subdivision or plan at the office
of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and before any development occurs on
the subject property. Cash contributions shall be deemed made upon deposit
with the Village of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or security approved by
the Corporate Authorities.
C. LIBRARY DISTRICT RESPONSIBILITY:
1. Conditions of Acceptance:
a. The library district agrees that the contribution shall be solely for
the purposes set forth in Title 7: Subdivisions and Land
Development, of the Lincolnshire Village Code. Specifically, the
library district agrees that the contribution shall be for the use in
the acquisition of land to serve the immediate or future needs of
residents from that subdivision or development; for the capital
improvement of any existing library facility which already services
such needs; for the acquisition of additional volumes and
equipment; or for the construction of any buildings or additions
thereto necessary to serve such needs.
In the event the library district refuses to accept the cash
contribution upon said condition, the cash contribution shall be
immediately returned to the subdivider/developer.
b. The cash contribution shall be held by the library district in a
special trust fund. Any interest which accrues on said special
trust fund shall also be used solely for the purposes set forth in
this Chapter.
c. The library district agrees that if any portion of a cash
contribution is not expended for the purposes set forth herein
within ten (10) years from the date of receipt it shall be refunded
to the developer who made such contribution. The developer
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 7-7: DONATIONS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 24
shall file a written request with the Village within one year after
expiration of the ten (10) year period specifying the portion not
so expended.
2. Obligations after Acceptance:
a. Immediate: Written acceptance from the library district shall be
submitted to the Village of Lincolnshire (Department of
Community Development) within 15 days of receipt of the cash
contribution.
b. Annual: The Library District shall annually account to the
Director of Financial Systems of the Village for all expenditures
made and interest earned from said cash contributions. The
annual accounting shall be made within sixty (60) days of the
end of the districts fiscal year. Cash contributions will be
withheld until said report is received by the Village.(Amend. Ord.
94-1366-50)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 05/14/2018 Page 1
VILLAGE PARKS
8-1 Village Parks
8-1A Swimming Facilities
8-1B Picnic Areas
8-1C Village Owned Nature Preserves and Natural Areas
8-1D Canoe Launch Rack
8-1E Athletic Fields
8-1F Use of Village Property
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 1
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
Sections:
8-1-1: Applicability
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Hours
8-1-4: Motor Vehicle Restrictions
8-1-5: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
8-1-6: Rules
8-1-1: Applicability:
This Chapter shall apply to all designated parks, Natural Areas and Nature Preserves owned by
the Village of Lincolnshire.
8-1-2: Definitions:
For the purpose of this Section, the following terms, words and phrases shall be the meaning
herein given. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUSINESS DAYS Weekdays exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
FAMILY All adult persons residing in the same household, whose legal
residence is that household; and those minor children for whom the
head of household has legal guardianship and who reside with that
guardian. (Ord. No. 99-1639-23)
NATURAL AREAS Those areas which are managed to be in a natural state to support
native biological diversity.
NATURE PRESERVES Those areas dedicated as Illinois Nature Preserves which are
provided the highest level of protection by the State of Illinois. They
are managed for preservation, protection and enhancement of
native biological diversity. They are the North Park Natural Areas,
Old Mill Woods Addition to Florsheim Nature Preserves and
Florsheim Nature Preserves.
NORTH PARK SPORTS
FACILITY
The active recreational area of North Park where the sports fields
are located, including but not limited to the baseball diamonds,
softball diamonds, soccer fields, picnic pavilion,
concession/restroom/warming building with plaza, recreational
skating areas, basketball courts, tennis courts, playground and
parking lot.
PICNIC Any outing at which persons attend as a cohesive group and partake
of food or drink. The term “picnic” as used herein does not include
any affair, event or activity sponsored or conducted by the Village.
SWIMMING FACILITY The lake and sand beach area of Spring Lake Park.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 2
8-1-3: Hours:
(Ord. Amd. 98-1582-44, eff. 7/13/98)(Ord. Amd. 98-1600-62, eff. 10/12/98)
A. Park Hours: The North Park Sports Facility shall be open only during the hours of
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. through eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. of each day throughout
each year except when at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees, permits the
park to remain open past eleven o’clock (11:00) PM.
Florsheim Park, North Park Natural Area, Old Mill Woods Addition to Florsheim
Nature Preserve and Rivershire Park - shall be open only from sunrise to sunset of
each day throughout each year except when at the sole discretion of the Board of
Trustees, it permits the park to remain open past sunset.
All other parks shall be open only during the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
through ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. of each day throughout each year, except, when
at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees, it permits a park to remain open for
hours other than those listed above.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be present upon the premises of any park,
Natural Areas or Nature Preserve except during the aforesaid hours. The
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the
Village in course of Village business. (Amd. Ord. 01-1787-45, eff. 11/12/01)
B. Restrooms: Spring Lake Restrooms: The Spring Lake Restrooms shall be open
only from ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. through sunset of each day throughout each
year and it shall be unlawful for any person to be present on these premises except
during the aforesaid hours.
The North Park Sports Facility Restrooms: The North Park Sports Facility
restrooms shall be open from ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. through sunset of each day
throughout each year unless facility lights have been permitted for a longer period.
Restrooms shall be open when facility lights are on and sports facilities are being
utilized for a permitted activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present on
these premises except during the aforesaid hours and when facility lights are on
and the sports facility is being utilized for a permitted activity. The provisions of this
Chapter shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the Village in the
course of Village business.
8-1-4: Motor Vehicle Restrictions:
A. Hours, Illegal Parking: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park
such vehicle on the premises of any park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day throughout each year, with the
exception of North Park which shall be the hours of eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 3
and six o’clock (6:00) A. M. any day throughout each year. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to any officer, agent or employee of the Village in the
course of Village business or those who have been permitted special use of the
parking lot by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. No. 99-1639-23)
B. Illegally Parked Vehicles: The Village is authorized to have any vehicle parked in
violation of this Chapter towed away and stored and the cost of towing and storing
said vehicle shall be assessed against the driver or owner of such vehicle and
such assessment shall be in addition to the punishment otherwise imposed under
this Code.
C. Signs: It shall be the duty of the Village official to cause signs to be erected in
appropriate places in all parks where parking is provided, indicating the hours
during which parking is prohibited therein.
8-1-5: Prohibited Acts and Conditions:
The provisions of this Section shall apply in all Village parks.
A. No person shall dump, deposit feces or leave any papers, bottles, broken glass,
cans, rubbish waste or other trash anywhere on park grounds, but instead shall
place all such waste or trash in proper receptacles where these are provided.
Where receptacles are not provided or when those provided are full to capacity, all
such waste and trash or other materials shall be carried away from the park by the
person or persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
B. No person shall use or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier in any park unless
prior approval has been granted by the Village. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to officers, agents and employees of the Village in the course of Village
business.
C. Musical bands are prohibited in all parks; A musical band may be permitted in
connection with any Village sponsored special event or activity conducted and/or
authorized by the Village.
D. No person shall construct or erect any building, tent or other structure of any kind
in any park, whether permanent or temporary in character, without first having
obtained a permit from the Village in accordance with all applicable provisions of
the Village Code.1 The provisions of this section shall not apply to officers, agents
1 See Title 6 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 4
and employees of the Village in the course of Village Business.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any wildlife at any Village Park, Natural
Areas or Nature Preserve. This would include but not be limited to: geese and
ducks. The provisions of this section shall not apply to officers, agents and
employees of the Village in the course of Village Business.
Any person who violates this provision shall, upon a finding of guilty, be fined at
cost as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
Title 1 of this Code.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any natural thing from the Natural
Areas of any of the Village Parks, Natural Areas or Nature Preserves: this would
include but not be limited to wood, plants, etc. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to officers, agents and employees of the Village in the course of Village
Business.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn wood found in any of the parks. Anyone
found in violation of this prohibition shall be fined at cost as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the
Village in the course of Village Business.
H. No individual, organization, or entity of any kind shall use the Village's park,
facilities park, Natural Areas, Nature Preserves, and/or other property in the course
of, as part of, ancillary to, or in support of any for-profit activity, commerce, service,
business, or enterprise, regardless of whether a profit actually materializes.
I. No park, Natural Areas, Nature Preserve or other property of the Village shall be
used for assembling people, for loading and/or unloading buses, vans or other
vehicles of any type or description, or for any other purpose in the course of or
ancillary to or in support of any activity, commerce, service, business, or enterprise
organized or intended to be for profit, including private camps, entertainment, and
sporting organizations, regardless of whether a profit actually materializes, except
as a concessionaire under license issued by, or contract with, the Village or any
other provider of materials or services under a contract with, or license or permit
issued by the Village.
J. No individual, organization, or entity of any kind seeking to earn or produce a profit,
including private camps and entertainment and/or sporting organizations, shall
provide or purport to provide a person or persons, regardless of age, with the
Village's parks, park grounds, fields, courts, facilities, buildings or other amenities,
including parking areas, for such person or persons to use, when a price or fee is
charged, or as part of a product, service or course of conduct for which a charge,
fee or price is asked and/or received in commerce, or to provide camp,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 5
entertainment and/or sporting activities, except concessionaires providing items of
food and/or drink under a concession license or contract with the Village or any
other provider of materials or services under a contract with, or license or permit
issued by the Village.
K. Each person using the Village's parks, park facilities, Natural Areas, Nature
Preserves, and other property in violation of this Ordinance or park rules as posted
in the parks, shall constitute the commission of an offense and each day on which
it occurs shall additionally be considered a separate offense. A penalty for each
such offense shall be imposed upon each individual, organization, or entity of any
kind who commits, knowingly allows, or knowingly benefits in the course of its
business or commerce from said violation or violations of this Ordinance. If more
than one individual, organization, or entity, such as a bus company or driver, act in
concert by contract or otherwise to commit an offense under this Ordinance, a
penalty may be imposed on each offender separately without regard to any penalty
imposed on the other or others under the terms of this section.
L. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a pet or animal, including dogs, into any
of the village parks, park facilities, Natural Areas, or Nature Preserves. The
penalty to be assessed at a cost as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the Village in the
course of Village Business.
M. Any individual, organization or entity shall be required to comply with park, Natural
Areas or Nature Preserve rules and regulations and all applicable Village
ordinance as stated in this section and as posted in any Village park.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, or rules or regulations as posted
in any Village Park, Nature Preserve or Natural Areas shall be fined in accordance
with the applicable section of the Village Code or Illinois Compiled Statutes, for
each violation. This penalty shall not be exclusive, but rather, the Village reserves
the right to any and all other remedies as may be available under law or equity.
(Ord. 82-704-11)(Ord Amd. 99-1649-33, eff. 6/14/99)(Ord. Amd. 99-1665-49, eff.
7/12/99) (Ord. Amd. 03-1832-09, eff. 3/10/03)(Ord. Amd. 04-1897-13), eff.
5/10/04)(Ord. Amd. 09-3078-01, eff. 1/12/09)
8-1-5: Rules:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate park rules as posted in the parks.
(Amd. Ord. 07-2982-10, eff. 4/23/07)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 6
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE A. Swimming Facilities
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Fees
8-1A-2: Tags
8-1A-3: Use by Nonresident Guests
8-1A-4: Hours
8-1A-5: Beach Permits
8-1A-1: Fees
A. Fees Set: The fees as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code are hereby established and shall be paid by
persons using the lake located in Spring Lake Park as a swimming facility.
For the purposes of this Section a “family” is defined as all adult persons residing
in the same household, whose legal residence is that household; and those minor
children for whom the head of household has legal guardianship and who reside
with that guardian.(Ord. No. 99-1639-23)
For the purposes of this Section, a “swimming facility” is defined as the lake and
sand beach area. (Ord. Amd. 96-1466-50 eff. 11/11/96)
B. Payment of Fees: Each person desiring to use the aforesaid swimming facility on
a daily basis shall pay the daily fee provided for in this Section to the lifeguard who
shall be on duty at said swimming facility. Each person desiring to pay the yearly
fee for use of said swimming facility shall pay such fee to the Village. Persons
purchasing daily passes wishing to purchase a season pass may apply the value
of one daily pass per person or family member toward the purchase of a season
pass upon presenting proof of purchase to the Village Clerk.(Ord. 92-1247-25)
(Amd. Ord. 95-1386-16 eff. 5/8/95)
C. Payment of Fee and Display of Tag Required: It shall be unlawful for any person
to use said swimming facility without having paid the fee required and without
displaying the proper identification tag as provided in this Section. (1971 Code
'40-3-4)
8-1A-2: Tags
A. Yearly Swim Tags: Upon payment of the yearly fee, the Village shall provide such
person so paying the fee a suitable tag signifying that such fee has been paid.
Suitable tags shall be provided by the Village to be sufficiently durable for the
purpose intended and of a different color for each year. (1971 Code 40-3-3) Such
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 7
tag must be displayed to the lifeguard on all subsequent occasions when the
swimming facility is used. Each individual swim tag is issued to one individual and
shall only be used by that individual. Yearly swim tags are non-transferrable (Ord.
No. 99-1639-23)
B. Daily Swim Tags: Upon payment of the daily fee, Village staff shall provide such
person so paying the fee a suitable tag signifying that such fee has been paid.
Such tag must be displayed to the lifeguard on the day that it was issued. Each
daily tag shall be sufficiently durable for the purpose intended and of a different
color as daily required. Each individual swim tag is issued to one individual and
shall only be used by that individual. Daily swim tags are non-transferrable. (Ord.
No. 99-1639-23)
8-1A-3: Use by Non-Resident Guests
Each resident having paid the fee required by this Section shall be entitled to be
accompanied by any number of non-resident guests for whom such non-resident
fee has been paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nonresidents may be denied
admission to the swimming facility at any such time as the facility is overcrowded
or the admission of additional persons threatens to cause an overcrowded
condition. (1971 Code '40-3-5) Residents shall have first priority.
8-1A-4: Swimming Times
Swimming shall be permitted only commencing on the Saturday preceding
Memorial Day through and including September 30 of each year. Swimming at
Spring Lake Park is prohibited under the following circumstances:
A. Between October 1 and the Saturday before Memorial Day of each year.
B. Between sunset and sunrise of any day when swimming is otherwise permitted.
C. By persons under the age of 17 unless accompanied by a person 17 years of age
or older (or) a lifeguard is present.
D. The Village Manager or his designee shall have the authority to close the beach at
their discretion.
All persons in the beach area and/or swimming in the lake are required to follow
beach rules at all times. (Ord. Amd. 99-1661-45, eff. 6/15/99)
8-1A-5: Beach Permits
The Village will grant a beach permit for groups using Spring Lake Beach under
the following conditions:
A. Required Permits: Beach permits must be requested when the size of the group
is ten (10) or more and less than thirty (30). Groups of less than ten (10) are not
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 8
required to have a beach permit. Groups of thirty (30) or more shall be prohibited.
B. Non-Refundable Application and User's Fee: A nonrefundable application and
user's fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter
15 of Title 1 of this Code shall be paid upon application for the beach permit. All
other fees for beach use shall be in accordance with Article 8-1A of the Village
Code.
C. Beach Permit Inspection: At the conclusion of the each scheduled event, an
inspection of the beach area will be performed by Village staff to determine if the
beach area (or Village property located thereon) was damaged or was left in a
littered and unsightly condition. If there are damages and/or expenses incurred by
the Village as a result of said event, the permitee shall be responsible for the costs
of such damage and may be invoiced for all such costs.
D. Permit Applications: Only a natural person may apply for and receive a beach
permit. No permit shall be issued in the name of a corporation, partnership or other
entity with the exception of not-for-profit groups located within the Village of
Lincolnshire and School Districts 103 and 125 as stated in this section. A resident
of the Village may apply for a permit at any time within sixty (60) business days of
the proposed event. A non-resident may apply for a permit at any time within
twenty (20) business days of the proposed event. All permit applications must be
submitted to the Village at least ten (10) business days prior to the event. The
application shall be submitted on appropriate forms provided by the Village to the
Village in writing and shall contain:
1. Name, address and telephone number of an individual applicant responsible
for the group.
2. Name of the organization (if any).
3. Total number of participants (age 16 and under) and total number of
participants (age 17 and older) expected to use the facility.
4. Date and hour(s) for which a permit is desired including a specific hour when
the event will terminate.
5. Alternate date and time requested.
6. Any additional information or special requests that would be of assistance in
approving the beach permit.
E. Standards for Issuance: The Village shall issue a beach special use permit when
he/she finds:
1. The permittee has fully completed a written application on appropriate forms
provided by the Village for a beach permit and paid any required fees.
2. The permit application has been submitted on time and discloses that the
proposed use will not be in derogation of any beach restrictions.
3. The beach area desired has not been reserved for other use at the day or
during the hours requested in the application.
4. The permittee shall purchase daily beach tags for each individual in the group
according to the fee schedule. (Ord. No. 99-1639-23)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 9
F. Permits will not be issued for holidays and shall be restricted to the hours of 11:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekends. The Village reserves the right to refuse a permit
application based on staffing restrictions. (Amd. Ord. 09-3097-20, eff. 06/08/09)
G. Appeal: Within five (5) business days after receipt of an application for a required
beach permit, the Village shall, if the permit is denied, notify the applicant in writing
of the reasons for refusing to issue the permit. Any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal the decision. The appeal shall be in writing and directed to the
Village Manager. The Village Manager shall consider the permit application under
the standards set forth above and within three (3) business days either sustain or
overrule the Village’s Clerk’s decision. The decision of the Village Manager shall
be given to the applicant in writing and it shall be final.
H. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable
Village ordinances as fully as though the same were set forth in the permit.
I. There must be one adult 21 years of age or over to supervise the group or
organization.
J. Supervisors will be responsible for enforcing all applicable beach regulations.
Additional safety directions will be issued by the lifeguards as conditions and
situations dictate. Violations of these regulations and/or directions will be
considered sufficient cause for revocation of the permit.
K. At all times during any event for which a permit is required, the permit must be in
the actual physical possession of the supervisor. Upon request of any Village
official, any park attendant or any police officer of the Village, the permit shall be
produced and exhibited.
L. Not-for-profit groups based in the Village and school districts #103 and #125
sponsored groups will be allowed a beach permit and shall be required to pay the
normal daily resident fee for each individual using the beach and the application
fee will be waived. (Ord. 69-1044-11)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 10
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE B. Picnic Areas
Sections:
8-1B-1: Picnic Area Restrictions
8-1B-2: Picnic Permits
8-1B-3 Fire Place Permits
8-1B-1: Picnic Area Restrictions:
A. A permit is required and shall be obtained for any picnic with thirty (30) or more
participants. No person shall continue participation in any picnic involving thirty
(30) or more persons unless a valid permit has been issued. (0rd. 82-704-11)
B. Parking for persons attending picnics is permitted in designated parking areas
only. No person shall park any motor vehicle in a designated "picnic area"' or
otherwise on any park Natural Areas or Nature Preserve property not designated
by the Village as a "parking area". Any use of a designated parking area shall be in
accordance with any and all posted restrictions and also in accordance with any
direction of any Village staff or any official of the Village. Parking is not permitted in
or near the area designated for picnics in subsection 8-10-2A above. (Ord. 82-704-
11; and. Ord. 82-715-22; Ord. 82-729-36)(Ord. Amd. 99-1631-15, eff. 3/8/99) The
provisions of this section shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the
Village in course of Village business.
8-1B-2: Picnic Permits:
A. Required Permits: A picnic permit is required for any picnic at which thirty (30) or
more persons participate as a group. A picnic permit for a group of less than thirty
(30) persons is not required, but may be obtained solely for priority purposes. (Ord.
Amd. 99-1631-15, eff. 3/8/99)
B. Application and User's Fee: An application and user's fee as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code shall
be paid upon application for a required picnic permit.
C. Picnic Permit Inspection: At the conclusion of the each scheduled event, an
inspection of the picnic area will be performed by Village staff to determine if the
picnic area (or Village property located thereon) was damaged or was left in a
littered and unsightly condition. If there are damages and/or expenses incurred by
the Village as a result of said event, the permitee shall be responsible for the costs
of such damage and may be invoiced for all such costs.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 11
D. Permit Applications: Only an individual person may apply for and receive a picnic
permit. No permit shall be issued in the name of a corporation, partnership or other
entity. A resident of the Village may apply for a permit at any time within ninety (90)
business days of the proposed picnic. A non-resident may apply for a permit at any
time within twenty (20) business days of the proposed picnic. All permit
applications must be submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to the picnic.
The application shall be submitted to the Village in writing and shall contain:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The day and hours for which the permit is desired, including the specific hour
at which the picnic is to terminate.
3. The specific picnic area or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.
4. An estimate of the number of persons who it is anticipated will attend the
picnic.
E. Standards for Issuance: The Village shall issue a picnic permit when he and/or
she finds:
1. That the permittee has fully completed a written application for a picnic permit
and paid any required fee.
2. That the permit application has been submitted on time and discloses that the
proposed picnic will not be in derogation of any picnic restrictions as set forth
in Section 8B1-2.
3. That the picnic area desired has not been reserved for other use at the day
and during the hours requested in the application.
F. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable
Village ordinances as fully as though the same were set forth in the permit.
G. At all times during any picnic for which a permit is required, the permit must be in
the actual physical possession of a participant whether that be the permittee or his
designee. Upon request of the Village official, the permit shall be produced and
exhibited.
H. No person shall disturb or unreasonably interfere with any person or persons
occupying any picnic area under authority of a duly issued picnic permit. (Ord. 82-
704-11)
I. The fee referred to in subsection B above does not apply to picnics sponsored or
conducted by any taxing body part or all of whose boundaries are within the Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 12
or the Special Recreation Association of Central Lake County acting in its capacity
of providing recreational programs for the Village. (Ord. 82-729-36)
J. The number and location of participants, at a permitted picnic, shall be limited to
the following:
North Park Concession Area 200 participants
North Park Picnic Pavilion 40 participants
The area designated for picnics in North Park is the brick and concrete area
immediately adjacent to the concession/restroom/warming building where the
picnic tables are located and the area directly beneath the picnic pavilion in the
Natural Areas where the picnic tables are located.
Spring Lake Park 100 participants
The area designated for picnics in Spring Lake Park is between the northwest
boundary of the softball diamond and the east bank of the Des Plaines River where
the picnic tables are located.
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to conduct, participate or
continue participation in any picnic involving more than thirty (30) persons in Spring
Lake Park during the period May 1 to October 31 unless a waiver has been
obtained from the Village Board.
Whytegate Park 50 participants
K. Picnic permits are not required in the following parks because large group picnics
are prohibited:
Balzer Park
Bicentennial Park
Memorial Park (Amend Ord. 08-3029-12, eff. 03/10/08)
Olde Mill Park
Rivershire Park
L. No picnics of any kind shall be allowed in the following parks:
Florsheim Nature Preserve and the North Park and Olde Mill Woods
additions to Florsheim Nature Preserve (Amend Ord. 08-3029-12, eff.
03/10/08)
M. The Village of Lincolnshire reserves the right to restrict permits for picnics in any
park or Natural Areas due to possible conflicts with Village sponsored programs or
events or significant scheduled sports activities.
N. Grilling in Village parks shall be restricted to designated grilling areas only. Only
Village of Lincolnshire grills may be used in Village parks unless permitted
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 13
otherwise. Disposal of coals, charcoal or other related fire by-products shall be
restricted to Village designated disposal containers only. Anyone igniting a grill
shall completely extinguish all fires and coals prior to leaving the park.
O. An applicant may petition the Park Board for a waiver to the above and if deemed
appropriate a recommendation shall be made to the Village Board who will
determine if a waiver shall be granted. (Ord. Amd. 99-1631-15, eff. 3/8/99), (Ord.
Amd. 03-1832-09, eff. 3/10/03) (Amd. Ord. 09-3078-01, eff. 01/12/09)
P. In the event of inclement weather, the permitee will be required to cancel any picnic
reservation within a twenty-four period (24) prior to the event. The permitee may
then re-schedule as needed pending availability and/or receive a full refund.
8-1B-3: Fire Place/Fire Pit Permits:
A. A Fire Place/Fire Pit permit is required for any person wishing to utilize the Fire
Place or Fire Pit.
B. Application and User’s Fee: An application and permit and or user’s fee as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1
of this Code shall be paid upon application for a required Fire Place/Fire Pit permit.
C. Fire Place Permit Inspection: At the conclusion of the each scheduled event, an
inspection of the fire place area will be performed by Village staff to determine if
the fire place area (or Village property located thereon) was damaged or was left in
a littered and unsightly condition. If there are damages and/or expenses incurred
by the Village as a result of said event, the permitee shall be responsible for the
costs of such damage and be invoiced for all such costs.
D. Permit Applications: Only an individual person may apply for and receive a Fire
Place or Fire Pit permit. No permit shall be issued in the name of a corporation,
partnership or other entity. A resident of the Village may apply for a permit at any
time within ninety (90) business days of the proposed Fire Place or Fire Pit usage.
A non-resident may apply for a permit at any within twenty (20) business days of
the proposed Fire Place or Fire Pit usage. All permit applications must be
submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to the Fire Place or Fire Pit usage.
The application shall be submitted to the Village in writing and shall contain:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The day and hours for which the permit is desired, including the specific hour
at which the Fire Place or Fire Pit usage is to terminate.
3. Signature of the applicant on the Fire Place/Fire Pit Usage Permit attesting
that they have read and understand the conditions of the permit.
E. Standards For Issuance: The Village shall issue a Fire Place or Fire Pit permit
when he or she finds:
1. The permittee has fully completed a written application for a Fire Place/Fire
Pit permit and paid any required fee.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 14
2. The permit application has been submitted on time and disclosed that the
proposed Fire Place or Fire Pit usage will not be in derogation of any
restrictions as set forth in the Village Code or on the permit application form.
3. The Fire Place or Fire Pit area has not been reserved for other use at the day
and during the hours required in the application.
F. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable
Village ordinances as fully as though the same were set forth in the permit.
G. At all times during any Fire Place or Fire Pit usage, for which a permit is required,
the permit must be in the actual physical possession of a participant whether that
be the permittee or his designee. Upon request of the Village official, the permit
shall be produced and exhibited.
H. No person shall disturb or unreasonably interfere with any person or persons
occupying the Fire Place or Fire Pit area under authority of a duly issued Fire
Place/Fire Pit permit.
I. The fee requirements referred to above do not apply to Fire Place or Fire Pit usage
requests by any taxing body, part or all, of whose boundaries are within the Village
or the Special Recreation Association of Central Lake County acting in its capacity
of providing recreational programs for the Village.
J. The number of participants within the area permitted for Fire Place or Fire Pit
usage shall not exceed 40 participants.
K. The Village of Lincolnshire reserves the right to restrict permits for Fire Place or
Fire Pit usage due to possible conflicts with Village sponsored programs or events
or significant scheduled sports activities.
L. Disposal of coals, charcoal or other related fire by-products shall be restricted to
Village designated disposal containers only. Anyone igniting a grill, Fire Place or
Fire Pit shall completely extinguish all fires and coals prior to leaving the park.
Open fires are only permitted in the designated Fire Place or Fire Pit. Permits are
not required for the operation of grills in the parks, however, all conditions listed in
this paragraph apply. (Ord. Amd. 09-3091-14, eff. 4/13/09
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 15
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE C. Village Nature Preserves and Natural Areas
Sections:
8-1C-1: Definitions
8-1C-2: Hours
8-1C-3: Nature Preserves Restrictions
8-1C-1: Definitions:
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning
herein given. The word “shall” always be mandatory and not merely discretionary.
NON-NATIVE All plants, trees, shrubs, insects, or other wildlife which area not
INVASIVES native to this region, aggressive in nature, which prohibit or limit
the growth and health of native biological process or functions.
PRESCRIBED FIRE The management of Natural Areas through the use of planned,
permitted burning to limit the development of growth of non-native
invasive plants and encourage the development of native plants.
MANAGEMENT PLAN The plan developed for the management and care of a Nature
Preserve or Natural Areas which encourages the development of
native biological diversity and healthy ecological systems.
8-1C-2: Hours:
A. Natural Areas and Nature Preserves Hours: Natural Areas and Nature
Preserves are open from sunrise to sunset each day throughout each year except
when at the discretion of the Village when it shall be necessary to close them.
8-1C-3: Restrictions:
A. Nature Preserves: These areas are dedicated Illinois Nature Preserves and
governed under regulations outlined by the State of Illinois and the Illinois Nature
Preserves Commission. Nature Preserves shall be held to the same restrictions as
outlined in Section 8-1-4 and shall also include, but not be limited to the following:
1. No picnicking is allowed.
2. Nature Preserve visitors are required to stay on the designated paths.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 16
3. No hunting or fishing is allowed in the Nature Preserves. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of the Village in the
course of Village business.
4. No fires or open burning shall take place in any of the Nature Preserves. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to officers, agents and employees of
the Village in the course of Village business.
5. Any individual, organization or entity shall be required to comply with Nature
Preserve rules and regulations and all applicable Village ordinances as stated
in this section and as posted at the Nature Preserves.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or rules or regulations as
posted in any Nature Preserve, Natural Areas or Village Park shall be fined in
accordance with the applicable section of the Village Code, Illinois Compiled
Statutes or Illinois Nature Preserve Regulations for each violation. This penalty
shall not be exclusive, but rather, the Village reserves the right to any and all
other remedies as may be available under law or equity. (Ord. 82-704-11) (Ord
Amd. 99-1649-33, eff. 6/14/99)(Ord. Amd. 99-1665-49, eff. 7/12/99) (Ord. Amd.
03-1832-09, eff. 3/10/03) (Ord. Amd. 04-1897-13), eff. 5/10/04).
B. Natural Areas:
Natural Areas shall be held to the same restrictions as outlined in Section 8-1-4 with
the exception that individuals wishing to picnic at Rivershire Park may do so in the
designated area. No picnic permits are issued for Rivershire Park. (Ord. 09-3078-
01, eff. 1/12/09)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 17
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE D. Canoe Launch Rack
Sections:
8-1D-1: Canoe Launch Rack Permit
8-1D-1: Canoe Launch Rack Permit
A. Fees Set: The fees as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code are hereby established and shall be paid by
persons using the Canoe Launch Rack located at Rivershire Park by the Des Plaines
River.
B. A Canoe Launch Rack Permit is required for any person wishing to utilize the Canoe
Launch Rack.
C. Use of the Canoe Launch Rack shall be for canoes, kayaks and other small water
craft or vessels that are powered by one or two persons using paddles.
D. Permit Applications: Only a natural person may apply for and receive a Canoe
Launch Rack Permit. No permit shall be used in the name of a corporation,
partnership or other entity. A resident of the Village may apply for a permit beginning
in April 1st of each year. Permits are issued on a daily basis, up to three days, and
on a seasonal basis for the period May 1 - October 31st annually. A non-resident may
apply for a Canoe Launch Rack Permit after June 1st of each year. All permit
applications must be submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to Canoe
Launch Rack usage. The application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk in
writing and shall contain: (Amd. Ord. 14-3327-54, eff. 03/24/14)
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
2. The signature of the applicant of the Canoe Launch Rack Permit attesting that
they have read and understand the conditions of the permit.
E. Standards for Issuance: The Village official shall issue a Canoe Launch Rack
permit when he and/or she finds:
1. That the permittee has fully completed a written application for a Canoe Launch
Rack Permit and paid the required fee.
2. That the permit application has been submitted on time and disclosed that
proposed Canoe Launch Rack usage will not be in derogation of any
restrictions as set forth in the Village Code or on the permit application form.
3. That the Canoe Launch Rack space has not been reserved for others.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 18
F. The permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable
Village ordinances, including but not limited to the following, as fully as though the
same were set forth in the permit.
1. Canoe Launch Rack Permits will only be issued to residents of the Village of
Lincolnshire prior to June 1. Should racks remain available, permits may be
issued to non-residents after June 1. (Amd. Ord. 14-3327-54, eff. 03/24/14)
2. Canoe Launch Rack Permits are issued on a first-come first-serve basis.
3. A total of five seasonal permits will be issued annually. Seasonal permits are
issued for the time period May 1 - October 31st annually. Any canoe, kayak, or
similar vessel left on the rack after November 1st will be removed and/or
discarded. The Village will not be responsible for any canoe, kayak, or similar
vessel that is removed after November 1st in any given year. Only one seasonal
permit will be issued per address per year.
4. Daily permits will be issued according to availability. Daily permits are issued
on a three (3) day basis. Any canoe, kayak, or similar vessel left on the rack
after the permit has expired will be discarded.
5. A permit tag will be issued to the approved applicant. This tag must be
displayed on the canoe while it is on the rack.
6. The Village is not responsible for any damage or loss associated with use of
the Canoe Launch Rack, including injury to the permittee or to any person
using the Canoe Launch Rack. It is the responsibility of the canoe, kayak or
similar vessel owner to provide a lock or other adequate measure to ensure
that the vessel is secured.
7. The permittee, whether an individual or group for its members, officers, guests,
invitees, if any, covenants and agrees that it/they shall at all times protect,
indemnify, save and keep harmless the Village of Lincolnshire from and against
any and all claims, costs, damage or expense arising out of or from any
accident or other occurrence on or about the premises or arising from any
activity under this permit, causing injury or damage to any person or property.
The permittee shall sign a hold harmless and absolute release binding
permittee and benefitting the Village of Lincolnshire, its officers, agents and
employees. This provision shall apply irrespective of the condition of the
amenity and to any acts or neglect of the village of Lincolnshire, its officer,
agents and employees.
G. At all times during the Canoe Launch Rack usage, for which a permit is required, the
permit tag must be on the actual canoe placed on the rack.
H. No person shall disturb or unreasonably interfere with any canoe occupying the
Canoe Launch Rack under authority of a duly issued Canoe Launch Rack Permit.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 19
I. The fee requirements referred to above do not apply to Canoe Launch Rack usage
requests by any taxing body, part or all, of whose boundaries are within the Village
or the Special Recreation Association of Central Lake County acting in its capacity of
providing recreational programs for the Village.
J. The Village of Lincolnshire reserves the right to restrict permits for the Canoe Launch
Rack usage due to possible conflicts with Village needs. (Amd. Ord. 09-3087-10, eff.
3/9/09)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 20
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE E. Athletic Fields
Sections:
8-1E-1: Athletic Field Usage; Definitions
8-1E-2: Athletic Field Usage Permits Required
8-1E-1: ATHLETIC FIELD USAGE; DEFINITIONS:
A. Athletic Fields in Village Parks are open to play as follows:
Spring Lake Park Baseball Field 8:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.
Olde Mill Park Baseball Field/Soccer Field 8:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.
North Park Athletic Fields See 8-1E-2
Spring Lake Park and Olde Mill Park do not have lighted fields.
B. For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed
to them below:
ORGANIZED ACTIVITY any game, practice or training activity for which forty percent
(40%) or more of the participants shall have a reasonable
expectation of engaging in a similar game, practice or
training activity on three (3) or more occasions within any
thirty (30) day period; or any event or activity lasting more
than three (3) hours and with more than 30 participants.
8-IE-2: Athletic Field Usage Permits Required
A. North Park athletic fields are the only fields that require a field usage permit. The Village of
Lincolnshire shall have first priority for use of the North Park playing fields and reserves the right
to cancel or reschedule any permits for use of these playing fields at its discretion.
1. North Park Fees Set: The fees as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code are hereby established
and ratified and shall be paid by persons using the North Park Athletic Fields
located at 1025 Riverwoods Road, Lincolnshire, Illinois.
2. A North Park Athletic Field Usage Permit is required for any Organized Activity,
other than those run or organized by Lincolnshire Sports Association or the
Village of Lincolnshire. Any individual or organization wishing to use the North
Park Athletic Fields more than four hours in any given season is required to file
an application under Classification C. A separate application and criteria are
required.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 21
3. General drop-in use of the North Park Athletic Fields does not require a permit
and is available on a first come, first serve basis. Drop-in use is limited to four
hours and does not include any Organized Activity. A group with an approved
permit shall have priority use of the North Park Athletic Fields over a group
without an approved permit for the times and fields described on the permit.
4. North Park Athletic Field Permit Applications: Permit requests by all
applicants must be submitted, not less than sixty (60) days and not more than
one hundred and twenty (120) days in advance of the first date(s) requested.
Permits will be considered on a first come, first served basis. Applicants will be
notified approximately thirty (30) days prior to the first requested North Park
Athletic Field usage date if their request is approved or not.
5. Payment of Fees:
a. The Village of Lincolnshire shall charge fees and a damage/security
deposit for permitted use of any of its North Park Athletic Fields. In
addition to North Park Athletic Field fees there will be additional
charges for lights. Usage and lights fees as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code.
b. Applicants requesting a North Park Athletic Field Usage Permit on a
non-seasonal basis shall be required to pay the established fee at the
time of application. Should an application be denied all fees will be
refunded.
c. A minimum of one hour is required for each North Park Athletic Field
reservation but may be reserved in increments of thirty minutes after
the minimum one hour period.
d. Applicants requesting a North Park Athletic Field Usage Permit on a
seasonal basis and are not an affiliate of LSA are required to apply
under Classification C. See Village of Lincolnshire Field Usage
Criteria for Classification C and the Field Usage Application
Classification C.
e. Applications and fees shall be submitted to the Village at the following
address: Village Hall, One Olde Half Day Road, Lincolnshire, IL
60069.
6. Damage/Athletic Field Inspection:
a. Athletic Field Inspection: At the conclusion of the each scheduled
event, an inspection of the athletic field area will be performed by
Village staff to determine if the area (or Village property located
thereon) was significantly damaged as a result of usage. If there are
damages and/or expenses incurred by the Village as a result of said
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 22
event, the permitee shall be responsible for the costs of such damage
and may be invoiced for all such costs.
b. Any damage beyond what is considered normal wear and tear will be
charged to the permit. The permit holder is responsible for all damage
done to Village property as a result of their use. This would include,
but not be limited to, heavy play on North Park Athletic Fields after a
rain event, damage to fencing, park amenities, trash, etc.
c. The Public Works Director, or her designee, may cancel any permit or
deny any use in the event environmental conditions result in an
increased likelihood significant damage will occur from normal use of
the North Park Athletic Fields.
7. Refund of Fees:
A refund of North Park Athletic Field Permit fees shall be made for the following
reasons:
a. If the Village of Lincolnshire believes that the North Park Athletic Field
is in unplayable condition and/or may be damaged due to North Park
Athletic Field conditions, no play will be allowed and a refund or a
credit towards a substitute time will be issued, in the Village’s sole
discretion.
b. If the group or individual provides written notification of cancellation to
the Village at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the date reserved.
Written notification is required for each individual North Park Athletic
Field, date and time and does not apply to seasonal permits.
c. An applicant who wishes a refund for a seasonal permit must provide
a written notification of cancellation not less than one week prior to
the first date requested.
d. The Village of Lincolnshire cancels a permitted use of the North Park
Athletic Fields due to a conflict with a Village use.
8. Insurance and Waiver Forms:
a. All groups or organizations who perform Organized Activities and who
are requesting a North Park Athletic Field Permit must provide at the
time of application a certificate of insurance listing the Village of
Lincolnshire as additional insured (on any CGL or umbrella policy)
and a copy of the waiver form to be completed by each of its
participants. This waiver shall clearly state the Village of Lincolnshire
is relieved from any and all responsibility arising out of use of the
North Park Athletic Fields. The certificate of insurance shall describe
not less than the following coverage:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 23
i. Commercial General Liability with limits of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate. Any aggregate
limit shall apply separately to North Park;
ii. If applicable, business automobile liability coverage with limits of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate.
Such insurance shall provide coverage for any vehicles
regardless of ownership; and
iii. All insurance provided by an applicant shall be endorsed to
indicate it shall be primary to any insurance maintained by the
Village for like risks, the Village’s insurance being considered
secondary and excess thereto. The insurance shall also contain
the standard separation of insured provision.
b. The Village of Lincolnshire shall request the holder of the permit for
an Organized Activity to provide copies of all signed waiver forms for
each participant intending to use the North Park Athletic Fields.
9. North Park Athletic Field Usage Hours:
North Park Baseball/Softball Fields and Soccer Fields
7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.*
*(Except when fields are permitted for use they may be permitted to 1:00
p.m.)
North Park has two lighted baseball and four lighted soccer fields.
10. North Park Athletic Field Use Classifications
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 24
Athletic Field Use Classifications
Classification A: (Village of Lincolnshire)
The Village of Lincolnshire shall have first priority for use of the North Park Athletic Fields and,
provided the Village’s use conflicts with a permit for use, may cancel or reschedule any permits
for use of the North Park Athletic Fields at its discretion.
Classification B: (Lincolnshire Sports Association and Affiliates)
Lincolnshire Sports Association - The Village of Lincolnshire does not provide organized sports
activities for its residents. LSA fills this need through volunteer service and is recognized as
providing a valuable service to the community. The Village will review, on an as needed basis, a
per participant fee for LSA’s use of North Park Athletic Fields. For this reason they shall have
second priority for use of the North Park Athletic Fields.
LSA may wish to establish a partnership with an organization to provide assistance in supporting
its programs. LSA shall enter into an Affiliate Service Contract with the Village and each partner
organization (an “Affiliate”). The form of the Contract shall be approved by the Village Board.
The Affiliate shall complete a Program Proposal Form prior to entering into the Affiliate Service
Contract. The Village shall evaluate the program based upon the following criteria. Those
programs not meeting the criteria shall be presented to the Park and Village Boards for review
and approval.
Affiliate Criteria:
a. The program shall identify a direct benefit to residents of the Village.
b. The program shall identify a direct benefit to LSA.
c. The Affiliate has been previously approved by the Village as an Affiliate and has complied
with all park regulations and has not caused damage to the facilities.
d. The Affiliate is offering a program similar to that which has historically been offered by
LSA.
e. Field time is available.
Copies of all agreements establishing such partnerships shall be submitted with the application.
Classification C: (Non Affiliates)
Any individual or organization wishing to use the North Park Athletic Fields that is not affiliated
with the Village of Lincolnshire, LSA, or a partner with LSA, is required to apply for North Park
Athletic Field usage under this classification. A separate application and criteria are required.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 25
a. Applications shall not be submitted less than sixty (60) days nor more than one hundred
twenty (120) days prior to the start of play. Notification of field availability, if any, will not
be provided until approximately 30 days prior to the start of play.
b. The applicant cannot request North Park Athletic Field usage, in Classification C, for
any programs which would be in competition with a program currently offered by
Lincolnshire Sports Association.
Example: The applicant may offer programs for different age groups,
different sports or more intensive competitive programs than
programs provided by LSA
c. Priority will be given to the applicant who has the highest percentage of Lincolnshire
residents participating in their program. Resident participation is defined as those
individuals who reside within the corporate limits of the Village of Lincolnshire and would
not include participants who may be in School District 103 not residing in Lincolnshire.
The applicant must provide a certified team roster for the current program year. This roster
shall identify each participant, their age, name, address and phone number. This roster
shall be provided with the application.
d. The applicant is required to provide proof of insurance which complies with Paragraph 7
above. Proof of insurance must be provided at the time of application.
e. A program description shall be required and shall include:
i. the North Park Athletic Field number requested (fields are numbered and
must be identified by the applicant on the application form) and size of field.
ii. number of teams and ages of team members
iii. number of hours of field time broken down into practices and games
iv. start date and end date for each season (fall or spring)
v. days and times of days requested
f. The need for lights will be determined by the Village. The applicant will receive a listing
of dates and times for lights with the final permit. Applicant will be responsible for any
applicable lighting fees as herein described.
g. Class A and B usage fees are required to be paid at the conclusion of the season.
Class C usage fees shall be paid prior to the use of the fields. If fees are not received by
this time, North Park Athletic Field usage for the remaining portion of the season will be
cancelled and no refund will be provided.
h. For each 5% of the participants who are Lincolnshire residents the North Park Athletic
Field Usage Fee will be reduced by 5% until a maximum of 50% is reached.
i. Selection for affiliate status for single events meeting the above criteria is determined by
Village staff. Requests for three or more events in a single year will be determined by a
recommendation from the Park Board with final approval by the Village Board. This process
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 26
may take up to sixty days. The ability of the North Park Athletic Fields to support play is
determined by staff. This is based on existing usage levels and the ability to keep the North
Park Athletic Fields in good condition.
j. The applicant shall require its participants to sign the standard Lincolnshire waiver form
or a pre-approved equivalent waiver form. A copy of the waiver form shall be submitted at
time of application. Signed copies of waivers shall be submitted for each player at the time
of payment.
B. All Other Athletic Fields
1. Permits are not required to use the athletic fields at Spring Lake Park and Old
Mill Park. The Village may adopt policies from time to time governing the use of
the facilities. These policies shall be posted at the facility in a conspicuous
place.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1
VILLAGE PARKS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-1: VILLAGE PARKS
Revised 5/15/2018 Page 27
TITLE: 8
CHAPTER 1: Village Parks
ARTICLE F. Use of Village Hall Property
SECTION:
8-1F-1: Use of Village Hall Property
8-1F-1: USE OF VILLAGE HALL PROPERTY:
No part of the Village Hall property shall be used for fishing, swimming or skating.
Signs will be erected at points designated by the Chief of Police and worded to
effectively inform the public of these restrictions.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
8-2 Village Water and Sewer Regulations
8-2A Water and Sewer Rates
8-2B Cross-Connection Control; Village Water Supply System
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 2
CHAPTER 2
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Designation of System
8-2-2: Compliance with Building Code
8-2-2A: Right of Access for Operation and Maintenance of System
8-2-3: Water and Sanitary Sewer Connections Required
8-2-3-1: Water and Sanitary Sewer Connections, Properties Located Outside
Village Limits
8-2-3-2: Sanitary Sewers, Prohibited Connections and Flows
8-2-3-3: Water Mains and Connections
8-2-3-4: Wastewater Regulations
8-2-3-4A: Use of Public Sewers Required
8-2-3-4B: Private Sewage Disposal
8-2-3-4C: Building Sewers and Connections
8-2-3-4D: Use of the Public Sewers
8-2-3-4E: Protection of Sewage Works from Damage
8-2-3-4F: Powers and Authority of Inspectors
8-2-3-4G: Penalties
8-2-4: Restricted Use of Water
8-2-5: Liability of Village
8-2-6: Interference With System Prohibited
8-2-7: Violations; Payment to Avoid Prosecution
8-2-1: DESIGNATION OF SYSTEM:
The existing waterworks system and the existing sanitary sewage system of
the Village and all property, real, personal and mixed comprising or which will
comprise the aforesaid systems is hereby combined into a single utility to be
designated as the Combined Waterworks and Sewage System of the Village.
(1971 Code 'l;5-1-1)
8-2-2: COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 3
All connections or tap-ins to the Combined Water and Sewer System of the
Village and all matters relating thereto, including but not limited to, applications
for service or for connection or for tap-in permits and issuance of such permits,
permit fees, materials used and inspections shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of the Village Building Code, the Village Code and the
Department of Public Works Policy in force or as from time to time amended1.
(1971 Code '65-1-2)
8-2-2A: RIGHT OF ACCESS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:
A. Ready Access: Employees of the Village Department of Public Works or such
persons authorized by a Village official shall have the right of access to any
premises served by the Combined waterworks and/or sewerage system for the
purpose of reading meters, whenever necessary as determined by a Village
official or for the purpose of making inspections and/or repairs in order to
maintain in good condition and provide for the protection of said systems and
the efficient management thereof. Such right of access shall be at any time
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of
any day. Where such inspections are not of an immediate or urgent nature and
are inconvenient to one or both parties, the employees shall arrange for
appointments mutually convenient to the persons of the premises served and
said employees.
B. Interfering With, Obstructing Village Officials: It shall be unlawful to interfere
with, prevent or obstruct employees of the Village or persons authorized by the
Village from the work described herein. No person shall in any manner
obstruct, or cause to be obstructed the free access of any duly authorized
official or employee of the Village to any stopcock, water meter, buffalo or
shutoff box or connection with any water main or service pipe by means of any
personal material, brick, building material, enclosure or by any other means or
device whatsoever, or to prevent free access thereto by such official or
employee whenever such official or employee shall desire access thereto. Any
person refusing the right to permit the said employees of the Combined
waterworks and/or sewerage system the abovedescribed right of access to his
premises shall be subject to cessation of utility services until the required
opportunity to inspect is accorded the officials and employees of the Village.
(Ord. 88-1029-61)
8-2-3: WATER AND SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
See Title 5, Chapter 6 of this Village Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 4
Every building within the Village not connected to the Village water system on
the effective date of this Ordinance shall connect to the Village water system
within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date a service water main first
comes within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a boundary line of the lot or parcel
on which the building is located, unless a valid variance postponing connection
of the lot or parcel to the Village water system has been granted, in which
event connection shall be made within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
expiration of the variance. The Village water main must be extended from its
existing terminus (i.e., within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the lot or parcel)
to the far boundary line of the lot or parcel on which the building is located in
the process of providing water from the Village water system to the building.
Upon connection of the building to the Village water system, all existing wells
or private water support piping shall be disconnected from the potable water
piping of the building.
A Except on any lot or parcel no boundary line of which lies within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of a Village service water main and except on any lot or parcel
governed by a variance granted by the Village Board permitting postponement
of connection to the Village water system, no private well or individual water
supply system shall be constructed, installed or used in the Village for potable
water supply and/or use in a buildings= plumbing system.
B. On any lot or parcel within the Village which has a structure connected to the
Village water system, the use of wells shall be restricted as follows:
1. On any lot or parcel within the Village, a previously existing well may be
used solely for the purposes of:
a. Irrigation; or
b. Replacement of water lost by evaporation and/or percolation
from a private decorative pond, which pond shall not exceed ten
(10) percent of the total lot or parcel size exclusive of required
yard areas, and
c. Said pond shall not be located in an easement, required yard, or
conservancy area and shall be primarily for ornamental
purposes; and the primary source of water for such pond shall be
from storm water runoff; and
d. The preexisting well in order to be used in conjunction with said
pond shall be limited in capacity to twenty (20) gallons per
minute, shall be limited in depth to the shallow acquifer, shall not
be located within two hundred (200) feet of another shallow well
and shall be subject to all State and County agencies having
jurisdiction over well construction and operation.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 5
2. Only on lots or parcels of three (3) acres or more, on which there is no
previously existing well, one private well may be constructed or installed,
provided that said well shall in addition to being limited in capacity to
twenty (20) gallons per minute and limited in depth to the shallow
acquifer, shall not be located within one thousand (1000) feet of another
shallow well, and the use of said well shall be limited to:
a. Irrigation;
b. Replacing water lost by evaporation and/or percolation from a
private decorative pond, which pond meets the standards set
forth in subsection 1(b), supra; and/or
c. Replacing water lost from a retention / detention basin by
evaporation and percolation. The primary source of water for the
retention / detention basin must be storm water, the sole use of
the basin water external to the basin must be irrigation, and the
basin must be located so as to receive the storm water runoff
from the areas being irrigated.
3. On any lot or parcel involuntarily annexed to the Village, wells preexisting
the annexation may continue to be used for a period not to exceed ten
(10) years from the effective date of the final Village action taken to annex
the lot or parcel to the Village, or the date of approval of this Ordinance,
August 11, 2003, whichever is later, unless the well and/or equipment
necessary for its use earlier ceases to function sufficiently to serve the
water needs of the building and/or to meet health and environmental
regulations, in which case it must be abandoned if a Village service water
main be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a boundary of the lot or
parcel. These ten (10) year amortization grace periods apply to the lot or
parcel only so long as it continues to be owned by those who owned it on
the date of annexation or the date of approval of this Ordinance, August
11, 2003, whichever is later; a change in ownership obligates the new
owner to connect to a Village service water main existing within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of any boundary line of the lot or parcel within one
hundred twenty (120) days of coming into title.
4. Under no circumstances shall a well or irrigation system be cross
connected to the Village water system or supply.
C. No septic tank, or other individual sewage disposal system shall be
constructed, installed or used in the Village except:
On any lot or parcel zoned R1 Single-Family Residential where a service sewer
main is not within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot or parcel and the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 6
installation of said septic tank or disposal system is approved by the Lake
County Board of Health
1. On any lot or parcel zoned F1 Farming serving an individual residence
located on a minimum of five (5) acres of the lot or parcel and the
installation of said septic tank or disposal system is approved by the Lake
County Board of Health.
2. On any lot or parcel involuntarily annexed to the Village, a septic tank or
disposal system approved by the Lake County Board of Health that
preexisted the annexation may continue to be used for ten (10) years
from the effective date of the final Village action to annex the lot or parcel
to the Village, or the date of approval of this Ordinance, August 11, 2003,
whichever is later, provided that if the septic tank and/or disposal system
earlier ceases to function sufficiently to meet health and environmental
regulations, it must be abandoned if a Village service sewer main be
within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a boundary of the lot or parcel.
These ten (10) year amortization grace periods apply to the lot or parcel
only so long as it continues to be owned by those who owned it on the
date of annexation or the date of approval of this Ordinance, August 11,
2003, whichever is later; a change in ownership obligates the new owner
to connect to a Village service sewer main existing within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of any boundary line of the lot or parcel within one hundred
twenty (120) days of coming into title.
D. The right to continue a well and/or septic tank or other individual sewage
disposal system under the terms of this Code Section despite a Village water
main and/or Village sewer main being within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a
boundary of the lot or parcel, as a result of the involuntary annexation of the lot
or parcel, shall terminate, even if the well or septic tank or other individual
sewage disposal remains serviceable if:
1. The building served is being torn down, even if reconstructed, and/or
2. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if
the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. This subsection does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State of local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 7
preservation by the Illinois Department of Conservation or listed
on the National Register of Historic Places.
E. A variance may be granted by the Village Board of Trustees in its discretion for
limited duration, qualified by reasonable terms and conditions established by
the Village Board of Trustees tailored to the circumstances, upon application of
a property owner whose lot or parcel is not already connected to the Village
water system or sanitary system upon a clear showing that complying with the
requirements of this Ordinance would cause an undue hardship, except that no
variance shall be granted where there is a Village service water main and/or a
Village service sewer main within fifty (50) feet of a boundary line of the lot or
parcel, and/or the lot or parcel for which the variance is sought is part of a new
subdivision under development.
1. An application for a variance shall be made jointly by all of the titleholders
of the lot or parcel affected or jointly by the trustee(s) and all beneficiaries
of any land trust in which the lot or parcel affected is held requesting the
variance.
2. The application shall be made on a form provided by the Village which
shall, at a minimum, identify the lot or parcel affected by both its common
address and its legal description, list the names of all titleholders, trustees
and beneficiaries, giving their respective residential addresses and
identifying the interest of each in the lot or parcel affected, state clearly all
of the facts relied on for the claim of hardship giving rise to the request for
variance and the exact variance relief requested from the Village Board
(e.g., terms, conditions, duration of variance). The application shall be
filed with the Village Manager or his or her designee.
3. The Village shall publish a notice of hearing on the application for
variance in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village at least
once not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing on the application for variance to be held before the Village Board
or its designee, which notice shall name the applicants, identify the lot or
parcel by its common address and legal description, set forth the stated
grounds given for the claim of hardship and give the time and place of the
hearing on the application for variance.
4. At the time and place noticed, an evidentiary hearing shall be held before
the Village Board or its designee at which time proof of the stated
grounds for hardship shall be made by competent evidence and
testimony for and against the variance shall be made under oath and
subject to cross-examination.
5. A variance may be granted only if the record of evidence received at
hearing has established to the satisfaction of the Village Board that a
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 8
hardship on the applicant(s) has been established and that the hardship is
not outweighed by inconvenience and/or health, safety and welfare
concerns of the public. In reaching its conclusion, the Village Board shall
consider, and its decision must be consistent with, the following
standards:
a. Because of the particular legal, practical, topographical or
physical conditions of the property surrounding the specific lot or
parcel involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result,
as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of
the regulations were to be carried out;
b. The conditions upon which an application for a variance is based
are unique to the lot or parcel for which the variance is sought, or
its owner(s), and are not applicable generally to other property or
owners within the same area;
c. The purpose of the variance is not based primarily upon a desire
to minimize financial burden;
d. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this Title and has
not been created by any persons presently having an interest in
the lot or parcel;
e. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the lot or parcel is located; and
f. The granting of the variance will not impair the availability of a
healthy drinking water supply or a safe and healthy sewage
disposal system to the lot or parcel for which application for
variance is made and/or neighboring properties.
6. The variance may be granted by single majority of the Village Board and
shall be given in writing specifying the lot or parcel to which it is applicable
and setting forth all the terms and conditions to which it is subject and the
date of expiration.
F. Temporary sewage disposal systems, such as portable potties, are permissible
for special events and similar temporary occasions with permission of the
Village Manager or his or her designee.(Ord. 03-1858-35, eff. 8/11/03)
8-2-3-1: WATER AND SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS, PROPERTIES
LOCATED OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
A. Annexation Agreement Required. Any owner(s) of property located outside the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 9
Village limits who desires to connect his or her property to the Village=s water
or sanitary sewer system or to both systems must apply to the Board of
Trustees for permission to make any such connection(s). The owner(s) shall
make application on a form to be provided by the Village. The owner(s) shall
agree that they will not voluntarily annex to any other municipality so long as
they are obligated hereby to annex to the Village.
1. Property Contiguous to the Village. The Board of Trustees shall not grant
permission to make any such connection(s) to any owner whose property
is contiguous to the Village unless and until the owner(s) files an
unconditional petition to annex his or her property to the Village. The
Village shall not be required to permit such annexation and may include
conditions of annexation in any Annexation Agreement.
2. Property Not Currently Contiguous to the Village. The Board of Trustees
shall not grant permission to make any such connection(s) to any
owner(s) whose property is not contiguous to the Village at the time of the
filing of the application unless and until the owner(s) enters into a written
agreement with the Village, in the form approved by the Village, to file an
unconditional petition to annex the property to the Village at the time that
the property becomes contiguous to the Village. The Village shall not be
required to accept such annexation at the time the property becomes
eligible for annexation and may include conditions of annexation in any
Annexation Agreement.
At a minimum, any Annexation Agreement shall require that security for
the installation and maintenance shall be provided as required by the
Village Subdivision Code and any water or sewer system must be
extended to the far property line of the property to be served.
3. Property Subject to an Intergovernmental Agreement. The remainder of
this Section 8-2-3-1 shall not apply to any property located outside the
Village’s corporate limits for which an intergovernmental agreement
either:
a. Requires the Village to make water and/or sanitary sewer service
available to such property; or
b. Prohibits the subject property from annexing to any municipality
other than the Village
The owner of each property to which this paragraph (3) applies
must apply to the Board of Trustees for permission to make any
such connections(s). The owner(s) shall make applications on a
form to be provided by the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 10
B. Service For More Than One Single Family Residence. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the Village shall not approve any agreement to provide
water or sewer service outside of the Village limits for any commercial
enterprise or for any single family development of more than one dwelling
unit except as follows:
1. A public hearing is held before the Village Board on the issue of providing
such service; and
2. The issuance by the Village Board of a Certificate of Necessity approved
by a vote of 3/4 of the members of the Village Board then holding office
based upon findings of fact considering the following matters:
a. Will the failure to permit the connection to Village facilities result
in some negative impact to the Village or its residents (such as
the destruction of trees, the use of septic systems in an area
where such system is not desirable, the use of a non-municipal
sewerage system that is substandard or other health, safety or
aesthetic matters)?; and
b. In light of the potential for future annexation, will the provision of
such sewer and/or water service enable the Village to assure a
development that is compatible with the Village=s comprehensive
plan and adjacent Village development?
For purposes of this Subsection B, a property shall be deemed to
be being developed for more than one unit if, considering the
current or potential future zoning , the Village Manager is of the
opinion that the property for which service is sought is capable of
division into more than one building lot. The Village Manager
may make such determination even if only one building permit is
currently contemplated.
C. Government Bodies. The Board of Trustees may grant permission to other
governmental bodies which serve other municipalities in addition to the Village
to connect to the Village=s water and/or sanitary sewer systems without
annexation if presently contiguous or without entering into a written agreement
with the Village to annex the property at the time that said property becomes
contiguous to the Village. If permission is granted by the Board of Trustees for
such a connection, all out-of-pocket costs to the Village and all other expenses
necessary to make the connection shall be borne by the governmental body
requesting the connection. The permission to allow the connection to the
Village=s water and/or sanitary sewer systems by another governmental body
shall remain in effect as long as that governmental body remains in
unincorporated Lake County. When and if said governmental body annexes to
any other municipality, other than the Village, the water and/or sanitary sewer
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 11
connection will be disconnected and all costs for said disconnection shall be
borne by the governmental body which requested said connection. All
associated fees shall be paid by the governmental body requesting the
connection in accordance with the requirements in this Village Code. (Ord. 01-
1773-31, eff. 7/9/01)
8-2-3-2: SANITARY SEWERS, PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS AND FLOWS:
A. It is the purpose of this Section that the entry of extraneous flows of
whatsoever nature into the sanitary sewer system of the Village be prohibited
and be discontinued, whether such entry may be occurring accidentally or
knowingly. Extraneous flows are those flows other than domestic sewage or
industrial waste, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
ground waters, surface waters, storm waters, spring waters and other drainage
or clear waters. Only sewage shall be permitted to enter into said sanitary
sewer system.
B. Prohibited Acts:
1. It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the Village any matter other
than sewage; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it shall
be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly,
any ground waters, surface waters, storm waters, spring waters, other
clear waters, or any other extraneous flows of whatsoever nature.
2. It shall be unlawful to make a connection or to maintain or operate a
connection which serves any home, building or any other establishment,
premises or facilities, and which contributes, directly or indirectly, to the
sanitary sewer system of the Village, any ground waters, surface waters,
storm waters, spring waters, other clear waters or any other extraneous
flows of whatsoever nature.
C. All drains, pumps, or connections designed or intended to receive and
discharge ground waters, surface waters, storm waters, spring waters, other
clear waters and other drainage or extraneous flows of whatsoever nature,
shall be considered illegal connections if they discharge directly or indirectly
into the Village sanitary sewer system. Such illegal connections include, but
are not limited to, roof drains, down spouts, footing drains, areaway drains,
drain tiles (and sump pumps used to collect and discharge same), yard drains,
catch basins and inlets, and sump pumps used to discharge spring waters from
basements or other areas, and any such connections shall not be allowed to
discharge directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewers of the Village.
D. The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house
connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 12
sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises
served by said sanitary sewer pipes. Maintenance means keeping the sanitary
sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or structures in
satisfactory working condition and good state of repair (including but not limited
to preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from entering
said facilities, protecting said facilities from any damage and keeping same free
from defects or malfunctions), and making necessary provisions and taking
necessary precautions to assure that said sewer facilities are at all times
capable of satisfactorily performing the services and adequately discharging
the functions and producing the final results and purposes said facilities are
intended to perform, discharge or produce.
The Village may make such tests and inspections of the Village sanitary sewer
system as it deems necessary in order locate such illegal connections and
sources of extraneous flows as may exist. The Village, at its option, may also
invoke other legal powers vested in it or implied by the Statutes for the
protection of the health and welfare of the public, or institute such legal action
as it deems necessary to discover and order the disconnection of any illegal
connections that may exist.
8-2-3-3: WATER MAINS AND CONNECTIONS:
No person shall uncover, make any connection(s) with, or opening into, use,
alter, disturb, molest, injure or in any manner, whatsoever, interfere with any
Village water main or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Village. Written application for such permit shall be made to the
Public Works Department of the Village on forms prepared and kept on file in
the office of said Department. (0rd. 87-944-30)
8-2-3-4: WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
8-2-3-4A: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Prohibited Discharges, Deposits:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
2. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 13
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 78-524-13)
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sanitary and/or industrial
waste water into any storm sewer or drainage ditch within the Village, or
within any area under the jurisdiction of the Village. (Ord. 86-870-07)
B. Privies, Cesspools Prohibited: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
C. Mandatory Connection: The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated
within the Village and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or
combined) sewer of the Village, is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so.
8-2-3-4B: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the Village, or any health
office or department having jurisdiction. (Ord. 78-524-13)
B. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected
to said sewer within ninety (90) days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean back-run gravel or other
approved granular material. (Ord. 78-524-13; amd 1984 Code)
8-2-3-4C: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection(s) with, or
opening into, use, alter or disturb, molest, injure or in any manner, whatsoever,
interfere with any Village sanitary or storm sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Village. Written application for
such permit shall be made to the Village on forms approved by the Village.
(Ord. 87-944-30)
B. All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with applicable Federal standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 14
C. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and
commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Village Director of Public Works and Village
Engineer. A permit and inspection fee as stipulated in Title 1-15 of this Code
for a residential, commercial, or industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to
the Village at the time the permit is issued. Any industry, as a condition of
permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituent, characteristics, and type of activity.
D. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only
be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities,
including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have
sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
E. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building
sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
F. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
G. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and tested by the Village Manager or his
designate, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
H. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9,
and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois
shall apply. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the Village Manager or his designate before installation.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 15
I. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall provide twenty four (24) hours
notice to schedule an inspection for connection to the public sewer. The actual
connection shall be made under Village supervision.
J. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
8-2-3-4D: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
Village Manager or his designate that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Village Manager or his designate will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies.
The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150? F), sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65? C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/I or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (1 50?F), zero and sixty-five degrees Centigrade (0 and
65?C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Village Manager or his designate.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 16
objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in
the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Village Manager or his designate for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Village as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Village in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/1 as Hg at
any time except as permitted by the Village in compliance with applicable
State and Federal regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/1 at any time except as permitted by
the Village in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentration or inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment work
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
"Slugs" as used herein shall mean the intermittent or short period
discharge of wastewater, the characteristics of which intermittent
discharge shall exceed the concentration of prohibited
substances as defined in this Section. (Ord. 78-524-13)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 17
12. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas.
13. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
14. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 78-535-25)
a. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
b. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewer, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section
5-6-4A, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations,
subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment
Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday,
November 8, 1973 and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgment of the Village Director of Public Works, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 18
If the Village permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flow, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Village Manager or his designate and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
B. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters
and wastes to illustrate compliance with this ordinance and any special
conditions for discharge established by the Village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analysis to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the Village, but no less than once per year the
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with the Federal, State and local
standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements
and laboratory analysis to the Village at such times and in such manner as
prescribed by the Village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the Village. At such times
as deemed necessary the Village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
C. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with applicable Village provisions by the industrial concern,
provided such payments are in accordance with Federal and State guidelines
for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. (Ord. 78-524-13)
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Village, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
E. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
F. Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required
by the Village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 19
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Village. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
G. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular
analysis involved will determine whether a twenty- four (24) hour composite of
all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, a BOD and suspended solids
analysis are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 78-535-25)
8-2-3-4E: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of violating this provision.
8-2-3-4F: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. The Village Manager or his designate and other duly authorized employees of
the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. The Village Manager or his designate or his
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond
that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 20
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Section A, above, the Village Manager or his designate or duly authorized
employees of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the Village employees and the Village shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the Village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such as may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
C. The Village Manager or other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
8-2-3-4G: PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except Section
5-6-5, shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations, The Village may revoke any permit for
sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall
be subject to the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the
Code described in 17-1 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
8-2-4: RESTRICTED USE OF WATER:
A. Outside of Building Use: All outside-of-building uses of water, except those
uses described herein, shall be restricted to an odd/even schedule.
Addresses which end in an even number (0,2,4,6,8) shall be allowed to use
potable water outside on calendar days which are even as well. Addresses
which end in an odd number (1,3,5,7,9) shall be allowed to use potable water
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 21
outside on calendar days which are odd.
Additionally, lawn sprinkling shall be prohibited during the hours between one
o’clock (1:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) p.m. on each day of the week
during the effective dates. (Ord. 15-3376-103, eff. 9/28/15)
1. Effective dates: This regulation is in effect from May 15 through
September 15 of each year.
2. Excluded activities: The following activities are exempt from the Outside
of Building Use restrictions:
a. Firefighting and other activities related to the protection of the
health, safety, and welfare of the community;
b. Municipal operations such as street sweeping, hydrant flushing,
and other activities performed by Village personnel or by Village
contractor under direction of the Village;(Or. 15-3376-103, eff.
9/28/15)
c. Construction activity under a valid building or site work permit,
including dust control and other erosion and sediment control
measures;
d. Irrigation from non-public sources of water;
e. Attended watering from hand-held devices of trees, flowers or
vegetable gardens, displays, baskets, or other similar vegetation,
exclusive of lawns; and
f. Other activities substantially similar in nature to the foregoing
uses which are approved by the Village Manager or his
designee.
B. Emergency Conditions: Whenever the Mayor of the Village, or if absent, the
Village Manager, upon consultation with a qualified engineer, deems that,
because of: (I) the breakage of main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
plant or any part or portion of said system or plant, or (ii) an inadequate water
supply or inadequate facilities for distribution of water in relation to reasonable
estimates of anticipated demand for water; the Village will be unable to provide
unlimited water supply to customers served by the Village water system, and
that the health, general welfare and safety of the citizens of the Village may be
threatened if unlimited water consumption is permitted, he shall file a report of
his determination in the office of the Village Clerk. In determining whether
such restrictions are necessary, there shall be considered the then current rate
of water usage, the types of usage, the amount of stored water in the Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 22
reservoirs, and the minimum reserve necessary for fire protection, among other
items. The report shall first state the conditions and factors which are the basis
of the conclusion that unlimited water cannot be supplied, and the precise
restrictions of use that are necessary in his judgment to protect the health,
general welfare and safety of the citizens of the Village. The report shall further
state the period of time, in addition to those set forth in subsection 8-2-4A, that
such restrictions shall be applicable. The Village Manager or his designee shall
file the report within 48 hours of the initiation of the restriction. The Village
shall utilize its best efforts to provide public notice to its customers of the
restrictions. Such public notice shall state the precise nature and estimated
duration of the restrictions placed upon water consumption. The Village
Manager shall also request appropriate news coverage by the newspapers
circulated in the Village.(Ord. Amd. 05-1989-53, eff. 9/12/05)
C. Prohibited Uses: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or consume water,
to cause water to be used or consumed, or to permit the use or consumption of
water on property or premises under the control of said person, in violation of
the restrictions stated above in subsections A and B. (Ord. 77-488-22)
8-2-5: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
All water and sanitary sewer service supplied by the Combined Waterworks
and Sewage System of the Village shall be provided on the express condition
that the Village shall not be liable for nor shall any claim be made against it for
damages or injuries caused by reason of the breakage of any main, trunk,
branches, service pipes, apparatus, or appurtenances connected with the
system or plant or any part or portion of said system or plant or for any
interruption of such service by reason of the breakage of machinery or by
reason of stoppage, alteration and extensions or for any costs incurred as a
result thereof. (1971 Code '65-1-7)
8-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner interfere with or obstruct in
any manner whatsoever the operation of the Combined Waterworks and
Sewage System of the Village or to cause or permit such interference or
obstruction. (1971 Code '65-1-8)
8-2-7: VIOLATIONS; PAYMENT TO AVOID PROSECUTION:
Any person charged with the offense of violating Section 8-2-4C may avoid
prosecution for said offense by making payment, in person to the Village Clerk
between the hours of eight-thirty (8:30) A.M. and four-thirty (4:30) P.M.,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 23
Monday through Friday, legal holidays excepted, subject to the fine set forth in
the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1. Failure to
make such payment will result in the filing of a complaint, a subpoena being
issued and an appearance will be required in the Circuit Court of the
Nineteenth Judicial Circuit, Lake County, Illinois. For the purpose of this
section, each day the prohibited consumption. (Ord. Amd. 05-1989-53, eff.
9/12/05) (Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/2/10)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 24
CHAPTER 2A
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. WATER AND SEWER RATES
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Sanitary Sewer Rates
8-2A-2: Water Rates
8-2A-3: Rates Outside the Corporate Village Limits
8-2A-4: Billings and Billing Periods
8-2A-5: Liability for Payment
8-2A-6: Lien Upon Real Estate
8-2A-7: Discontinuing Service
8-2A-8: Collection and Accounting of Funds
8-2A-9: Provisions Filed with Recorder as Notice
8-2A-1: SANITARY SEWER RATES:
A. There are hereby established rates for and charges for use of and for the
service supplied by the sanitary sewage system of the Village as follows: (Ord.
81-667-20)
B. For service within the corporate Village limits, the basic user charge as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code per one thousand (1,000) gallons, based on water usage as
recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters. (Amd. Ord. 96-1535-19, eff.
5/13/96)
1. 5-day, 20? centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 240 mg/l.
2. Suspended solids (SS) of 240 mg/l. (Ord. 92-1243-21; Amd. Ord. 93-
1282-12, eff. 5/10/93)
C. The Village reserves the right to require testing for concentrations of
biochemical oxygen of suspended solids discharged by user of the system and
to require a surcharge for concentrations above a certain level if required by
Lake County or any other agency duly exercising jurisdiction in these
circumstances. (Amd. Ord. 96-1535-19, eff. 5/13/96)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 25
1. For concentrations of BOD in excess of 240 mg/l, the surcharge as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15
of Title 1 of this Code per excess pound of BOD in all wastewater
discharged to the Village system.
2. For concentration of SS in excess of 240 mg/l, the surcharge as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15
of Title 1 of this Code per excess pound of SS in all wastewater
discharged to the Village system.
Users who discharge wastewater subject to the surcharge shall have
representative samples of their wastewater analyzed by independent
laboratories, satisfactory to the Village, at quarterly intervals or intervals
as determined by the Village Manager, and shall have the results of such
analysis sent directly to the Village Manager.
D. The minimum charge shall be calculated on a minimum usage of four thousand
(4,000) gallons per month.
E. The charges for sanitary service shall be made monthly for all users. The
minimum charge shall be per quarter as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Provided, however,
that senior citizens shall be exempt from the requirement of a minimum charge
and shall be charged solely on the basis of actual usage. For purposes of this
provision, a senior citizen shall be defined as follows:
1. The owner of and residing in a single-family residence or individual
apartment, condominium or townhouse unit in the Village upon which he
or she is legally obligated to pay real estate property taxes.
2. Of the age of sixty five (65) years or older.
3. Whose household income as defined in Title 1-9-1 does not exceed the
total maximum social security benefits allowed to be collected, and each
senior citizen seeking exemption hereunder must file an annual
application at the beginning of each calendar year for such exemption, on
forms to be provided by the Village and with such accompanying
documentation as may be requested by the Village. Upon receipt of any
such application and such accompanying documentation as may be
required, the Village Manager or his designee shall, as soon as
practicable thereafter, determine whether the applicant is a person
entitled to an exemption hereunder. If the Village Manager determines
that the applicant is not entitled to an exemption hereunder, the applicant
shall be so notified in writing and shall have the right to appeal such
decision to the Mayor and Board of Trustees whose decision shall be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 26
final. (Amd. Ord. 97-1535-59, eff. 11/10/97; Ord. 15-3388-115, eff.
12/14/15)
F. During the period of May 15 to September 15 of each year, sanitary sewer
charges for residential sanitary sewer customers shall not exceed one hundred
and twenty percent (120%) of the average usage for the preceding eight (8)
month period as determined by the Village. Where sufficient information is not
available, as in the case of a new customer, the credit will begin only after the
accumulation of sufficient usage history takes place as determined by the
Village. (Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
Commercial or industrial sanitary sewer customers may elect to enter into a
ASecondary Meter Agreement (commercial or industrial) with the Village of
Lincolnshire whereby sanitary sewer charges for the period of May 15 to
September 15 of each year are adjusted in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the agreement. (Ord. 91-1204-17, Amd. Ord. 92-1252-30, eff.
5/11/92, Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
G. Laboratory Testing and Other Charges: Charges for the collection, sampling,
laboratory testing or analysis of sanitary sewage performed by or for the
Village or its authorized agent, in order to ensure, monitor or maintain the
sanitary sewage system shall be considered as a charge for the use of and for
the services supplied by the sanitary sewage system of the combined
waterworks and sewage system of the Village. (Ord. 92-1261-39, eff. 8/10/92)
8-2A-2: WATER RATES:
There is hereby established rates or charges for the use of and for the service
supplied by the waterworks system of the Combined Waterworks and Sewage
System of the Village, based upon the amount of water consumed, as shown
by the water meters, as follows: (Ord. 81-667-20)
A. For each user of the waterworks within the corporate limits the charge shall be
in accordance with the fees as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. (Ord. 92-1243-21;
amd. Ord 93-1282-12 eff. 5/10/93)
B. The minimum monthly charge for water service shall be based on four
thousand (4,000) gallons. Provided, however, that senior citizens shall be
exempt from the requirement of a minimum charge and shall be charged solely
on the basis of actual usage. For purposes of this provision. a senior citizen is
defined as:
1. The owner of and residing in a single-family residence or individual
apartment, condominium or townhouse unit in the Village upon which he
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 27
or she is legally obligated to pay real estate property taxes.
2. Of the age of sixty five (65) years or older.
3. Whose household income as defined in Title 1-9-1 does not exceed the
total maximum social security benefits allowed to be collected, and each
senior citizen seeking exemption hereunder must file an annual
application at the beginning of each calendar year for such exemption, on
forms to be provided by the Village and with such accompanying
documentation as may be requested by the Village. Upon receipt of any
such application and such accompanying documentation as may be
required, the Village Manager or his designee shall, as soon as
practicable thereafter, determine whether the applicant is a person
entitled to an exemption hereunder. If the Village Manager determines
that the applicant is not entitled to an exemption hereunder, the applicant
shall be so notified in writing and shall have the right to appeal such
decision to the Mayor and Board of Trustees whose decision shall be
final. (Amd. Ord. 97-1535-59, eff. 11/10/97)
C. When the term "user of the waterworks system" is used herein it is intended to,
and shall be construed to, include each user of the waterworks system that has
a separate water meter. For multiple-family residential buildings, if there is a
single meter for the entire building, the entire building shall be considered a
single user under this subsection; however, if any of the individual dwelling
units have separate meters, those units with such separate meters shall be
considered individual users of the waterworks system for the purpose of this
subsection. (Ord. 81-667-20)
D. A charge as published in the Comprehensive Schedule of Fees and Other
Charges, latest edition per acre of a development site, with a one acre
minimum charge, for all water used during construction on said development
site. At the discretion of the Village, construction water may be charged based
upon actual usage when it is anticipated that large volumes of construction
water will be used. The Village shall provide a water meter to record
consumption for billing purposes. A security deposit for the water meter shall
be deposited with the Village and will be refunded when the meter is returned
in satisfactory condition. (Ord. 87-934-20)(Ord. Amd. 99-1669-53, eff.
08/09/99)
E. A charge as published in the Comprehensive Schedule of Fees and Other
Charges, latest edition, for the cost of a water meter. (Ord. 91-1189-02) All
water meters used to record consumption for billing purposes shall be provided
to the user by the Village as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
F. Laboratory Testing and Other Charges: Charges for the collection, sampling,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 28
laboratory testing or analysis of water performed by or for the Village or its
authorized agent, in order to ensure, monitor or maintain the waterworks
system shall be considered as a charge for the use of and for the services
supplied by the waterworks system of the combined waterworks and sewage
system of the Village. (Ord. 92-1261-39 eff. 8/10/92)
8-2A-3: RATES OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS
A. Water Rate. The rate for sewer and water users outside corporate Village
limits shall be 110% of the resident rate plus any applicable surcharge as set
forth below. (Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
B. Formula For Surcharge When There is Outstanding Bond Indebtedness
Against Water Fund. In addition to the amount set forth in A above, and if
there is outstanding bonded indebtedness against the Water Fund, users of the
water and/or sanitary sewer systems whose property is located outside of the
corporate Village limits shall be surcharged for these services based upon the
following formulas which will be updated annually by the Finance Department
to be effective the first day of each fiscal year. For purposes of the following
formulas, a K gallon is a Kilo gallon or one thousand (1,000) gallons of water or
sanitary sewage.
1. Water Rate Formula. The water system related portion of the most recent
tax levy shall be divided by K gallons of water sold in the previous fiscal
year. This amount will be equal to the bonded debt cost per K gallon of
water sold.
2. Sanitary Sewer Rate Formula. The sanitary sewer system related portion
of the most recent tax levy shall be divided by K gallons of sanitary sewer
flow in the previous fiscal year. This amount will be equal to the bonded
debt cost per K gallon of sanitary sewage flow.
This formula shall be utilized for residential as well as nonresidential
water/or sanitary sewer customers outside the corporate Village limits.
Water and sanitary sewer customers are intended to, and shall be
construed to, include individual dwelling units in multiple-family residential
buildings which have separate water meters for the purpose of
determining the amount of water bills for such users of the water system.
C. Laboratory Testing and Other Charges. Charges for the collection, sampling,
laboratory testing or analysis of water and/or sewage performed by or for the
Village or its authorized agent, in order to ensure, monitor or maintain the
waterworks and/or sewage system shall be considered as a charge for the use
of and for the services supplied by the waterworks and/or sewage system of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 29
the combined waterworks and sewage system of the Village.
D. Standard Rates. Water and Sanitary sewer rates resulting from the above
formulae shall be in accordance with the fees as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 01-1773-31, eff. 7/9/01)
8-2A-4: BILLINGS AND BILLING PERIODS:
It is hereby made the duty of the Village Treasurer to render bills as herein
provided for service, for laboratory testing and other charges, for all rates and
charges in connection therewith, and to collect all monies due thereon. (Ord.
92-1261-39 eff 8/10/92; Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
The monthly rates for water and sewer service described in Sections 8-2A-1, 8-
2A-2 and 8-2A-3 of this Chapter, shall all be computed in a manner to conform
with billing periods of the Village as follows:
All meters shall be read and billed monthly. (Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115)
8-2A-5: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
Said rates or charges for service established in this Article shall be payable as
hereinafter provided. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the
user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
supplied such premises and the service is supplied to such premises by the
Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and
users of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the said Village.
All bills for service shall, at the discretion of the Village Board, be rendered as
of the first day of the month succeeding the period for which services are billed
as provided in this Article, and shall be payable not later than the close of
business on the twenty fifth calendar day of the month succeeding the period
for which services are billed. If payment of the full amount of the current
charges is not made within said period, and the unpaid portion (which shall
then be deemed outstanding charges) is $10 or more, then an amount equal
to ten percent (10%) of the outstanding charges shall be added (e.g. bill was
rendered January 1 for service from November 15 - December 15, and has not
been paid as of close of business on January 25, and the outstanding charges
are $10 or more, a 10% late charge will be added to the outstanding charges of
the January 1 bill). (1971 Code '65-2-5; and. Ord. 74-365-41) Such
outstanding charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent (Ord. 87-934-20, Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 30
8-2A-6: LIEN UPON REAL ESTATE:
The Village may impose a lien upon real estate for any delinquent charges.
Notice of such delinquencies shall be sent to the user of the service, the
occupant and if the user or occupant is not the owner to the taxpayer shown on
the tax bill for the parcel involved as the owner of record, such notice to state
that the delinquency if not paid shall constitute a lien on the real estate and
thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for
which service is supplied, and the Village Treasurer s hereby authorized to and
may file a notice of such lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake
County, Illinois, which said notice of such lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out the name(s) of the owner(s) of the real estate, a
description of the real estate upon or for which service was supplied, the
amounts of monies due, and the date or dates when such amount or amounts
became delinquent, and a notice of said lien shall be sent to the taxpayer
shown on the tax bill for the parcel involved as the owner of record. In all
cases where a lien has been recorded, a release fee as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
shall be charged in addition to the delinquent water or sewer charges plus
current water or sewer charges. The failure of the Village Treasurer to record
such notice of any such lien shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for
unpaid water bill(s), or the right to pursue any other legal remedy. (Ord. 75-
420-50; Amd. Ord. 93-1280-10 eff. 4/26/93; Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff.
12/14/15)
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of
the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The
Village Attorney is hereby authorized to and may institute such proceedings in
the name of the Village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters
against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid forty five (45) days.
(Ord. 87-934-20; Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
8-2A-7: DISCONTINUING SERVICE:
In the event the previous balance for services, as established in this Article are
not paid by the close of business of the twenty first calendar day of the
following month (e.g. bill was rendered January 1 for service from November
15 - December 15, and has not been paid as of close of business on February
21), such service shall be discontinued the next business day after notice is
given as provided below, and shall not be reinstated until all past due bills,
including a Reinstatement of Utility Service Administration fee as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code
for notification and all other penalties thereof are paid in full, together with
payment made as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 31
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code for reinstating such service. (Ord. 87-934-20;
Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
In addition, a Discontinuing Service Administration Fee as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code will
be charged for all bills past due $50 or more as of the close of business on the
tenth calendar day of the following month (e.g. bill was rendered January 1 for
service from November 15 - December 15, and has not been paid as of close
of business on February 10, and the past due amount is $50 or more, a
discontinuing service administration fee will be added to the January 1 bill per
the comprehensive fee schedule). (Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff. 12/14/15)
At least forty eight (48) hours before such service is discontinued, for
nonpayment of charges, notice shall be given to the owner(s) of the premises,
and to the occupants of the premises and users of the service if different than
the owner(s), that such service shall be discontinued for nonpayment of
charges. Notice shall be given by posting notice on the principal means of
ingress/egress to the customer’s premises and depositing the same in the U.S.
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the occupants of the premises, and to the
owner(s) of the premises, at such addresses as are shown on the then most
current records of the Village. Receipt of such notice shall be conclusively
presumed from proof of mailing such notice as provided above and an affidavit
of posting certified by an authorized officer of the Village. Service in any other
manner where there is actual receipt of notice also shall be satisfactory service
for the purposes of this Section. (Ord. 74-364-40; Amd. Ord. 15-3388-115, eff.
12/14/15)
8-2A-9: PROVISIONS FILED WITH RECORDER AS NOTICE:
A copy of this Chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County and shall be deemed notice
to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of
the service of the combined waterworks and sanitary sewage system on their
properties. (1971 Code '65-2-9)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 32
CHAPTER 2B
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE B. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL;
VILLAGE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2B- 1: Purpose
8-2B- 2: Illinois Plumbing Code
8-2B- 3: Prohibited Connections
8-2B- 4: Duty of Village Official
8-2B- 5: Right to Enter Property
8-2B- 6: Discontinuance of Water Service
8-2B- 7: Cost of Clean-Up of Potable Water Supply System
8-2B- 8: Application of Rules and Regulations
8-2B- 9: Policy
8-2B-10: Definitions
8-2B-11: Water System
8-2B-12: Cross-Connection Prohibited
8-2B-13: Survey and Investigation
8-2B-14: Where Protection is Required
8-2B-15: Type of Protection Required
8-2B-16: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-2B-17: Inspection and Maintenance
8-2B-18: Booster Pumps
8-2B-19: Violations
8-2B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
A. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by
isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which
could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply
system.
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems
containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 33
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and
consumer's potable water systems.
8-2B-2: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the Village shall be installed in accordance with the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890. If in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Village official, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the Village official will give notice to the water customer
to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at
his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and also at his own
expense shall have inspections and tests performed, and perform maintenance
of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois
Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, local regulations and
manufacturer's installation requirements.
8-2B-3: PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS:
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintained or permit to
be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the Village may
enter the supply or distribution system of the Village, unless such a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the Village official and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
8-2B-4: DUTY OF VILLAGE OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the Village official to cause surveys and investigations to
be made of commercial, industrial and other properties served by the public
water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public
water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the Village official shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5)
years.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 34
8-2B-5: RIGHT TO ENTER PROPERTY:
The Village official, his authorized agent, or an approved cross-connection
control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the Village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections, and that the Village official, his authorized agent, or an
approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply system or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required crossconnection
control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the said Village official any information
which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on
such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within
the discretion of said Village official, be deemed evidence of the presence of
improper connections as provided in this Chapter.
8-2B-6: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The Village official is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupant thereof. the water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is known
to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until
such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter, and until a reconnection fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) is paid to the Village. Immediate disconnection with a verbal notice
can be effected when the said village official is assured that the imminent
danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such
action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent
actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply,
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of said Village official, or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
public water supply, the Village official, or its agents or assigns shall be liable
to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result
from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms
of this Article, whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
8-2B-7: COST OF CLEAN-UP OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 35
The consumer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system and all other
costs incurred.
8-2B-8: APPLICATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the Village.
8-2B-9: POLICY:
The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public
water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of
contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Village official or his authorized representative, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, said Village official shall give notice to customers to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the
premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his own expense; failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the
consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing and repair as required below for a period of at least five
(5) years. The Village official may require the consumer to submit a crossconnection
inspection report to the Village to assist in determining whether or
not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection control device
inspections shall be conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector
certified by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Cross-connection
surveys shall be performed by the Village official or his authorized agent(s).
8-2B-10: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
AGENCY The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED Approved by the code official or other authority having
jurisdiction. All devices used for back-flow prevention in
Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing
Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 36
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system
and includes the water supplied by the system. These
auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from
another source such as wells, lakes or streams, or
process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute
a water source or system over which the water
purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water system from any source other than the intended
source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER or
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE
Any approved device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water
system.
CONSUMER or CUSTOMER The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected
to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER
SYSTEM
Any water system located on the customer's premises.
A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION The introduction into the potable water supply of
chemicals, wastes, or sewage which will render the
water unfit for its intended purpose.
CROSS-CONNECTION Any physical connection or arrangement between two
(2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other either water of
unknown or questionable safety or steam, gas, or
chemical whereby there may be a flow from one
system to the other, the direction of flow depending on
the pressure differential between the two (2) systems.
CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL DEVICE
See Backflow preventer. Backflow prevention device.
INSPECTOR or CCCDI A person who has successfully completed Agency
sponsored training and certification to install and test
backflow and cross-connection control devices, and is
authorized by the Village to conduct such device
testing.
DIRECT CROSSCONNECTION
A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 37
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY
An assembly composed of single, independently acting
check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and
suitable connections for testing the water tightness of
each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the
flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to
the health and well-being of consumers. The word
"severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected
to result in death or significant reduction in the quality
of life.
INDIRECT CROSS
CONNECTION
A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or
pressure, siphoned, or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
INSPECTION A plumbing inspection to examine all materials,
fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with
requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 890 and local amendments.
NONPOTABLE WATER Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use
as determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 604.
PLUMBING The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of
all piping, fixtures, plumbing appliances, and plumbing
appurtenances in connection with sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities; venting systems and public or
private water supply systems; within or adjacent to any
building or structure, or located on the property.
Not included in this definition are installations of; gas
piping, water piping in connection with refrigeration,
process and comfort cooling, hot water piping in
connection with building heating, and piping for fire
sprinklers and standpipes, except where any portion of
the potable water supply system may come in contact
with, or be connected to any such installations.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 38
POLLUTION The presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends
to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or
impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSSCONNECTION
A fixture or appurtenance which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line.
PROCESS FLUID(S) Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a
form or concentration such as would constitute a
health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into
the public or a consumer's potable water system. This
includes but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
C. Used waters originating from the
public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary
quality;
D. Cooling waters;
E. Questionable or contaminated
natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
G. Oils, gasses, acids, alkalis and other
liquids and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for
fire fighting purposes.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 39
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells
and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping
stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks
and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually
used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing
water for drinking or general domestic use. The "public
water supply" shall refer to the waterworks system of
the Village.
REDUCED PRESSURE
PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICE OR
RPZ
A device consisting of two (2) independently acting
check valves, spring loaded to a closed position and
separated by an intermediate or chamber in which
there is an automatic relief vented to atmosphere,
spring loaded to the open position.
SERVICE CONNECTION The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to
the user.
SURVEY The collection of information pertaining to a customer's
piping system regarding the location of all connections
to the public water supply system and must include the
location, type and most recent inspection and testing
date of all cross-connection control devices and
methods located within that customer's piping system.
This survey must be in written form, and should not be
an actual plumbing inspection. This survey is to be
conducted every two (2) fiscal years by the Village.
SYSTEM HAZARD A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to
health may enter the public water supply system or a
consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER Any water supplied by a public water supply system to
a consumer's water system after it has passed through
the service connection and is no longer under the
control of the water supply official custodian.
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire.
VILLAGE OFFICIAL The designee of the Village Manager or other
representative of the Village authorized or responsible
to operate or protect the public water supply.
WATER PURVEYOR The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.
8-2B-11: WATER SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 40
water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the Village official up to the point where the
consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply
distribution system which are under the control of the Village.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of
conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumers water system
up to the water shut-off, commonly known as the B-box and located in the right
of way. The water meter shall be the responsibility of the Village.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the
water shut-off, commonly known as the B-box used to convey water from the
public water supply distribution system to points of use.
8-2B-12: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
A. Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment
containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are
prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices
or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a
continuing basis.
1. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of
a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the
Agency or approved laboratory.
2. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
8-2B-13: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Village
official, his authorized agent, or authorized cross-connection control device
inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections
within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of crossconnection
control devices within the consumer's premises.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 41
B. On request by the Village official, his authorized agent, or authorized crossconnection
control devices inspector, the consumer shall furnish information
regarding the piping system or systems of water use within the customer's
premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
said Village official for the verification of information submitted by the inspected
consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection
inspection results.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys
of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual
or potential cross-connections to his water system through which contaminants
or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system. All
cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in
accordance with Illinois Revised Statutes 1987, chapter 111, paragraph
1103(1) and local amendments or ordinances.
D. It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public
water system by ensuring that:
1. All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control
devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
2. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
3. Cross-connection control devices of the reduced pressure principle type
shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a
person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control device
inspector (CCCDI) and authorized by the Village to perform such
inspections. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical
testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
4. Testing and Records:
a. Each reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device
shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or
more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. All other
devices shall be tested in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
b. Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with
Illinois Revised Statutes 1987, chapter 111-1/2, paragraph 1004
(e) and local amendments or ordinances.
c. Each device shall have a log or tag attached or maintained listing
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 42
the date of most recent test, name of the CCCDI, and type of
device and date of repairs.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained on site and include:
(1) Date of each test;
(2) Name and approval number of person performing the test;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs and servicing required;
(5) Repairs and date completed; and
(6) Servicing performed and date completed.
(7) Manufacturer's installation and testing instructions.
E. Any existing connection to, or premises served by the potable water supply
system which is identified from the survey as needing the installation of a
cross-connection control device, and that does not have such a device properly
installed, shall have no more than thirty (30) days from the date of notice
provided by the Village official, or his authorized agent, to install an approved
cross-connection control device. if such a cross-connection control device is
not installed by the consumer within said thirty (30) days, the water service to
said premises may be discontinued or denied in accordance with Section 8-2B-
19 of this Article.
8-2B-14: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
A. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative
Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Illinois Administrative Code 680 and
local amendments or ordinances. In addition an approved backflow prevention
device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system
serving premises, where in the judgment of the Village official, actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. At a minimum, all
service connections shall be designated as low hazards. An approved "dual
check valve" assembly shall be installed on all single family residential units
connected to the public water supply.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line
to a consumer's water system premises where the following conditions exist:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 43
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is
accepted as an additional source by the Village official and the source is
approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under
the sanitary control of the Village official.
3. Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the
Village official and/or the cross connection control device inspector, are
not correctable or having intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connection exists.
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions
or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete crossconnection
survey.
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
C. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative
Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Illinois Administrative Code 653.
In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Village official determines that no
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
2. Laboratories.
3. Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
4. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
5. Food or beverage processing plants.
6. Chemical plants.
7. Metal plating industries.
8. Petroleum processing or storage plants.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 44
9. Radioactive material processing plants.
10. Car washes.
11. Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
12. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
8-2B-15: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. The type of protection required under Section 8-2B-14 of these regulations
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
1. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
2. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance
that could cause a system or health hazard.
3. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
B. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire
protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
1. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or other
chemicals;
2. Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
3. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
4. There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the
fire safety system.
C. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be
protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 45
double detector check valve assembly on un-metered service lines.
8-2B-16: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water
Works Association or American Society of Sanitary Engineering.
8-2B-17: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer on any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
1. Fixed proper air gap separation shall be inspected to document that a
proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
2. Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of
installation and as required by the manufacturer, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed
within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the Agency
as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be submitted to the
Village in writing. The Village may establish policies, procedures, and/or fees
by which to authorize the cross-connection control device inspector to perform
inspection and testing on any device connected to the waterworks system of
the Village.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or
visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained on site and include:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 46
1. Date of each test or visual inspection;
2. Name and approval number of person performing the test or
visual inspection;
3. Test results;
4. Repairs or servicing required;
5. Repairs and date completed; and
6. Servicing performed and date completed.
7. Manufacturer's maintenance manual.
E. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found
to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced in the time period specified
in subsection 8-2B-17A at the expense of the consumer.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Village official.
G. If, in the opinion of the Village official, the installed device located on any
premises connected to the potable water supply is not being maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's minimum testing interval or annually,
whichever is more frequent, then the Village shall conduct the test or have the
tests conducted and the costs of such test, plus an administrative cost, shall be
borne by the customer.
8-2B-18: BOOSTER PUMPS:
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any
premises such a pump shall be equipped with a low-pressure cut-off device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off
device in proper working order and to certify to the Village official, upon
request, but no less than once a year, that the device is operable.
8-2B-19: VIOLATIONS:
A. The Village official shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-2: VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Revised 12/14/15 Page 47
occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested,
maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to said Village official, or if it is
found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed or if
an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure
cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has
corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these
regulations and to the satisfaction of the Village official, and the required five
hundred dollars ($500.00) reconnection fee is paid.
C. Neither the Village, the Village official, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to
any customers of the Village for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of said customers water supply in accordance with
the terms of this Chapter, whether or not said termination of the water supply
was with or without notice.
D. The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.
E. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be served
with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to
the fine set forth in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in
17-1, and in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the Village for
any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such
violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. (Ord. 91-1211-
24)(Ord. Amd. 07-3000-28, eff. 8/13/07)(Ord. Amd. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
STREETS AND PARKWAYS
SECTION:
8-3- 1: Excavation Permit Required, Application
8-3- 2: Excavation Permit Fee, Deposit
8-3- 3: Bond or Insurance Policy Required for Excavations
8-3- 4: Restoration of Excavations
8-3- 5: Barricades Required
8-3- 6: Failure to Restore
8-3- 7: Return of Surplus Deposit for Excavation, Deficiencies
8-3- 8: Debris
8-3- 9: Obstructions
8-3-10: Encroachments
8-3-11: Mailboxes
8-3-12: Maintenance and Use of Parkways
8-3-13: Curb Cut Restrictions
8-3-13-1: Curb Replacement Requirements
8-3-14: Driveway Requirements
8-3-1: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
No person shall interfere with or effect a change in any street, parkway, public
way or public property in the Village without having first obtained a permit from
the Public Works Department given in accordance with the provision of this
Code or other ordinances of the Village. Provided, however, that the
installation of mailboxes and all landscaping by homeowners shall be exempt
from the provisions of this Chapter.
All applications for permits under this Chapter shall be submitted to the Public
Works Department and be accompanied by a plat or pencil tracing or sketch
showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed opening for
the installation of new work or the location and character of the alterations
involving changes in the location, pipes, conduits, wire or conductors. The
application shall state the person doing the actual excavating, the name of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 2
person for whom the work is being done, and time, place and character of
such opening and the purpose thereof.
8-3-2: EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE, DEPOSIT:
For each and every permit issued there shall be collected a fee as established
in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code. Before a permit shall be granted to any person for interfering with or
effecting a change in any street, parkway, public way or public property in the
Village a cash deposit or certified check shall be collected as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code a
fee for restoration purposes must be deposited with the Village Clerk.
If special circumstances exist, it is within the discretion of the Public Works
Department to require a larger deposit to meet potential restoration costs.
8-3-3: BOND OR INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATIONS:
No permit shall be issued to any person permitting or allowing any
interference with or effecting any change in any street, parkway, public way or
public property in the Village, until the person making application for such
permit shall first have executed to the Village a good and sufficient bond as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
Title 1 of this Code, with sureties to be approved by the Village Attorney,
conditioned:
To indemnify, save and keep harmless the Village from any and all loss, cost,
damage, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the Village from or
on account of the issuance of the permit to obstruct, tear up, remove or repair
any parkway, street or part thereof and from or on account of any act or thing
done by the permittee or permitted by the permittee in the obstruction, tearing
up, removing or repairing of any parkway, street or part thereof.
In the event any proposed work may appear to subject the Village to the
possibility of any greater liability than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the
Village Attorney may require the amount of the bond to be increased to an
amount sufficient to protect the Village against any such loss, cost, damage or
expense.
The bond aforesaid shall not be required if an insurance policy in theminimum
amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) covering public liability
and including the Village as a party insured is furnished.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 3
8-3-4: RESTORATION OF EXCAVATIONS:
A. Paved Roadways: The person interfering with or causing a change in any
street, parkway, public way or public property is responsible for restoration, if
restoration is not completed by such person within a reasonable time, the
restoration (including backfill, concrete replacement and asphalt patching) of
any street shall be performed by the Village, the cost of such restoration to be
deducted from the deposit provided for in Section 8-3-2.
The restoration of the roadway of any street will conform to the following
standards:
1. No excavated material shall be used for backfill, except by the written
consent of the Public Works Department or a Village authorized agent.
2. Backfill material shall consist of sand or stone screenings, shall conform
to State highway specifications and shall be deposited in six inch (6")
layers, each layer to be suitably compacted by ramming or tamping.
3. All trenches or excavations made in any improved street shall be refilled
to a point on a level with the subgrade immediately below the pavement
with such care and in such a manner that there will be no further
settlement of the fill material. The replaced pavement above the
subgrade shall be identical with and correspond in every way to the
original improvement.
4. All concrete used for this work shall be delivered from ready mix trucks
and shall conform to State highway specifications. The concrete shall
contain no more water than is required for a four inch (4") slump. After
the concrete has been laid, as above described, the same shall be
protected from traffic for one week.
5. Before final restoration is made to roadway patches, the perimeter of the
patch shall be sawcut back neatly and squarely at least twelve inches
(12") beyond the limits of the original excavation. Reflective crack control
treatment shall also be installed.
6. In addition, any person making an excavation in any street pavement
shall cause to be deposited with the Village as security for the restoration
of the street pavement a bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the
cost of said restoration and said bond shall remain in full force and effect
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 4
for a period of three (3) years as security for the maintenance and repair
of the restored street pavement.
7. Any personmaking any excavation in any parkway area shall cause to be
deposited with the Village as security for the restoration of the parkway
area a bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the cost of said
restoration and said bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period
of one year as security for the maintenance and repair of the restored
parkway area. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to
homeowners who excavate the parkway area in front of their own homes.
B. Parkways: All trenches or other excavations in any parkway shall be
refilled and the sod removed in making such trenches excavations shall
be replaced or, after refilling the same, the surface shall be sowed with
grass seed or resodded as determined by the PublicWorks Department
and shall be cared for until the same is restored to as good condition in
every way as before the excavations were made.
C. Where curb and gutter sections are to be replaced, the repair must
include all the curb and gutter between joints, unless sawed joints are
provided.
Any underground improvements of any kind which may be encountered
in making street excavations shall not be molested or disturbed in any
way and if injured shall be at once repaired and restored to their original
condition without cost to the owners thereof.
All the work hereinbefore referred to shall be done in a good and
workmanlikemanner and shall bemaintained and kept in good order and
repair until the deposit aforesaid is refunded, but not to exceed one year.
Each person shall from time to time during such year repair or refill any
such ditch, trench or other excavation, if called upon so to do by the
Public Works Department or other proper official of the Village and all
such work shall be done and performed to the full and complete
satisfaction of the Public Works Department or of such officer as may
hereafter be appointed to perform the same or similar duties as now
performed by such Department and to the full satisfaction of and without
expense to the Village. (Ord. 85-833-17)
8-3-5: BARRICADES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in digging into any street, in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 5
paving any street, building any sewer or drain or trench for water pipes in any
of the public streets or avenues under contract with the Village, or by virtue of
any permission which may have been granted to them by the Board of
Trustees, or any Village department, where such work, if left exposed, would
be dangerous, to erect a fence, railing or barricade, and to place a suitable
covering where necessary as determined by the Public Works Department,
around such excavations or work in such a manner as to prevent danger to
persons who may be traveling such streets, roads or avenues and to continue
and uphold such fence, railing or barricade until the work shall be completed or
the obstruction or danger removed. It shall also be the duty of such person to
place upon such fence, railing or barricade at twilight in the evening suitable
and sufficient warning lights and keep them burning through the night during
the performance of such work, under the penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1
of this Code for every neglect. Flares, lanterns, "bombs" or other devices using
a flame shall not be permitted as suitable lights. Barricades, flashing lights,
warning signs and placement shall be in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. (Ord. 85-833-17; and. Ord. 89-
1110-77) No person shall remove any barricade or light or other danger signal
erected in front of or about any parkway or street within the Village, or in front
of or about any parkway or street under repair or undergoing reconstruction
within the Village, or in any way interfere with, change or destroy such
barricade, light or other danger signal until such parkway or street is repaired
or rebuilt.
The provisions of the preceding Section shall apply to every person who shall
place building materials in any of the public streets, avenues or public places
or be engaged in building any vault or constructing any lateral drain from any
building to any public sewer, or who shall do or perform any work causing
obstructions in the public streets by virtue of any permit from any executive
department and also to all public or Village officers engaged in performing any
work in behalf of the Village whereby obstructions or excavations shall be
made in the public streets. The extent to which the railing or fence, or
barricade referred to herein shall be built is hereby defined in the following
situations:
A. In digging into any street or road, by placing the same along the upper bank of
such excavation or by extending the fence so far across the street or road as
to prevent persons from traveling on such portions as would be dangerous.
B. In paving any street or avenue, by extending the same across the roadway of
such street or avenue, or if but a portion of the width of such roadway be
obstructed, across such portion; in which case the obstruction shall be so
arranged as to leave a passageway through, as nearly as may be of uniform
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 6
width.
C. In the building of a sewer, by placing the same across the roadway at the ends
of such excavations as shall be made.
D. In building vaults, by enclosing the ground taken for the vaults.
E. In placing buildingmaterial in the streets, by placing the same across somuch
of the street as shall be occupied by such materials and the materials shall be
so placed as to occupy a space of uniform width.
F. In the construction or repair of any building, by placing the same around so
much of the public way as the PublicWorks Department shall deemnecessary
for the safety of the public. (Ord. 85-833-17)
8-3-6: FAILURE TO RESTORE:
In the event that any person opening any street, parkway, or public way or by
performing any activity that damages the street parkway or public way, fails to
restore such street, parkway or public way in the manner provided in this
Chapter within ten (10) days after written notice so to do has been mailed or
served upon such person, then and in such event the Public Works
Department shall have such work done and the cost thereof shall be charged
to the person to whom the permit was issued, and shall be deducted from the
amount deposited by such person as required in Section 8-3-2. (Ord. 85-833-
17; and. Ord. 89-1110-77)
8-3-7: RETURN OF SURPLUS DEPOSIT FOR EXCAVATION, DEFICIENCIES:
After completion of the work, under the provisions of this Chapter, to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Department, he shall certify to the Finance
Department the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount deposited
in such case, and such surplus shall thereupon be paid over to the proper
claimant upon presentation to the Village Clerk of the deposit receipt; but if for
any reason the amount of such deposit shall have been insufficient to cover
the cost of such work, or if any damage shall have been done to any
underground work or connections, or otherwise, not contemplated in the
original estimate, which shall have caused increased expenditure, the amount
of such deficiency or damage shall be certified to the Finance Director who
shall collect the same from the person to whom the permit was issued. (Ord.
85-833-17)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 7
8-3-8: DEBRIS:
A. Construction Material or Debris: It shall be unlawful to store construction
material, equipment or debris on any public street, parkway, public way or
dedicated public right of way open to the general public unless suchmaterial is
used for the construction of any public improvements.
B. Deposits on Streets: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any pavement open to
travel by the general public any material that may be harmful or hazardous to
the pavement or operation of a vehicle thereon, including but not limited to,
plowed snow, glass, wood, stone, gravel,mud, dirt, debris, pipe, brick, block or
waste material. The responsibility for any such deposit shall lie with the party
making the deposit and the property owner whose property was the source of
such material. (Ord. 89-1110-77)
8-3-9: OBSTRUCTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of
any street, parkway or public way with the following exception. The placement of
underground sprinkler systems and electronic dog fences will be allowed in the
right of way under the following conditions:
Underground Irrigation Systems:
A. Submittal of detailed plan and permit application for the installation to the
Department of Community Development.
B. Received permission from the Department of Public Works.
C. Signed waiver form supplied by the Village, to be recorded with the Lake County
Recorder of Deeds Office stating the property owner assumes all responsibility for
damages to the permitted obstruction and indemnification of the Village for any
judgments or settlements against the Village from actions arising from the granting
of a permit to use the right of way in this manner and for costs and attorney's fees
for defense of any action brought against the Village.
D. Payment of the following fee in addition to the usual permit cost as established in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code:
1. R.O.W. Obstruction Fee - (Ord. 91-1220-33)
Electronic Dog Fences:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 8
A. Electronic dog fences shall be permitted within an easement or right-of-way under
the following conditions:
1. The existence of a dog fence shall not in any way interfere with the right of the
Village to excavate for repair, maintenance or installation of any public utilities
or for any other necessary purpose.
2. The Village will not be required to maintain or replace any such system as
may be damaged by any such work or by any other maintenance or
construction operation.
3. No portions of the electronic dog fence shall be installed in a Conservancy
area. (Ord. Amd. 11-3196-18, eff. 3/14/11)
8-3-10: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building, structure or permanent
sign which encroaches upon any dedicated public right of way within the
corporate limits of the Village.
8-3-11: MAILBOXES:
A. Mailbox or Letterbox Construction: Freestanding mailboxes or letter boxes
shall be located in accordance with Federal postal regulations and applicable
law, and shall consist of a post construction, the actual mailbox receptacle to
be sized in conformance with Federal regulation. Said post construction shall
consist of a wooden, iron, or steel post which shall support the mailbox. The
saidmailbox receptacle shall be separate from and attached to the supporting
post. A mailbox/post combination is permitted to be constructed of uniform,
one-piece plastic or similarmaterial. The Village, together with the Lincolnshire
Postmaster, shall provide property owners with diagrams and instructional
materials setting out the requirements for height, exact location, and other
requirements with regard to construction and location of the said postconstruction
mailbox. No other types of mailbox construction shall be
permitted. (Ord. 02-1798-08, eff. 4/8/02)
B. Existing Nonconforming Mailboxes: Mailboxes in existence prior to March 15,
2002 which are not in conformity with the requirements of subsection A hereof
shall be permitted to continue. In the event any such nonconforming mailbox
is destroyed, removed or damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) ormore
of its value as a result of any occurrence whatsoever, the said nonconforming
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 9
mailbox structure shall be removed, and replaced by a mailbox constructed in
accordance with the requirements of subsection A above.(Ord. 02-1798-08,
eff. 4/8/02)
C. For the purposes of this Section, mailboxes shall not be deemed "structures"
as that term is defined in the Village Code. The provisions of Section 8-3-9 of
this Village Code with regard to placement of structures on Village property
and the like shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 89-1110-77)
8-3-12: MAINTENANCE AND USE OF PARKWAYS:
Any property owner or tenant currently using the Village parkway or whose
property may in the future benefit from the use of a portion of a Village
parkway for access to that property shall maintain all parkway that is adjacent
to that property. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, lawn
cutting and bush and tree trimming in a manner consistent with Village
standards and regulations. Thismaintenance obligation shall confer no rights
on the property owner or tenant except that any third party shall be liable either
in law, equity or as a trespass violation to the owner or tenant and the Village
for any unpermitted use of such adjacent parkway. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to compromise, in any manner, the absolute right of the
Village to use any Village parkway as it deems advisable with or without notice
to the adjacent property owner or tenant.(Ord. 01-1761-19, eff. 5/14/01)
8-3-13: CURB CUT RESTRICTIONS:
(Rep. by OD. 91-1206-19) No new curb cuts of any kind whatsoever (Including
but not limited to a driveway, entranceway, or street intersection) providing
vehicular access to adjacent properties shall be permitted on any public street
within the Village limits. 300' of the intersection of the public street and an
arterial roadway. Arterial roadways shall include but not be limited to,
Milwaukee Avenue, Aptakisic Road, Half Day Road and Route 45.
No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new building if it is
located on property which is proposed to be served by a curb cut of any kind
whatsoever if such curb cut violates the aforesaid prohibition by being on a
public street within 300' of the intersection of the public street and an arterial
roadway.
This regulation shall prohibit all curb cuts on public streets within 300' of the
intersection of the public street and any arterial roadway west of the centerline
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 10
of Milwaukee Avenue, to the existing westernmost municipal limits and within
the proposed ultimate planning boundaries as of April 1, 1994. (amd. Ord. 94-
1324-09)
8-3-13-1: CURB REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Any section of curb and gutter within the Village limits that requires
modification either by direction of the Village or as a request as part of a valid
Village Permit, must be removed entirely and replaced as required by the
Specifications prescribed by the Illinois Department of Transportation. (Amd
Ord. 07-3000-28, eff. 8/13/07)
8-3-14: DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. A driveway shall be, a minimum width of ten feet (10'), or shall be installed in
conformance with the applicable sections of the latest edition of the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
construction.
1. Manholes or valve boxes shall not be located in any new residential
driveway, walkways or portion thereof.
2. Driveways shall be constructed of the following materials and methods:
a. Six inch (6") Village approved crushed stone base course with
two inch (2") hot mix asphalt surface course, Mix C, N-50, or as
approved by the Village Engineer.
b. Six inch (6") Village approved crushed stone base course with
six inch (6") Portland cement concrete, as approved by the
Village Engineer. No steel reinforcement material shall be
installed within the right-of-way.
c. Six inch (6") Village approved crushed stone base course with
paving brick or other durable surface, as approved by the Village
Engineer.
d. Aggregate Driveways (Decorative Stone Driveways) shall be
constructed six inches (6") of crushed stone base course, over
an approved filter fabric material, with no less than 2-1/2 inches
of decorative gravel, and shall meet the following specifications:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-3: STREETS AND PARKWAYS
Revised 03/14/2011 Page 11
i. Filter Fabric Material must have a; Tensile Strength of no
less than 200 lbs, a Puncture Strength of no less than
100 lbs., and a Trapezoidal Tear of no less than 75 lbs.
ii. Permitted decorative aggregate shall have a minimum
gradient of 3/8 inch and maximum gradient of one inch
(1@).
iii Decorative aggregate shall be absence of any material
classified as Afines@ by the Illinois Department of
Transportation/Materials.
iv. An aggregate driveway shall have a maximum
longitudinal slop of 5% over the first 15-feet of
aggregate driveway, as measured from the back of the
approved apron.
v. An aggregate driveway must be compacted (machine
method) and able to achieve a minimum percent of
compaction of ninety-five percent (95%) standard proctor,
as certified and/or approved by the Village Engineer.
vi. All aggregate driveways must have an approved hard
surface as defined in items (b-d) of this Section
throughout the Village Right-of-Way or ten feet (10') from
the back of the street curb, whichever is greater.
vii. All decorative aggregate driveways in existence on or
before June 22, 2009, shall be comply with this Section
within three (3) years of the adoption of this Ordinance, or
prior to the sale of the subject property, or the
improvement of 50% or more of the driveway (at which
time all requirements listed shall apply), whichever date
comes first.
B. This Section shall apply to all buildings and structures in the Village, including
but not limited to residential, commercial and office buildings or structures.
(Ord. 09-3101-24, eff. 06/22/09)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
SECTION
8-4- 1: Definitions
8-4- 2: Purpose
8-4- 3: Registration Required
8-4- 4: Waste Haulers Registration
8-4- 5: Registration Certificate
8-4- 6: Recycling and Landscape Water Services
8-4- 7: Annual Report
8-4- 8: Refuse Pickups
8-4- 9: Color and Size of Recycling Bins
8-4-10: Disposal Site
8-4-11: Anti-Scavenging
8-4-12: Anti-Littering
8-4-13: Duty of Owners
8-4-14: Construction Refuse
8-4-15: Refuse on Private Property
8-4-16: Deposit of Refuse
8-4-17: Use of Sewers
8-4-18: Frequency of Collection
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall
have the meaning herein given.
ASHES Residue from fire used for cooking and for heating
buildings. (Ord. 90-1144-28)
CLEAN CONSTRUCTION Those wastes/debris resulting from the construction or of
structures or buildings which include, but are not limited
to materials such as concrete blocks, bricks, or broken
concrete or asphalt, plaster, rock, stone, wire and wood
lath, glass, timbers, wood building products, siding,
gutters, appliances, pipes, ducts, furniture, heating and
air-conditioning equipment, uncontaminated dirt or sand
and other similar nonputrescible materials generated
from construction or demolition activities. (Ord. 92-1233-
11)(Ord. 11-3230-52)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 2
EXCLUSIVE WASTE
HAULER
A waste hauler contracted by the Village to provide
collection and disposal of solid waste for residential,
multi-family, institutional, commercial, and\or industrial
users.(Ord. Amd. 96-1462-46, eff. 10/14/96)
GARBAGE Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food; wastes from handling, storage and sale of
produce.
LANDSCAPE WASTE All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as
the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and
trees.
LITTER Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or
waste. Litter may include, but is not limited to any
garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings
or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other
packaging construction material, motor vehicle parts,
furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal, any nauseous or
offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure
any person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been
discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of
improperly.
PERSON Any person, firm, partnership, association, trust,
corporation, company, institution, society, or
organization.
RECYCLABLES Discarded materials which may be reclaimed and which
are considered salable and Arecyclable@ by the Village.
For purposes of this Chapter they include, but are not
limited to, glass, bi-metal (tin and steel) cans, aluminum
cans, newspapers and inserts, paper bags, magazines,
catalogs, telephone books, household papers consisting
of office and stationery papers, computer papers, or other
mailings, corrugated cardboard and clean chipboard, and
plastics #1 (PET) such as soda bottles, #2 (HDPE), such
as, one gallon milk or water containers, two gallon water
dispensers, plastic fruit juice bottles, liquid laundry
detergent containers, fabric softener bottles, bleach
bottles, windshield solvent bottles, #3 (PVC), such as,
floor wax bottles, #4 (LDPE), such as, lids from tubs or
coffee cans, #5 (PP), such as syrup bottles, #6 (PS rigid)
such as, take out containers, vitamin bottles, and #7
(other), such as ketchup bottles. (Ord. Amd. 96-1462-46,
eff. 10/21/96)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 3
RECYCLING Any process by which solid waste materials are
transformed into new products in such a manner that
the original products may lose their identity. (Ord. 90-
1144-28)
REFUSE All solid wastes including, but not limited to, garbage,
rubbish, ashes, landscape waste, recyclables, clean
construction or demolition wastes/debris, commercial
waste and industrial waste. (Ord. 92-1233-11)
RUBBISH Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes.
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire. (Ord. 90-1144-28)
WASTE HAULER Any person collecting and disposing of refuse, except the
following:
A. Any landscaper who only hauls landscape waste
generated from his daily landscape services;
B. Any plumber or contractor whose daily
operations only generate minor amounts of
clean construction or demolition wastes/debris
which can and are hauled away on a daily basis
in a pick-up truck or similar sized vehicle. (Ord.
Amd. 96-1462-46, eff. 10/14/96)
8-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control the disposal,
accumulation and removal of refuse, to eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and
unsightly conditions in the Village and to promote the active reuse of materials
in the solid waste stream through education, conservation and recycling.
8-4-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person acting as a waste hauler shall remove refuse from any premises or
property in the Village or transport refuse through the streets or public ways
owned and/or operated by the Village, or in any manner dispose of refuse, or
contract for any such removal, transportation or disposal of refuse without first
having registered with the Village and paying the required registration fee, as
provided for in this Chapter.With the exception of a waste hauler who is under
exclusive contract with the Village. (Ord. Amd. 96-1462-46, eff. 10/14/96)
Any waste hauler who removes refuse from any premises or property in the
Village or who transport refuse through the streets or public ways owned and
operated by the Village, or in anymanner dispose of refuse or contract for any
such removal, transportation or disposal of refuse without registering with the
Village or paying the required registration fee shall be subject to fines and
penalties as outlined in Title 1 Chapter 17 of the Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 4
8-4-3.1 EXCLUSIVE CONTRACTS:
As suits the current best interest of the Village, and to better enable the Village
to regulate and control the services provided to the users of solid waste
services, the Boardmay provide for one exclusive solid waste hauler providing
the collection and disposal of solid waste for residential,multi-family,
institutional, commercial, and\or industrial users. The Village may provide for
such exceptions to the exclusive franchise as it determines to be in the users =
and the Village=smutual best interests.Waste haulers under exclusive contract
with the Village shall not be required to pay a registration fee but shall be
required to comply with all Village waste hauler regulations unless in conflict
with the exclusive contract document, at which time the exclusive contract
document shall prevail. The exclusive contract document is deemed to be a
part of this Chapter by reference. (Ord. Amd. 96-1462-46, eff. 10/21/96)
8-4-4: WASTE HAULERS, REGISTRATION:
A. Waste haulers shall register on application forms provided by the PublicWorks
Department of the Village.
B. At the time of application, each waste hauler must establish that it carries and
will continue to carry for so long as its operates within the Village, the following
insurance:
1. Workman's Compensation: The waste hauler shall carry with a company
authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois a policy to protect itself
against liability under the Workman's Compensation and Occupational
Diseases statutes of the State of Illinois.
2 Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance: The wastehauler shall carry in its own
name a policy under a comprehensive form to insure the entire motor
vehicle liability for its operations with limits not less than $3,000,000 each
person and $5,000,000 each accident bodily injury and death liability and
$2,000,000 each accident for property damage liability.
3. General Liability: The wastehauler shall carry in its own name a
Commercial General Liability Insurance policy with the following limits of
liability: $3,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
and property damage and $5,000,000 per occurrence for personal injury.
The general aggregate shall be twice the required occurrence limit.
Minimum General Aggregate shall be no less than $6,000,000.
4. Employer's Liability: The waste hauler shall carry in its own name an
Employer's Liability limits of $2,000,000 per accident.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 5
5. Environmental Impairment Pollution Liability: The waste hauler shall carry
in its own name a $2,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
bodily injury, property damage, and remediation costs.
6. The Village shall be named as an additional insured on each of the above
insurance policies.
C. Verification of Coverage. The wastehauler shall furnish the Village with
certificates of insurance naming the Village and its elected and appointed
officials, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insureds and with
any original endorsements. The certificates and endorsements for each
insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind
coverage on its behalf.
D. The Insurance coverage requirements specified herein constitutes the
minimum requirements and said requirements shall in no way lessen or limit
the liability of the waste hauler. The waste hauler shall procure and maintain,
at its own cost and expense, any additional kinds and amounts of insurance,
which, in the waste hauler=s judgment, may be necessary for its proper
protection in the prosecution of its work.
E. The waste hauler shall furnish the Village satisfactory proof of coverage of the
above insurance requirements, by a reliable company or companies, with a
minimum "Best" insurance rating of B, before commencing the performance of
services under this Chapter. Such proof shall consist of certificates executed
by the respective insurance companies and filed with the Village. Said
certificates shall contain a clause to the effect that, for the duration of the
registration, the insurance policy/policies shall be canceled, expired or
changed as to amount of coverage only after written notification sixty (60) days
in advance to the Village.
F. Upon application for a waste hauler's registration, each applicant shall provide
the PublicWorks Department with an agreement to hold the Village harmless
for any acts of the applicant relating to its use of the Village streets and public
ways in such a manner as to cause injury or loss to persons or property. Such
agreement must be approved by the Village Attorney prior to its filing with the
Public Works Department.
To be registered, a waste hauler must use all modern loader trucks for its
operations in the Village andmust keep all equipment used in the performance
of its work in a clean, safe, sanitary condition and shall not permit the same to
remain standing anywhere in the Village. All trucks used for refuse collection
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 6
shall be enclosed and leak-proof. All trucks used for recycling and landscape
waste pickup must be capable of keeping all materials within the confines of
the vehicle.
G. All refuse collected by a waste hauler shall be disposed of at a State-approved
or Village-approved site outside the corporate limits of the Village. The
Village's present compost site may be used by all waste haulers to dispose of
landscape wastes for so long as said site is made available by the Village at
the discretion of the waste hauler.
H. Each registered waste hauler shall provide the Village, at no cost, with one
dumpster per year for a period of one week each year at a location and time to
be designated by the Public Works Department and at the discretion of the
Public Works Department. Such dumpster shall be dumped as often as
necessary during such one week period and as directed by the Public Works
Department. All such dumpsters shall be a minimum size of twenty (20) cubic
yards.
I. All registered waste haulers shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, and this Code. A certificate from the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois covering each vehicle proposed to be
licensed showing compliance by the applicant with the statutes of the State of
Illinois, now, or as the same may be, in force and effect, relating to the
bonding, or licensing or insuring of motor vehicles used must be in the
possession of the waste hauler.
J. Waste haulers shall perform all collection and disposal services in a neat,
orderly, and efficient manner and shall use due care and diligence in the
performance of such services and to provide neat, orderly and courteous
employees and personnel.
K. Waste haulers shall not allow refuse or landscape wastes or recyclables to
scatter or spread as a result of the waste hauler's services.
The requirements of subsections 8-4-4B through K, inclusive, are conditions
precedent to holding a waste hauler's registration certificate in the Village, and
the failure of a waste hauler to conform thereto shall constitute cause for the
revocation of the waste hauler's registration certificate by the Village Manager.
The Village Manager, in revoking a waste hauler's registration certificate, shall
give the waste hauler a written notice by certified, return receiptmail specifying
the grounds thereof. Such waste hauler may, within ten (10) working days of
such revocation, file a written request with the Village Manager for a public
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 7
hearing before the Village Manager, at which time the waste hauler may
present evidence bearing upon the question. The Village Manager, after such
public hearing, may affirm his prior revocation or restore the waste hauler's
registration certificate with or without conditions.
8-4-5: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
A. Regular Residential and/or NonresidentialWaste Haulers: Each application for
a registration certificate by a regular residential and/or nonresidential waste
hauler, a waste hauler who provides a minimum of once per week regular
refuse pickup to a residential or nonresidential property, shall be accompanied
by an annual registration fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. Each registration
certificate shall be issued only to the person, firm or corporation named in the
application and shall not be transferable or assignable.
B. Periodic Refuse Haulers: Each application for a registration certificate by a
waste hauler who removes refuse on a periodic and/or as needed basis, i.e.,
construction waste removal, shall be accompanied by an annual registration
fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15
of Title 1 of this Code. Each registration certificate shall be issued only to the
person, firm or corporation named in the application and shall not be
transferable or assignable.
C. Any Regular Residential and/or Nonresidential or Periodic Refuse waste hauler
who removes refuse from any premises or property in the Village or who
transport refuse through the streets or public ways owned and operated by the
Village, or in any manner dispose of refuse or contract for any such removal,
transportation or disposal of refuse without registering with the Village or
paying the required registration fee shall be subject to fines and penalties as
outlined in Title 1 Chapter 17 of the Code.
8-4-6: RECYCLING AND LANDSCAPE WASTE SERVICES:
As of July 1, 1990, all waste haulers must offer the following additional
services to their customers in conjunction with the regular refuse pickup being
provided to customers prior to the passage of these regulations:
A. Pickup of all landscape waste as defined herein.
B. Curbside recycling for all residential dwelling units.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 8
C. Recycling for all nonresidential buildings.
The cost of all services described above shall be the responsibility of the
customer utilizing the service based upon the fees charged by the waste
hauler to provide said services.
8-4-7: ANNUAL REPORT:
All waste haulers shall make annual written reports to the Village setting forth
their collection and disposal activities and services offered in the Village on a
form provided by the Village. Said reports shall be supplied to the Village within
thirty (30) days of the end of each calendar year. In addition, said reports shall
also include the following:
A. Total number of residential customers served.
B. Total number of commercial customers served.
C. Total number of customers utilizing the recycling and landscape waste
services.
D. Total tonnage of recyclables and landscape wastes picked up in the Village.
(Ord. 90-1144-28)
8-4-8 REFUSE PICKUPS:
A. Residential waste haulers shall offer both once and twice per week pickup
service of any and all refuse. Residential customers shall choose whether they
desire once or twice per week pickup service. Pickups shall take place only on
Wednesday for once per week pickup service andWednesday and Saturday
for twice per week pickup service. If this schedule is interrupted by holidays or
weather-related conditions, the pickup service shall be on the next available
working day. (Ord. 90-1144-28; and Ord. 90-1169-53)
B. Commercial waste haulers shall provide pickup service as often as necessary
and desired by the customer.
C. Collection of recyclables and landscape waste shall only be conducted on
Wednesday. If the collection of recyclables and landscape waste is
interrupted by holidays or weather-related conditions, the collection shall be on
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 9
the next available working day.(Ord. Amd. 03-1827-04, eff. 2/10/03)(Amd. Ord.
03-1838-15, eff. 04/14/03)
D. It shall be illegal for a waste hauler to collect waste from an area adjacent to
any residential dwelling prior to 7:00 a.m. on any day. Any waste hauler found
to be in violation of this regulation is subject to a fine and penalties as outline
in Title 1 Chaper 17 of this Code.
8-4-9: COLOR AND SIZE OF RECYCLING BINS:
All toter carts for the collection of recyclables from detached single-family
dwelling units on individual lots shall be of a forest green color and aminimum
size of 65 gallons. The recycling toter carts shall be provided by the refuse
hauler serving the residential unit.
8-4-10: DISPOSAL SITE:
In the event the Village decides to enter into a service agreement providing for
the exclusive disposal of all of its residential waste at a designated or
appropriate facility, all waste haulers upon thirty (30) days written notice by
certified return receipt mail from the Village, must dispose of all the Village's
residential waste at such facility.
8-4-11: ANTI-SCAVAGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the registered waste haulers to
collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable item placed for collection at
any residential or nonresidential property as part of the Village's gram.
8-4-12: ANTI-LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit litter in any place within the
Village, except in authorized receptacles. No person shall deposit in any gutter,
street or other public places in the Village any accumulation of litter.
8-4-13: DUTY OF OWNERS:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 10
It shall be the duty of the owner/occupant of any premises in the Village to
store, collect, and dispose of all refuse produced or otherwise accumulated on
said premises, or to cause the same to be done, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
A. No owner/occupant of a residential dwelling unit may place any refuse out for
pickup service before nine o=clock (9:00) P.M. on the day before the scheduled
pickup. Additionally, refuse containers must be removed from plain view from
the street no later than 9:00 p.m. on the day of scheduled collection.
B. The owner/occupant of a residential dwelling unit shall provide a location on
their premises where refuse containersmay be stored on days between refuse
pickup. This location shall be maintained in an orderlymanner at all times and
shall not be in plain view from the street or in a location that would be offensive
or be a nuisance to immediate adjoining neighbors.(Ord. 90-1144-28; and.
Ord. 90-1169-53)(Ord. 03-1838-15, eff. 4/14/03)
C. Commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential refuse and refuse storage
containers must be completely screened from public view, either wholly within
the interior of a building or within an approved exterior refuse enclosure.
Exterior enclosuresmust utilize the same exterior finishes andmaterials as the
principal building on the site. Exterior enclosures must also be of a height
sufficient to completely screen any refuse containers inside, andmust be foursided
with doors made of a solid material compatible in color and texture with
the exterior finish andmaterials. Exterior enclosuresmust bemaintained in an
orderlymanner at all times and doorsmust be closed at all times, except when
being serviced. (Ord. 14-3337-64 eff. 10/27/14)
8-4-14: CONSTRUCTION REFUSE:
In addition to the duty imposed herein on the owners of the premises, it shall
be the duty of any person responsible for the production or accumulation of
refuse on any premises in the Village resulting from any building or
construction operations to store and dispose of such refuse in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter, or cause the same to be done. Access to refuse
containers shall not be across public curb or parkway. Dumpsters shall not be
allowed to stand unutilized at any site for longer than thirty (30) days, and
when in use shall not be allowed to overflow.
When applicable, the owner and Commercial Contractor shall be responsible
for removing any construction dumpsters prior to the final inspection upon an
application for a Certificate of Occupancy. Dumpsters located on premises for
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-4: REFUSE COLLECTION AND WASTE HAULER SERVICES
Revised 10/27/2014 Page 11
which a Building Permit has not been issued shall require a permit for approval
from the Department of Community Development, and shall not be permitted
more than sixty (60) days every twelve (12) months. (Ord. Amd. 07-2974-02,
eff. 2/26/07)
8-4-15: REFUSE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall burn in the open any refuse on any premises in the Village.No
person shall keep any refuse on any premises in the Village in such a manner
as to create a public nuisance nor shall any person keep on any premises in
the Village any refuse not produced on said premises.
8-4-16: DEPOSIT OF REFUSE:
No person shall cast, sweep, drop, place or otherwise deposit any refuse
anywhere in the Village in such manner that the refuse might be carried or
deposited by the elements upon any creek, river, body of water, or public or
private premises.
8-4-17: USE OF SEWERS:
No person shall introduce, directly or indirectly, any refuse into any public or
private sewer system unless such refuse has been first macerated or refined.
8-4-18: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
All refuse produced or otherwise accumulated on any premises in the Village
shall be removed from such premises at least once in each week; provided,
however, that putrescible refuse shall not be allowed to overflow the containers
provided for storage. (Ord. 90-1144-28)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
NEWSRACKS
SECTION:
8-5- 1: Intent and Purpose
8-5- 2: Definitions
8-5- 3: Permit Required
8-5- 4: Application for Permit
8-5- 5: Conditions for Permit
8-5- 6: Standards for Maintenance and Installation
8-5- 7: Display of Obscene Material
8-5- 8: Location and Placement of Newsracks
8-5- 9: Violations of Chapter
8-5-10: Appeals
8-5-11: Village Manager's Designated Representative
8-5-12: Abandonment
8-5-13: Separability
8-5-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village find and declare that:
A. The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights of way presents an
inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such
rights of way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and
buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and
emergency services.
B. Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons
using public rights of way, and unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute
public nuisances.
C. It is a matter of public necessity that the Village protects children and
unconsenting adults in and on its public streets, sidewalks, transportation
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 2
facilities and other public rights of way from viewing such public displays of
offensive sexual material. Such displays are thrust indiscriminately upon
unwilling audiences of adults and children and constitute assaults upon
individual privacy.
D. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
morals, and general welfare of persons in the Village in their use of public
rights of way.
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
DISTRIBUTOR The person responsible for placing and maintaining
a newsrack in a public right of way.
NEWSRACK Any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or
maintained for the display and sale of newspapers
or other news periodicals.
PARKWAY That area between the sidewalks and the curb of
any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area
between the edge of the roadway and property line
adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any
area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular
travel.
PICTORIAL MATERIAL Any material suggesting or conveying a visual
image, and includes, but is not limited to, a
photograph, painting or drawing.
Any pictorial material is "obscene" if it satisfies or
meets the definition of "obscene" as set forth in
section 11-20(b) of chapter 38 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes, 1989, as amended from time to time. (ill.
Rev. Stat. ch. 38 par. 11-20(b), 1989.)
ROADWAY That portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK All that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to,
roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 3
8-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any
public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, in the Village any
newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the Village Manager
specifying the exact location of such newsrack(s). One permit may be issued
to include any number of newsracks, and shall be signed by the applicant.
8-5-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Village Clerk upon
such form as shall be provided by the Village, and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newsrack, and
shall be signed by the applicant.
8-5-5: CONDITIONS FOR PERMIT:
A. As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee
thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Village, its officers, agents,
trustees, mayor, and employees against any loss or liability or damage,
including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property
damage sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use or
maintenance of a newsrack within the Village.
B. Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks without
prior inspection of the location but such newsrack or newsracks and the
installation, use ormaintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance
of the provisions of this Chapter. Permits shall be issued within twenty four
(24) hours (excluding Saturday and Sunday and legal holidays) after the
application has been filed as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code. (amd. Ord. 95-1385-15,
eff.5/8/95)
C. Such permits shall be valid for three (3) years and shall be renewable pursuant
to the procedure for original applications referred to in Section 8-5-4 as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
Title 1 of this Code. (Amd. Ord. 95-1385-15, eff.5/8/95)
D. Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and must
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 4
be displayed on the front of each newsrack at all times.
8-5-6: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION:
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack shall exceed five feet (5') in height, thirty inches (30") in width, or
two feet (2') in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other
than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or news
periodical sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a
person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he is
unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-returnmechanisms shall be
maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be
seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name and
address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a
malfunction of the coin-returnmechanism, or to give the notices provided for in
this Chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good
repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:
1. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
2. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the
visible painted areas thereof.
3. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal
areas thereon.
4. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration.
5. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 5
tears, peeling or fading.
6. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
8-5-7: DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly place or maintain any
publication ormaterial in newsracks which exposes to public view any pictorial
material that is obscene.
8-5-8: LOCATION AND PLACEMENT OF NEWSRACK:
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a
public right of way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right
of way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this Section:
A. No newsrack shall be used ormaintained which projects onto, into or over any
part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon,
along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
B. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture
located in the public right of way, except to other newsracks.
C. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight feet (8') along a curb,
and a space of not less than three feet (3') shall separate each group of
newsracks.
D. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.
2. Within twelve feet (12') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
3. Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
4. Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
5. Within three feet (3') ahead or fifteen feet (15') to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 6
6. Within three feet (3') of the outer end of any bus bench.
7. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet (6').
8. Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
9. Within one hundred feet (100') of any other newsrack on the same side of
the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the
same publication.
10. On any handicap access ramp.
The provisions contained in subsection D5 of this Section shall not apply
if compliance with the provisions would prohibit the placement of a
newsrack for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') on the same side
of the street in the same block.
8-5-9: VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER:
Upon determination by the Village Manager that a newsrack has been
installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, an
order to correct the offending condition will be issued to the distributor of the
newsrack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by
mailing a copy of the order by certifiedmail return receipt requested. The order
shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest actions necessary
to correct the condition, and inform the newsrack distributor of the right to
appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within five (5) days
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of
the order or to appeal the order within three (3) days after its receipt shall
result in the offending newsrack being summarily removed and processed as
unclaimed property. if the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to
owner under provisions of subsection 8-5-6D hereof, it shall be removed
immediately and processed as unclaimed property. An impound fee, which
shall be measured by the Village's cost and expense of impounding, shall be
assessed against each newsrack summarily removed. The Village Manager
shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected condition or of a newsrack
reinstalled after removal under this Section. The distributor of said newsrack
shall be charged an inspection fee for each newsrack so inspected as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-5: NEWSRACKS
Revised 12/13/2010 Page 7
Title 1 of this Code. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and
charges required under this Chapter. (amd. Ord. 95-1385-15, eff.5/8/95).
8-4-10: APPEALS:
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or
action taken under the provisions of this Chapter may appeal and shall be
appraised of his right to appeal to the Board of Trustees. An appeal must be
perfected within three (3) days after receipt of notice of any protested decision
or action by filing with the office of the Village Clerk a letter of appeal briefly
stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no
more than ten (10) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. Appellant shall be
given at least five (5) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The
Board of Trustees shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a
reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the
determination of the Village Manager should not be upheld. At the conclusion
of the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall make a final and conclusive
decision.
8-5-11: VILLAGE MANAGER'S DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE:
Village Manager as used in this Chapter shall include his designated
representative.
8-5-12: ABANDONMENT:
In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty (30) continuous
days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the
manner as provided in Section 8-5-9 for newsracks in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter.
8-5-13: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent Jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Chapter. (Ord. 90-1177-61)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 1
TITLE 8
CHAPTER 6: Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public
Right-of-Ways
Sections:
8-6-1: Purpose and Scope
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Annual Registration Required
8-6-4: Permit Required; Applications and Fees
8-6-5: Action on Permit Applications
8-6-6: Effect of Permit
8-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-6-8: Annual Recurring Rates for Small Wireless Facilities
8-6-9: Insurance
8-6-10: Indemnification
8-6-11: Security
8-6-12: Permit Suspension and Revocation
8-6-13: Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status
8-6-14: General Construction Standards
8-6-15: Public Safety and Traffic Control
8-6-16: Location of Facilities
8-6-17: Construction Methods and Materials
8-6-18: Vegetation Control
8-6-19: Removal, Relocation, or Modifications
8-6-20: Clean-Up and Restoration
8-6-21: Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
8-6-22: Variances
8-6-23: Penalties
8-6-24: Enforcement
8-6-25: Severability
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this Chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-ofway
in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 2
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities and
utility facilities, including without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and
other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that
are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village=s utilities
and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the
installation of facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that
increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the
Village’s residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to
facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject to This Chapter: This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the wireless provider or utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by
law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege
of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rightsof-
way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that
the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for
terms and conditions inconsistent with this Chapter.
E. Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility
other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar
agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 3
govern and control during the term of such agreement. Any lawful renewal or
extension thereof shall incorporate the terms of this Chapter as though fully set
forth therein.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement. Any
lawful renewal or extension thereof shall incorporate the terms of this Chapter as
though fully set forth therein.
F. Conflicts with Other Chapters: This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
G. Conflicts with State and Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State
laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Chapter and may exercise the power described in Section 8-6-22 to vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its
rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
8-6-2: Definitions:
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms
listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section
shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code ' 530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
ANSI American National Standards Institute.
ANTENNA Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision
of any type of wireless communications services.
APPLICANT A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials.
BACKFILL The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 4
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic
devices.
CLEAR ZONE The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area
may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable
slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired
width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE The Municipal Code of the Village of Lincolnshire.
COLLOCATE OR
COLLOCATION
To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace
wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other than
mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
PROVIDER
A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as
amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless
provider.
CONDUCTOR Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR
CONSTRUCT
The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration,
enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in
place of facilities.
COVER The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a rightof-
way.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR The Village Public Works Director or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the
right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 5
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting;
placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials,
equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way
or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety
of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets,
pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables,
small wireless facilities, as defined in this Chapter, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Chapter. For
purposes of this Chapter, the term “facility” shall not include
any facility owned or operated by the Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such
as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form,
concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined
by the Village Engineer or his or her designee to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of
persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY CODE The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
HIGHWAY A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 6
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches
and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR
HISTORIC LANDMARK
A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties,
or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of
Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties
and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v
of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47
CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation
program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office or where such certification of the
preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
HOLDER A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
IDOT Illinois Department of Transportation.
ICC Illinois Commerce Commission.
JACKING Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.
JETTING Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
MAJOR INTERSECTION The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
MONOPOLE A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower
designed and principally used to support antennas or related
equipment and that is not a utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED
INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure in the public right-of-way within the boundaries
of the Village, including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic
signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or
maintained by the Village.
OCCUPANCY The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 7
sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
Sections 8-6-4 and 8-6-5 of this Chapter.
PRACTICABLE That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
PIPELINES
Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products
including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane,
butane, or coal-slurry.
PRIVATE LINE A dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations.
PROMPT That which is done within a period of time specified by the
Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30
days.
PUBLIC ENTITY A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the
Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or
permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village.
Right-of-way or Rights-of-way shall not include any real or
personal Village property that is not specifically described in
the previous two sentences and shall not include Village
buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
SALE OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT
RETAIL
The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by
one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use
or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND That amount of security required pursuant to Section 8-6-10.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 8
SHOULDER A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area
for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed
from the pavement.
SIDEWALK A paved or non-paved surface which is intended for
pedestrians or bicycles. The term Sidewalk includes bike
paths and trails.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its
exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of
no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment
are not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING
JUDGMENT
A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering
principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide
area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private
line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio,
paging service and any other form of mobile or portable oneway
or two-way communications, and any other transmission
of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.
Telecommunications shall not include value added services in
which computer processing applications are used to act on
the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall
not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component
part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. Telecommunications shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections
521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 9
other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the Village through an open video system as
defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. '76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
PROVIDER
Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls
facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
RETAILER
Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is
not a small wireless facility as defined in this Chapter.
UTILITY POLE An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service
cables, which are used to provide lighting, traffic control,
signage, or a similar function.
VENT A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire, Lake County, Illinois.
WATER LINES Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated
material.
WIRELESS FACILITY Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a
communications network, including: (i) equipment associated
with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration. “Wireless facility” includes small
wireless facilities. “Wireless facility” does not include: (i) the
structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities,
coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated
with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDER
Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service
in the State that builds or installs wireless communication
transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 10
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a
wireless services provider for the application submitted to the
Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided
using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES
PROVIDER
A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURE
A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of
supporting wireless facilities. “Wireless support structure”
does not include a utility pole.
8-6-3: Annual Registration Required:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Village Engineer or his/her designee, providing the utility’s name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact
persons who can act on its behalf in connection with emergencies involving the registrant’s facilities
in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in Section 8-6-8 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
8-6-4: Permit Required; Applications and Fees:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the
location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
Chapter), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with
the Village Engineer or his/her designee and obtaining a permit from the Village therefore,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customer’s premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance, the replacement
of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size or smaller, if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 11
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are
suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes. The Village may require a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that affect
traffic patterns or that require lane closures.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a form
provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may
designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or confidential
by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The application for a small wireless
facility, along with supporting information and notices, must be submitted to the Village Engineer
or his/her designee.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the wireless
provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
1. The applicant’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicants name and address, if different than the wireless provider or
utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the
work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the
facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of
such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to
be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or
impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file with the Village:
i. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
ii. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The
intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 12
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this Section unless the Village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Evidence of insurance as required in Section 8-6-9 of this Chapter; and
7. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 8-6-11 of
this Chapter;
8. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of Chapter 6 (See
Section 22);
9. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply
with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Facilities. The permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific facility that is the subject of the
permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, cable
television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that
any “Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory
authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant
has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional
authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design,
construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water
Pollution Control and other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum
products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be
followed.
6) Applications for small wireless facilities must also include the following:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 13
i. Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility covered by
the application;
ii. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole will be
installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings;
iii. A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for each proposed
small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and stamped by a
professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or municipallyowned
infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the small wireless
facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without creating a
risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also describe the
method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate that any
structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm to any residential
structure;
iv. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
v. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility covered by the application;
vi. Certification that the collocation complies with Section 8-6-16 below; and
vii. Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment methods
used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application.
E. Applicants Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period
and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained
in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within thirty
(30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement,
applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the in the
amount established in Title 1, Chapter 15. No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant
to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
G. Application Fees for Small Wireless Facilities. All applications for the collocation of a single
small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount established in Title 1, Chapter 15. All applications for the
collocation of more than one small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in Title 1, Chapter 15 for
each small wireless facility addressed in said application. An application for the installation of a
small wireless facility that will require a new utility pole must be accompanied by a fee in the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 14
amount established in Title 1, Chapter 15.
H. Consolidated Applications for Small Wireless Facilities. Applications for small wireless facilities
may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided they involve the same type of small wireless
facility and the same type of structure. The Village may, at its discretion, remove small wireless
facility collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for purposes of
deeming the application incomplete or denied.
8-6-5: Action on Permit Applications:
A. Application Deadlines for Small Wireless Facilities. Applications are deemed complete if the
Village does not notify the applicant otherwise within 30 days of receipt of the application.
If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an existing utility pole,
the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within 90 days. If the Village fails to
notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the
application to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of a new utility pole, the
Village will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within 120 days. If the Village fails to
notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved.
B. Village Review of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the Village Engineer or his/her designee on a
nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, or regulations that concern public safety, the Village Engineer or
his/her designee shall notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code
provisions upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and
resubmit a revised application without paying additional application fees. When reviewing
applications for small wireless facilities, the Village will approve or deny the revised application
within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the
Village Engineer or his/her designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this Chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
Village Engineer or his/her designee shall issue a permit. In all instances, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or his/her designee that
the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
C. Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence
work governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications,
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 15
not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Village Engineer or his or her designee shall specify
the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and
constructed.
2. In the event that the Village Engineer or his or her designee fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten
(10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) twentyfive
(25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this Chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is
required for work pursuant to Section 8-6-4 of this Chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit
and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the
facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements
of Subsection (a) of this Section.
D. Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization: Under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted
forty-five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and regulations.
8-6-6: Effect of Permit:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created: A permit from the Village
authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on
Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
B. Duration: No permit issued to a utility shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion. Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed within 180 days after the
issuance of the permit. If collocation is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small
wireless facilities are valid for 5 years from the time of issuance.
C. Pre-construction meeting required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued
under this Chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The
pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 16
such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence
of other facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities,
use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
D. Compliance with All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse
the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes,
laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
8-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the
locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit
application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of
this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with Section 8-6-21 of
this Chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit
and submit revised drawings or plans therefore.
8-6-8: Annual Recurring Rates for Small Wireless Facilities:
The Village shall charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless facilities
on municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-of-way equal to either the rate
established in Title 1, Chapter 15 per utility pole, or the actual, direct, and reasonable costs
related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the Village utility pole, whichever is greater. If
the Village elects to charge the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule on
an annual basis.
8-6-9: Insurance:
A. Required Coverages and Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies
insuring the utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 17
paragraph below:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations,
explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as “X”,
“C”, and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
i. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
ii. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
iii. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
iv) Wireless providers must include the Village as an additional insured on
the commercial general liability policy;
2. Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
3. Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
B. Excess or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this Section may be in any
combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must
provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that
when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the
excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies of any of the policies
required by this Section to the Village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written
request therefor from the Village.
D. Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this
Section shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village, by
registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice
addressed to the Village Engineer or his or her designee of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.”
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 18
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10)
days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
E. Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A wireless provider
or utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of
Subsections b), c) and d) of this Section. A wireless provider or utility that elects to self-insure
shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under Subsection a) of this Section,
such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.
F. Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Wireless Provider or Utility’s Liability: The legal
liability of the wireless provider or utility to the Village and any person for any of the matters that
are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under
valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the
licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-
" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
8-6-10: Indemnification:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless provider or utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials
and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney=s fees
and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities
or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether
such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise,
license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider or utility’s indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses
or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by
the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
8-6-11: Security:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 19
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth
in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this
Section at the permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized
under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the
permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits
and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this Chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or
expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without limitation,
any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by
this Chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as
a consequence solely of the permittee=s failure to perform or complete, and all
other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or
any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the
permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an
unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of
credit provided pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the
permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of
any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois
at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to
the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer or his or her designee,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities
proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations,
and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion
of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer or his or her designee may,
in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 20
Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have
been required under the provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written notice clearly stating the
reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw
an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village
for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which
the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village determines can
be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that
any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security
Fund to the amount specified in Subsection c) of this Section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the
Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said
withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund
below the minimum balance required in Subsection c) of this Section.
G. Closing and Return of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as
remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter
or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any
and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary
to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in
addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security
Fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which
may be infringed or otherwise violated. The Village shall have the right to require lien waivers
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 21
before accepting or approving any work or making payment for any work in the Right-of-Way,
including the return of the Security Fund as set forth in Section G above.
8-6-12: Permit Suspension and Revocation:
A. Village Right to Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the
permit application;
2. Non-compliance with this Chapter;
3. Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee=s facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct
or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the
permit and approved plans.
B. Notice of Revocation or Suspension: The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke
or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the
revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 8-6-11.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension: Upon receipt of a
written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the
following options:
1. Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the
revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in
the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within
five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the
satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village
within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this Subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 22
Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for
revocation set forth within Subsection a) of this Section.
E. Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the
provisions of Subsection c) of this Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the
Village: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) day notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) day
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of
removal.
8-6-13: Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status:
A. Notification of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The
new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show
current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name,
the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village=s
right-of-way.
C. Insurance and Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect
the name of the new owner upon transfer.
8-6-14: General Construction Standards:
A. Standards and Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic
control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to
time:
1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2. Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3. Highway Design Manual;
4. Highway Standards Manual;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 23
5. Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6. Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code ' 545);
7. Flagger=s Handbook; and
8. Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
B. Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among
differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Village Engineer or his or her
designee shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply
and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer or his or her designee shall
state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
8-6-15: Public Safety and Traffic Control:
A. Public Safety. The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facilities located
in the Village right-of-way may not interfere with the frequencies used by public safety agencies
for public safety communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance
with industry standards and the Federal Communications Commission’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna, wireless facility or small
wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must take all steps necessary to correct
and eliminate the interference at its own costs. The Village may terminate a permit for any
antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility based on such interference if the interference
is not corrected.
The Village may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety uses. This reservation
of space may preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the Village determines
that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
B. Minimum Requirements: The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic protection are
contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
C. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers: The wireless provider or utility is responsible
for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary,
meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the
utility’s workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
D. Interference with Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 24
E. Notice When Access is Blocked: At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will
partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the wireless
provider or utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning
time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to Section 8-6-21 of this Chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
F. Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility=s attention by the
Village.
8-6-16: Location of Facilities:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of
facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this subsection.
1. No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any
location if the Village Engineer or his/her designee determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village=s utility
facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of
the Village’s utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the
minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause
only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
3. No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that
interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
4. No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as
to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5. Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in
use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
6. The Village is not required to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to
continue to install or maintain utility poles in any location if it makes a nondiscriminatory
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular
type. For Village utility poles with collocated small wireless facilities in place
when the Village makes a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles, the
Village will, at its discretion, either maintain the utility pole or install and maintain
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 25
an alternative utility pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or offer
to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within
the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as
nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
ii. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb,
where available;
iii. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
iv. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
v. Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located
within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i. The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
ii. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if
other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without
disrupting the pavement); and
iii. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility
shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed
between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 26
incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional
cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the
installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be
located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a
ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
i. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC=s rules entitled,
AConstruction of Electric Power and Communication Lines@ (83 Ill. Adm.
Code 305);
ii. Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the
highway and outside of the clear zone; and
iii. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
i. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
ii. Capacity for the utility=s foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in
the initial installation.
6. Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-ofway
line where an underground facility other than a power or communication
facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the
utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as
provided in current Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. '192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way: The Village may require that facilities
be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities
i. The Village may not require the placement of a small wireless facility on a
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 27
specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the application
necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the Village may propose that
the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. Should the
applicant reject the proposed relocated collocation, it must provide a written
certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost
reasons the alternative location will not satisfy the wireless provider’s needs.
The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view in compliance
with the appearance standards described below.
ii. If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are
located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles and
other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-ofway
as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above ground
facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the
side where the above ground facilities most closely match the scale of the
new freestanding facility.
2. Other Facilities.
i. The Village may restrict the location and size of any monopole, utility pole or
other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or modified so that
the height of the free standing facility is higher by more than ten feet or more
than 10%, whichever is greater, than any other existing, freestanding facility
located within the right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the
proposed facility, measured along the center line of the respective right-ofway.
Where there are no other freestanding facilities located within three
hundred (300) feet of the proposed facility, the maximum height of the
freestanding facility shall be forty five (45) feet.
ii. The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
iii. If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are
located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles and
other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-ofway
as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above ground
facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the
side where the above ground facilities most closely match the scale of the
new freestanding facility.
3. If all existing aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way,
all new freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-ofway
as the existing aboveground facilities. If there are existing above ground
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 28
facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side
where the aboveground facilities most closely match the scale of the new
freestanding facility.
F. Height Restrictions for Small Wireless Facilities. Small wireless facilities are limited to a
maximum height of 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless structure on which it is collocated.
The height limit of a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small
wireless facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of:
1. 10 feet higher than the tallest existing utility pole within 300 feet of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure that is in the same right-ofway;
or
2. 45 feet above ground level. The Village shall designate which intersecting rightof-
way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure
shall control the height limitation.
G. Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable
design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of
the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs
include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction
with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and
municipally-owned infrastructure shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles or monopoles is strongly discouraged.
H. Design and Appearance Standards.
1. Residential Design Standards.
Purpose: ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide discretion on
required and preferred design of small wireless facilities.
Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each Facility located in a
district zoned for residential uses:
a. Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth techniques to
reduce potential visual impacts from all facilities.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 29
b. All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a facility must be
stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples
of stealth of camouflage designs are presented in Figure 1 below.
c. Facilities and all ancillary equipment associated with the facility must not
emit sound.
d. Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole and
equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No exposed
cable is allowed.
e. No flashing lights or stickers which are not required by law are allowed to be
placed on any facility. Stickers must use text only and be designed in the
same color as the pole to which they are attached.
f. In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian pathway. All
installations must maintain accessibility requirements and standards.
g. All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-resistant paint to
match pole color and surroundings.
h. Colors and materials for facilities shall be chosen to minimize the visibility of
the facility.
i. Antennas attached to existing poles or municipally-owned infrastructure shall
be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
j. Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-reflective matte finish
paint using color shades that are comparable or blend with surrounding
natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any ground-mounted
facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in front of which it is
located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner of the groundmounted
facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a period of
one-year from planting.
k. All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and areas of bare
or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement landscape is
determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation funds to use
elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the
restoration work or reseeding for a period of one-year.
l. No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless expressly
allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended under FCC
regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all
times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and
provides the facility owner’s unique site number, and also provides a local or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 30
toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner’s operations center.
All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise
placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures.
Figure 1. Sample Stealth Designs for Small Cell Utility Poles:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 31
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 32
2. Design Standards in Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones.
Purpose: to protect and promote the Village’s unique character in a manner
consistent with State and federal laws and regulations.
Applicability: These design standards shall apply to (a) each area, district,
neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan
as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the
community; and (b) each redevelopment area designed under the Tax Increment
Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and
Redevelopment Act.
a. Siting of facilities in special aesthetic/economic purpose zones must respect
the existing character or design ordinance of established zone.
b. Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in
their applications.
c. Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it appears to be
something other than a facility and is at the same time compatible with its
surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
d. Facilities must be designed so that the facilities silhouette, mass and color
are masked in such a way as to be virtually indistinguishable from their
background.
e. Examples of stealth of camouflage designs are presented in Figure 1.
f. Facilities located in areas governed by the Village of Lincolnshire Design
Guidelines, adopted by the Village on November 23, 2015, shall design
facilities in a manner which is not inconsistent with such guidelines.
3. Design Standards in Historic Districts.
Purpose: to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and encouraging the
continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, properties, structures,
sites and objects having a special historical interest or value to the Village and
its citizens.
Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district or on any
historic landmark:
a. Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American
history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or
are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places are to be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 33
avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked buildings,
properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by an ordinance
that meets the requirements of the certified Local Government Program of
the Illinois State historic Preservation Office are also to be avoided, to the
greatest extent possible.
b. Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in
their applications.
c. Applicant must implement said Village-approved design concepts, and the
use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to achieve
compliance with historic preservation review.
d. Prior to submitting an application, where the Applicant submits an
application to site facilities in a historic district, the Applicant must meet with
the Village to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the
installation.
e. When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider or utility must
avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant
architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy
the distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
f. Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced,
wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking, limited paint
removal and reapplication of paint.
4. General Design Standards.
Applicability: These design standards apply to all small wireless facilities:
a. All small wireless facilities not governed by the preceding design standards
must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The small wireless facility,
including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that
blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or municipally-owned
infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which
blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures.
Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or covered with
an appropriate cover.
b. The Village may discourage the installation of facilities in particular locations
in order to preserve visual quality.
c. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require
extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the rightof-
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 34
d. A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats any existing
concealment elements of the utility pole or municipally-owned infrastructure
to which it is attached.
e. Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio
frequency shall be separated as far as practicable.
I. Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only
where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the
facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to,
underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower
supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway
structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable,
corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential,
present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a
bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of
alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility
attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following
considerations:
i. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted
and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event
of damage to or failure of the facility;
ii. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in
the transportation system;
iii. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative
practicability;
iv. The proposed method of attachment;
v. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
vi. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
vii. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
viii. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 35
J. Appearance Standards:
1. The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in
order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or
to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic
quality of the lands being traversed.
K. Facility Attachments to Existing Utility Poles and Light Standards
1. Any facility attached to existing utility poles and light standards shall not result in
a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the utility pole or light
standard, provided the Village may require a smaller facility for the purpose of
complying with any other more restrictive regulation in this Chapter.
2. A facility shall be deemed to substantially change the physical dimensions of the
utility pole or light standard if it meets any of the following criteria:
a. It increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than ten
feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height should be measured from the
existing dimensions of the utility pole or light standard.
b. It involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the utility pole or light
standard that would protrude from the edge of such structure by more than
six feet.
c. It involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there
are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure.
d. It would defeat any concealment elements of the utility pole or light standard.
3. Communications Attachments. A communications facility which does not result
in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the utility pole or light
standard shall be permitted only if meets all of the following criteria:
i. All antennas capable of serving two or fewer telecommunications
carriers that are part of the deployment shall fit within enclosures (or
if the antennas are exposed, within imaginary enclosures) that are
individually no more than three cubic feet in volume. Any neutral
host antennas capable of serving more than two telecommunications
carriers shall fit within enclosures (or if the antennas are exposed,
within imaginary enclosures) that are individually no more than six
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 36
cubic feet in volume. All antennas on the structure, including any
pre-existing antennas on the structure, shall fit within enclosures (or
if the antennas are exposed, within imaginary enclosures) that total
no more than six cubic feet in volume.
ii. All other equipment associated with the communication facility and
attached to the utility pole or light standard shall be located as high
above the established grade as practicable and which complies with
all other applicable separation requirements.
iii. All permits, licenses and approvals required by the owner of the
utility pole or light standard have been granted prior to applying for a
Village permit.
8-6-17: Construction Methods and Materials:
A. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods:
1. Boring or Jacking.
i. Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Village Engineer or his or her designee from the edge of the pavement. Pits
for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
ii. Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
iii. Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six inches
(0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe,
and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the
following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
iv. Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or
auger and following pipe method.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 37
v. Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under
or around the root system.
2. Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-ofway
shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of
IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
i. Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission
is obtained from the Village Engineer or his or her designee.
ii. Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the
excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on
the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway,
excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
iii. Drip Line of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling.
i. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall
be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials
in accordance with IDOT=s AStandard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.@ When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
ii. For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is
completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village Engineer or his or her designee, the utility, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades,
as determined by the Village Engineer or his or her designee.
4. Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be
permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a
variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is permitted under Section
8-6-21, the following requirements shall apply:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 38
i. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon
as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Engineer or his or her designee.
ii. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
iii. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
iv. For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete
surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary
for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.
5. Encasement.
i. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by onepiece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
ii. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m)
of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the
area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
iii. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is
used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall
be encased regardless of installation method.
iv. In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be
eliminated.
v. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations
of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy
pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic
protection of the pipe is provided;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 39
vi. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the
facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right-of-way.
6. Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines
30 Inches (0.8 m)
18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by
Village)
Gas or Petroleum Products 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage
Line
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
7. Locating Village’s Transite Water Mains; Hand Digging. Portions of the
Village’s water main are constructed of transite, a material incompatible with
conventional utility location methodologies. The Utility, its employees, agents,
or contractors and each of them, shall be deemed to be aware of this
condition. The Utility, its employees, agents, or contractors shall use due care
at all times in light of these circumstances, including implementing hand
excavation, vacuum excavation methods and visually inspecting the
excavation while in progress. If the Utility installs lines by means of augering,
or boring, due care shall be defined as digging at each and every crossing of
the lines or at 200 foot intervals where the Village=s lines are marked in
parallel to the proposed installation. In the event the Utility observes clear
evidence of the presence of an unmarked Village-owned utility facility in the
area of the proposed excavation, the Utility shall not begin excavating until
two (2) hours after an additional call is made to the Village=s Engineer or
Director of Public Works. If the Utility, its employees, agents or contractors
fail to exercise due care or comply with the notice requirements described
herein, the Utility shall be liable for the damage caused to the Village=s utility
facilities
B. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities:
1. Electric Power or Communication Lines.
i. Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within Village
rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity
with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled ARules for Construction
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 40
of Electric Power and Communications Lines,@ and the National Electrical
Safety Code.
ii. Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use
single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be
used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation
so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is
no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.
iii. Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing
is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between
jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing
is installed by the use of Amoles,@ Awhip augers,@ or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation
or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted
prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance
with the National Electrical Safety Code.
iv. Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of
the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops,
shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless
otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines.
Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be
installed by:
i. The use of Amoles,@ Awhip augers,@ or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
ii. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines
or toes of slopes of the highway;
iii. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of
slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
iv. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by
other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way
shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 41
and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety
Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 B Transportation of Natural
and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR '192),
IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” and all
other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way
shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure
Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines.
Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within
rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
AStandard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.@
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead
or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided
with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the Village Engineer or his or her designee. With the approval of
the Village Engineer or his or her designee, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with
the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-ofway
shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry,
the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction,” the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
2. Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the right-ofway
without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer or his or her
designee. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle
to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the
Village.
3. Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall
identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 42
new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be
required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to
traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be
required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer or his or her designee
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those
set forth in Section 5-1-11(B) of this Code.
E. Location of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall
contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and
underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a
utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
8-6-18: Vegetation Control:
A. Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct
all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreement with the Village as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility
with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws
and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any
other permit required under this Chapter.
1 Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits
shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 43
2. Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen
trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree
trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance: The Village may require that special
measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required
measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or
pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for
any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be p Village Engineer or
his or her designee permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or his or her designee that such spraying
is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
8-6-19: Removal, Relocation, or Modifications:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. Wireless providers are
required to provide the Village with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless
facilities. Such notice must include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
B. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such
facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 44
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee=s license or franchise, unless
otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or
franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required
permit in violation of this Chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the
permittee=s license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The Village retains the right and privilege to cut
or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known,
prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or
removing a facility.
D. Abandonment of Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities. As used in this section, a small wireless facility that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered
abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless facility shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned and the owner of that small
wireless facility must remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after
sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may direct the wireless
provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer or
his/her designee determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. If the small wireless facility is not removed
within 90 days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of
the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
2. Other Utility Facilities. As used in this section, a facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. Upon
abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall
notify the Village within ninety (90) days. The owner of the abandoned facility
must remove the facility within 90 days after sending such written notice to the
Village. The Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the Village Engineer or his or her designee [Director of Public Works]
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice,
the Village may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms
of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 45
actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and
cost recovery.
8-6-20: Clean-Up and Restoration:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within
ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to
construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer or his or her designee. Such cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed
prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this Section may be
extended by the Village Engineer or his or her designee for good cause shown.
8-6-21: Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility=s
expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the
utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on
the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights,
barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the
nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of
equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be
provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted
when no other means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village
Engineer or his or her designee duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the
nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic,
the Village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as
rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 46
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs
undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
8-6-22: Variances:
A. Request for Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this
Chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer or his or her designee as a part of the
permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a
variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority to Grant Variances: The Village Engineer or his or her designee shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on
an individual basis.
C. Conditions for Granting of Variance: The Village Engineer or his or her designee may authorize
a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain
features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would
make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to
be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform
with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in
relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the
Village Engineer or his or her designee may require the utility requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
Chapter but which carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
E. Right to Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Village Engineer or his or her designee under the
provisions of this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other
board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in
writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the
Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of
the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-6: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised 05/29/2018 Page 47
8-6-23: Penalties:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code.
There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the
utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate,
the utility shall bear the Village=s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of
the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
8-6-24: Enforcement:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the
Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
8-6-25: Severability:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Amd. Ord. 07-3010-38, eff. 11/26/07)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES
INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-7-1 Purpose and Objective
8-7-2 Definitions
8-7-3 Applicability
8-7-4 Administration
8-7-5 Severability
8-7-6 Minimum Standards
8-7-7 Prohibitions on Discharges
8-7-8 Suspension of MS4 Access
8-7-9 Industrial or Construction Discharges
8-7-10 Monitoring of Discharges
8-7-11 Best Management Practices Required
8-7-12 Watercourse Protection
8-7-13 Notification of Spills
8-7-14 Enforcement
8-7-15 Appeal of Notice of Violation
8-7-16 Enforcement Measures after Appeal
8-7-17 Cost of Abatement
8-7-18 Injunctive Relief
8-7-19 Compensatory Action
8-7-20 Violations Deemed Public Nuisance
8-7-21 Remedies Not Exclusive
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village through the regulation of non-storm water
discharges to the storm drainage systemto themaximumextent practicable as
required by federal and state law. This Chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this Chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges
by any user;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 2
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4; and
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have themeaning ascribed
to it in Section 502 of the CleanWater Act, 40 CFR 122, and 35 Ill. Adm. Code
309, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. For convenience, simplified
explanations of some regulatory/statutory definitions have been provided, but
in the event of a conflict, the definition found in the statue or regulation takes
precedence.
AUTHORIZEDENFORCEMENT The Village of Lincolnshire, or upon its inability or
AGENCY failure to act, the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission.
AUTHORIZEDENFORCEMENT
OFFICER
Any officer or employee of an Authorized Enforcement
Agency who administers or enforces any provision of
this Chapter or Clean Water Act pursuant to this
Chapter. The term AAuthorized Enforcement Officer@
shall include: the Village Manager; the Development
Manager; the Planning Manager; the Code
Enforcement Officer; the Director of PublicWorks; the
Village Engineer, the Fire Chief, Village Attorney, or
their designate. It is expressly intended that those
officials shall be, and are empowered to enforce the
provisions of this Code including the initiating and
signing of formal complaints alleging violations of such
provisions.
BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES (BMPs)
Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm
water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 3
CLEAN WATER ACT Formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, means Pub. L 92-500 (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY Activities subject to NPDES construction or Lake
County Watershed Development permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of 5,000 square feet or more. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, that because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as allowed under an
NPDES permit or as exempted in section 8-7-7 of this
Chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS An "illicit connection" is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal
discharge to enter the storm drainage system
including, without limitation, any conveyances that
allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter
the storm drainage system; and any connections to the
storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an
Authorized Enforcement Agency; or any drain or
conveyance connected froma commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system that has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an Authorized Enforcement
Agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
ISOLATED WATERS OF LAKE
COUNTY
Those waters as defined in the Lake County
Watershed Ordinance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 4
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
The system of conveyances (including sidewalks,
paths, (MS4) roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) owned and operated
by the Village and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and that is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT
DISCHARGE ELIMINATION
SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States or Isolated Waters of Lake County,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area wide basis.
NON-STORM WATER
DISCHARGE
Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and
acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT Anything that causes or contributes to a change in the
turbidity, Ph, color, or temperature of the receiving
water. Pollutants may include, without limitation:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage,
litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
PREMISES Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 5
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, without limitation,
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs,
and other drainage structures.
STORM WATER Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation,
and resulting from such precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION
PREVENTION PLAN
A document that describes the Best Management
Practices and activities to be implemented by a person
or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to
the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE Any river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, lakes, flowage, slough,
ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, swale, wash, or
natural or human-made drainage way, in or into which
surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or
intermittently. (Ord. 05-1957-21)
8-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an Authorized Enforcement Agency. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff.
3/14/05)
8-7-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The Authorized Enforcement Agency shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Authorized Enforcement Agencymay be delegated in writing by the director of
the Authorized Enforcement Agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff.
3/14/05)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 6
8-7-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application of any provision of this
Chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect, impair, or invalidate other provisions of this Chapter, or their application,
that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 05-
1957-21, eff. 3/14/05).
8-7-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff.
3/14/05)
8-7-7: PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGES:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct, or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage systemis prohibited
except as follows:
1. Water line and fire hydrant flushing or other potable water sources, storm
sewer cleaning water, residual street wash water, landscape irrigation or
lawn watering (except of wastewater irrigation), diverted stream flows,
rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps,
air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if
dechlorinated - typically less than 1 PPM chlorine), firefighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the Authorized Enforcement Agency as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 7
3. Dye testing, but only with prior oral notification to the Authorized
Enforcement Agency prior to the time of the test.
4. Non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under
the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is
in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval
has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
4. Improper connections in violation of this ordinancemust be disconnected
and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the
Authorized Enforcement Agency.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system,
shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of
written notice of violation from the Authorized Enforcement Agency
requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a
reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or
conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the Authorized
Enforcement Agency.
6. The use of any illicit drain or connection previously allowed, permitted or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 8
approved by an Authorized Enforcement Agency shall be discontinued
and suspended no later than December 31, 2006. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff.
3/14/05)
8-7-8: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The Authorized
Enforcement Agency may suspend, without prior notice, MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the Authorized Enforcement
Agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to
the public.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging
to the MS4 in violation of this Chapter may have MS4 access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Authorized
Enforcement Agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violatormay petition the Authorized Enforcement Agency for
a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the Authorized
Enforcement Agency. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-9: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION DISCHARGES:
A. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
Authorized Enforcement Agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
B. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an
NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity shall
submit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to the Village at the same time the
operator submits the original Notice of Intent to the EPA as applicable.
C. The copy of the Notice of Intent may be delivered to the Village either in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 9
person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water
Village Manager
Village of Lincolnshire
One Olde Half Day Road
Lincolnshire, IL 60069
D. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the Notice of Intent to do so to the Village.
8-7-10: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm water
discharges to the storm drainage system or associated with construction or
industrial activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The Authorized Enforcement Agency shall be permitted during the
discharger=s regular operating hours to enter and inspect premises
subject to regulation under this Chapter and to inspect and copy any
relevant records, at its own expense, as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, then the discharger shallmake the necessary and
reasonable arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
Authorized Enforcement Agency, except in case of emergency. Access to
the premises shall not be unduly withheld.
2. Facility operators shall allow the Authorized Enforcement Agency ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under
the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The Authorized Enforcement Agency shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Authorized Enforcement Agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility's storm water discharge.
4. The Authorized Enforcement Agency has the right to require the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 10
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the Authorized Enforcement
Agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Authorized Enforcement Agency
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge
permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with an
NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with construction or
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Authorized
Enforcement Agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
7. If the Authorized Enforcement Agency has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he or she
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling programs designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect
the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the
Authorized Enforcement Agencymay seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-11: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED:
The Authorized Enforcement Agency will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment will provide, at its own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of pollutants or other wastes into the
municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these
structural or nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said people=s expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 11
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Pan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance
with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-12: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through
the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of
the watercourse. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility
or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials
that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging
into storm water, the storm drainage system, or water of the United States said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies
of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Authorized Enforcement
Agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed andmailed to the Authorized Enforcement Agency within three (3)
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-14: ENFORCEMENT:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 12
Whenever the Authorized Enforcement Agency finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Authorized Enforcement Agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such noticemay require without limitation:
A. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
B. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
C. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
D. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
E. Payment of restitution to cover administrative and remediation costs;
F. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required,
the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restorationmust be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the
violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work
will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedialmeasures set forth in
the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein
within fifteen (15) days, or such greater period as the Authorized Enforcement
Agency shall deem appropriate, after the Authorized Enforcement Agency has
taken one or more of the actions described above, the Authorized
Enforcement Agency may impose a penalty subject to the fine set forth in the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule of the Code described in 17-1 for each day the
violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 05-
1957-21, eff. 3/14/05) (Amd. Ord. 10-3131-08, eff. 3/22/10)
8-7-15: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violationmay appeal the determination of the
Authorized Enforcement Officer. The notice of appealmust be received within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within
fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of themunicipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 13
3/14/05)
8-7-16: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in
the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days of
the decision of themunicipal authority upholding the decision of the Authorized
Enforcement Agency, then representatives of the Authorized Enforcement
Agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-17: COST OF ABATEMENT:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment. Interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum shall be
assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following the discovery of
the violation (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-18: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this article, the Authorized Enforcement Agency may
petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further
violations or compelling the person to performabatement or remediation of the
violation. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-19: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
article, the Authorized Enforcement Agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance
at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 8-7: REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Revised 03/22/10 Page 14
8-7-20: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is
a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense,
and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such
nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 05-1957-21, eff. 3/14/05)
8-7-21: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the
discretion of the Authorized Enforcement Agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 2005-1957-21, eff. 03/14/05))
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION;
FALSE ALARMS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Automatic Dialing Service; lnterconnection to Primary Trunklines
9-1-4: Testing Equipment
9-1-5: Notice of Disruption in Service
9-1-6: Alarm User Registration
9-1-7: False Alarms
9-1-8: Lien Created
9-1-9: Liability of Village Limited
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to burglar and holdup alarm systems and alarm users as defined in
this Article.
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 2
ALARM SYSTEM An assembly of equipment and devices (or a
single device such as a solid state unit which
plugs directly into a 110 volt AC line) arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which police are expected to
respond. In this Article the term "alarm system"
shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm
systems", "burglar alarm systems", "holdup alarm
systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems".
Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which
monitor temperature, humidity, or any other
condition not directly related to the detection of an
unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an
attempted robbery at a premises are specifically
excluded from the provisions of this Article.
ALARM USER Any person on whose premises an alarm system
is maintained within the Village except for alarm
systems onmotor vehicles or proprietary systems.
If however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is
connected with an alarm system at a premises
(other than a proprietary system), the person using
such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from
this definition and from the coverage of this Article
are persons who use alarm systems to alert or
signal persons within the premises in which the
alarm system is located of an attempted
unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If sucha
system, however, employs an audible signal
emitting sounds or flashing light or beacon
designed to signal persons outside the premises,
such systems shall be within the definition of
alarm systems and shall be subject to this Article.
ANNUNCIATOR The instrumentation of an alarm console at the
receiving terminal of a signal line which, through
both visual and audible signals, shows when an
alarm device at a particular location has been
activated or it may also indicate line trouble.
ANSWERING SERVICE A telephone service providing, among its services,
the service of receiving on a continuous basis
through trained employees, emergency signals
from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the
communication center of the Police Department.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 3
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a prerecorded voicemessage or coded
signal indicating the existence of the emergency
situation that the alarm system is designed to
detect.
CENTRAL STATION An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and where guards are
maintained continuously to investigate signals.
CENTRAL STATION EQUIPMENT The signal receiving, recording or retransmitting
equipment installed in the central station.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM A system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled
automatically to, recorded in, maintained and
supervised from a central station having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times.
DIRECT CONNECT An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them
at an agencymaintained by the local government;
for example, a police communications center.
DIRECT LINE A telephone line leading directly from a central
station to the communications center of the Police
Department that is for use only to report
emergency signals on a person-to-person basis.
FALSE ALARM The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or
agents. Such terminology does not include, for
example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes,
earthquakes or other violent conditions.
HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM A signaling system which when activated causes
an audible and/or visual signaling device to be
activated in or on the premises within which the
system is installed.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM
SYSTEM
An alarm system in which the signal transmission
is initiated by the direct action of the person
attacked or by an observer of the attack.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 4
PERSON Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POLICE CHIEF The Chief of the Police Department of the Village
of Lincolnshire, or his designated representative.
POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT The publicly supported Police Department of the
Village of Lincolnshire or any authorized agent
thereof.
PRIMARY TRUNKLlNE A telephone line leading directly into the
communication center of the Police Department
that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls
on a person-to-person basis, and which is
identified as such by a specific number included
among the emergency numbers listed in the
telephone directory issued by the telephone
company and covering the service area within the
Police Department's jurisdiction.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM An alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm
and supervisory signals at a control center located
within the protected premises, the control center
being under the supervision of the proprietor of the
protected premises. If a proprietary system
includes a signal line connected directly or by
means of an automatic dialing device to a police
communication center, a central station, modified
central station or an answering service, it hereby
becomes an "alarm system" as defined in this
Article.
SUBSCRIBER A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise
obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter
contracts with or hires an alarm business to
monitor and/or service the alarm device.
TELEPHONE COMPANY The utility that furnishes telephone services to the
Village.
VILLAGE The Village of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
9-1-3: AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICE; INTERCONNECTION TO PRIMARY
TRUNKLINES:
No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunkline and
all automatic dialing devices interconnected to a primary trunkline shall be
disconnected therefrom.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 5
9-1-4: TESTING EQUIPMENT:
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the
Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining
permission from the Police Chief. Permission is not required to test or
demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to
the Police Department unless the messages are to be relayed to the Police
Department.
9-1-5: NOTICE OF DISRUPTION IN SERVICE:
When an alarm business' service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason
by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such
disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that protection is
no longer being provided. If however, the alarm business has written
instructions from its subscriber not to make such notifications by telephone
during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instructions.
9-1-6: ALARM USER REGISTRATION:
A. Registration: Every alarm user shall register each alarm system he operates
within this Village with the Police Chief.
B. Alarm User Registration Application: The alarm user shall state on the
application form his name, the address of the residence or business, or
businesses in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, his
telephone number, the type of alarm system (local, direct connect, central
station, etc.), the individual or alarm company selling, installing, monitoring,
inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system, and the name
and telephone number of at least one person (in the case of a corporate alarm
user applicant, at least two [2] persons) who can be reached at any time, day
or night, and who is authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can
open the premises in which the system is installed.
C. The information contained in an alarm user registration application required by
this Section and other information received by the Police Chief through
correspondence or communications with an alarm user shall be securely
maintained and restricted to inspection only by the Police Chief or certain
officers or Village employees specifically assigned the responsibility of
handling and processing alarm user registrations in the course of official
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-1 BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM USERS REGISTRATION; FALSE ALARM
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 6
duties. The Police Chief or any employee of the Village shall not reveal the
information contained in an alarm user registration application or in
correspondence or communications with an alarm user to any other person for
any purpose not related to this Article or official law enforcement matters and
without the express written consent of the alarm user supplying such
information.
D. Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without first registering
as required by this Section, and who fails to disconnect his alarmsystem, shall
be in violation of this Article.
9-1-7: FALSE ALARMS:
More than three (3) false alarms in any calendar year from any alarm system
shall subject the alarm user as prescribed in the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty
Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code.
9-1-8: LIEN CREATED:
In the event any owner of an alarm system fails to pay the false alarm charge
provided for in Section 9-1A-7 above within thirty (30) days after written notice
from the Village, a lien is declared against the real estate upon which said
alarm system is located in the amount of the charge(s) due. The Village Clerk
may record a lien for the nonpayment of the charge(s) due. The lien may be
enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages ormechanics
liens. Suit to foreclose this lienmust be commenced within three (3) years after
the date of the recording of the lien.
9-1-9: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED:
The Village shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarmsignals
and prerecorded alarm messages received by the Village are given
appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the
Village shall not be liable for any defects in operation of automatic protection
devices and signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to respond
appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such source, nor for the failure or
neglect to any person with a license as described herein or with a franchise, in
connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission
of alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages, or the relaying of such
signals and messages.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
9-2-1 Establishment of Agency
9-2-2: Coordinator
9-2-3: Functions of ESDA
9-2-4: Service as Mobile Support Team
9-2-5: Mutual Aid Agreements
9-2-6: Emergency Action
9-2-7: Compensation of ESDA Members
9-2-8: Reimbursement by the State
9-2-9: Purchases and Expenditures
9-2-10: Oath of ESDA Members
9-2-11: Office Space
9-2-12: Appropriation – Tax Levy
9-2-13: Immunity of ESDA Members
9-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF AGENCY:
There is hereby created the Village of Lincolnshire Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency (Athe ESDA@) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury
or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with AThe
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1988.@
This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as
may be selected by the coordinator.
9-2-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall
serve until removed by same.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 2
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and
control of the Village Manager as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by her shall be and act as
coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
9-2-3: FUNCTIONS OF ESDA:
The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as
shall be prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by
the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated
by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid Agreement with
any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into
as provided by the AThe State ESDA Act of 1988".
9-2-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Village SDA organization may be designated as
members of the Mobile Support Team created by the director of the State
ESDA as provided by law. The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be
designated by the coordinator of the Village ESDA organization. Any member
of a Mobile Support Team who is a Village employee or officer while serving on
call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
9-2-5: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreements with other
cities, villages or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall
be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and
by the state director of ESDA.
9-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 3
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village
ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
9-2-7: COMPENSATION OF ESDA MEMBERS:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held;
members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for such
training time such compensation as may be established by the Village
Manager.
9-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY THE STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support
Team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement
made by the State incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
9-2-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Manager may, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator of
ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator of
ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in
view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 4
normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by AThe Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency Act of
1988", provided that if the Board of Trustees meets at such time he shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the Board of Trustees.
9-2-10: OATH OF ESDA MEMBERS:
(Oath) Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
AI, ___________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions,
and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon
which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the Village of Lincolnshire ESDA organization, I will not advocate
nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence.@
9-2-11: OFFICE SPACE:
The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in a Village building, r
elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Board of Trustees for the Village
ESDA as its office.
9-2-12: APPROPRIATION - TAX LEVY:
The Board of Trustees may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a
tax not to exceed five (5) cents per one hundred(100) dollars of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the
AThe State ESDA Act of 1988"; however, that amount collectable under such
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 9-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 5
levy shall in no event exceed .25 cents per capita.
9-2-13: IMMUNITY OF ESDA MEMBERS:
Any Village police officer, including the Police Chief, who provided emergency
services or who actively participates in the implementation and operation of the
Village of Lincolnshire=s ESDA, pursuant to this Chapter, shall be deemed to
be engaged in the performance of his or her duties as a Village of Lincolnshire
police officer and acting within the scope of his or her employment as a Village
of Lincolnshire police officer for purposes of indemnification pursuant to
Sections 1-4-5 and 1-4-6 of Chapter 24 and Section 2-302 of Chapter 85 of the
Illinois Revised Statutes, as amended from time to time.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-3: Speed Restrictions
10-1-4: Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations
10-1-5: Parking Regulations
10-1-6: Deposit of Snow or Ice Upon Public Roadways-Prohibition
10-1-7: Safety Seat Belts
10-1-8: Size, Weight and Load Limitations
10-1-9: Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles
10-1-9-1: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
10-1-9-2: Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited
10-1-9-3: Notification to Law Enforcement Agencies
10-1-9-4: Removal of Vehicles
10-1-9-5: Reports on Towed Vehicles
10-1-9-6: Identifying Vehicles
10-1-9-7: Reclaimed Vehicle, Expenses
10-1-9-8: Disposal of Unclaimed Vehicles
10-1-9-9: Duties after Disposition of Vehicles
10-1-9-10: Liability
10-1-10: Snowmobiles and All-Terrain
10-1-11: Certificates of Safety
10-1-11-1: Requirement of Certificate of Safety
10-1-11-2: Certificate of Safety Displayed
10-1-11-3: Exceptions
10-1-11-4: Valid Certificate of Safety
10-1-12: Traffic Schedules
10-1-12-1: Schedule I, Parking Prohibited At All Times
10-1-12-2: Schedule II, Parking Prohibited During Certain Times
10-1-12-3: Schedule III, Stop Streets
10-1-12-4: Schedule IV, Traffic-Control Signal Intersections
10-1-12-5: Schedule V, Yield Right-of-Way Intersections
10-1-12-6: Schedule VI, Traffic Control Turning Provisions
10-1-12-7: Schedule VII, Traffic Control Turning Provisions
10-1-13: Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment
10-1-13-1: Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment
10-1-13-2: Use of Motor Vehicles for Unlawful Purposes
10-1-13-3: Seizure and Impoundment
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 2
10-1-13-4: Administrative Hearing
10-1-13-5: Disposition of Impounded Vehicles
10-1-13-6: Posting of Bond
10-1-13-7: Vehicle Possession
10-1-14: Penalty
10-1-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
Pursuant to the authority vested within the village by Section 1-3-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the village hereby adopts, by
reference, the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et. seq., in its entirety,
as heretofore enacted or hereafter amended, and the same are hereby
adopted as ordinance provisions of the village. Any violation of said provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall hereinafter be considered a violation of this
chapter and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to the penalty
provisions provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code or where superseded by the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule, Section 1-17-11.
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions applicable to the Illinois Vehicle Code are applicable to this Title
10.
10-1-3: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
Maximum Speed Limit; Exceptions: On the basis of a traffic investigation
concerning the streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the Village, it is
hereby determined that the speed limits established for streets and highways
within the Village by Section 11-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code as amended
are excessive, and that, therefore, the maximum speed limit for a motor vehicle
on all streets within the corporate limits of the Village, which are not under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation or the Illinois State Toll
Highway Commission, shall be twenty (20) miles per hour on all such streets
and highways within the Village, except that:
Knightsbridge Parkway
Barclay Boulevard
Marriott Drive
Tower Parkway
Overlook Point
Schelter Road
Heathrow Drive
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 3
Margate Drive
Bond Street
shall be thirty (30) miles per hour, and maximum speed limits on the following
streets and highways:
LCH 24, Riverwoods Road
SBR 22, Half Day Road
SBR 21, Milwaukee Avenue
LCH 44, Long Grove - Aptakisic Road
shall be as specified in the Illinois Vehicle Code as amended or as otherwise
determined by the governmental authority having jurisdiction thereof.
10-1-4: MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
A. Authority To Designate Through Streets And Stop And Yield Intersections:
1. The Village with reference to streets under its jurisdiction may designate
through streets and erect stop signs or yield signs at specified locations
thereto, or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection or as a
yield intersection and erect stop signs or yield signs at one or more
entrances to such intersection.
2. Every stop and yield sign shall conform to the State Manual and
Specifications or in cases of the stop or yield sign not conforming to the
State Manual and Specifications, the stop or yield sign shall at a minimum
conform to the following local specifications:
a. Intersection of two through streets of relatively equal traffic
volume with identifiable safety hazards in the immediate area; or
b. Intersection of two through streets not intersecting at right angles
where the configuration of the intersection limits safe visibility; or
c. Intersection of two through streets with uncorrectable natural
sight-line obstructions involving, but not limited to, landscape
berms, trees, roadway incline.
3. The Village may in its discretion and when traffic conditions warrant such
action give preference to traffic upon any of the streets under its
jurisdiction over traffic crossing or entering such street by erecting
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 4
appropriate traffic control devices.
B. Turning Restrictions:
1. Additional Limitations on U-Turns:
In addition to limitations on U turns in the Illinois Vehicle Code, a driver of a
motor vehicle cannot make the following U-turns so as to:
a. Proceed in the opposite direction within any intersection where
vehicular movement is controlled by traffic-control signals or
other traffic-control devices.
b. Proceed in the opposite direction upon any street or highway
within three hundred feet (300') from any intersection where
vehicular movement is controlled by traffic-control devices and/or
stop signs, when such movement cannot be made in safety and
without interfering with other traffic.
c. Avoid the instructions of any official traffic-control devices.
C. Emerging From Alley, Building Private Road Or Driveway:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or
driveway within an urban area shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance
road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the
point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching such roadway.
D. Negligent Driving:
A person commits the offense of negligent driving when he operates any motor
vehicle in a manner that he fails to become aware of certain circumstances that
exist or of the possible results that will follow from his conduct, where such
conduct constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
E. Farm Tractor Operation Regulated:
1. No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway unless such tractor is
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 5
being used as an implement of husbandry in connection with farming
operations. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions apply:
a. Farm Tractor- Every motorized device designed and used
primarily as a farm implement for drawing wagons, plows,
mowing machines and other implements of husbandry, and
every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled, excluding
all-terrain vehicles and off-highway motorcycles as defined in this
Title.
b. Antique Tractor- Any vehicle which was originally manufactured
as a Farm Tractor but which is no longer used for any
agricultural or husbandry purposes and meets all of the following
criteria:
(1) Fifty (50) years of age or older;
(2) Gross vehicle weight less than 8,000 pounds;
(3) Equipped with manufacturer rated engine with not
greater than fifty (50) horsepower;
(4) Equipped with all required safety; equipment, including
operating headlights, red tail lights and ASlow Moving
Vehicle@ diamond signs; and
(5) Equipped with manufacturer-specified exhaust muffler in
proper operating condition.
2. For the purpose of this Section, use of a farm tractor as an implement of
husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to
include use of such tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment and supplies as
well as transportation of such tractors in connection with the obtaining of
repairs thereto, and the towing of a registered truck not more than eight
thousand (8,000) pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor
is left at the place of work or repair.
3. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, Antique Tractors
shall be permitted to be operated solely for the purpose of exhibition or
demonstration on Rights-of-Way under the Village=s jurisdiction and
control, provided the owner or operator shall at all times:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 6
a. Operate the vehicle no faster than twenty (20) miles per hour;
b. Have proof of valid insurance including liability coverage with
limits of not less than the minimum statutory amounts as
described in Section 7-203 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
c. Be 18 years of age or older;
d. Display a valid Village Registration Card, issued by the Chief of
Police, verifying that such tractor meets all the criteria in the
definition for Antique Tractor; and
e. Yield to any motor vehicle of the First or Second Division, as
defined in this Title, and implement the hand signals required by
law prior to making any turns.
4. Antique Tractor Registration.
a. Before operating an Antique Tractor in the Village, and annually
thereafter, the owner shall register the Antique Tractor with the
Chief of Police, who shall cause the Antique Tractor to be
inspected to verify whether such tractor meets the criteria in the
definition of Antique Tractor. If the tractor meets all the criteria in
the definition of Antique Tractor the Chief of Police shall issue a
Village Registration Card to the owner, which shall be
conspicuously displayed on the Antique Tractor at all times. A
Vehicle Registration Card shall be valid from May 1 to April 30.
b. The Chief of Police shall revoke the Village Registration Card
from any owner who (a) operates or permits to be operated an
Antique Tractor in a manner which violates subsection (C), or (b)
fails to maintain the Antique Tractor in compliance with the
criteria in the definition of Antique Tractor. Any owner who shall
suffer the revocation of a Village Registration Card may not
apply for a new Village Registration Card until the following year.
c. It shall be unlawful to operate an Antique Tractor in the Village
without a Village Registration Card.
F. Authority To Restrict Use Of Streets: When the Village Director of Public
Works finds, during the period of March 15 through June 15, that because of
deterioration, rain, snow and other climatic conditions certain streets in the
Village will be seriously damaged or destroyed by the use of certain vehicles
thereon, he shall be authorized to prohibit the operation of those certain
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 7
vehicles on said streets for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in one
calendar year and shall be authorized to erect and cause to be maintained
signs so designating this prohibition on each end of that portion of any street
affected thereby. This prohibition shall not be effective unless and until such
signs are erected and maintained.
Variances to this Section may be granted by the Village Manager or his
designate to accommodate service trucks upon request.
10-1-5: PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. General Parking Restrictions:
1. Limited Parking: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park in
a limited parking zone longer than the time designated by official signs.
2. Night and Winter Parking, Restricted Hours: It shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to park said vehicle, or for the owner of said vehicle
to permit said vehicle to be parked on any street in the Village between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
day, or at any time after snow begins to fall and for a period of eight (8)
hours after snow stops falling, if the snow on the streets exceeds one inch
(1") in depth; provided, that said eight (8) hour parking restriction shall
continue during snow removal operations until completed. The Public
Safety Committee has power, subject to the approval of the Mayor, to
designate by appropriate signs that no parking is permitted during the
hours and under the conditions described in this subsection.
3. Parking Near School Grounds: It shall be unlawful for any person in
charge of any motor vehicle to park the same or to allow the same to
stand for more than a period of thirty (30) minutes upon any public
highway within the Village at a distance nearer than one hundred feet
(100') from any part of any school grounds or school premises which are
being used for school purposes at any time between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. upon any day on
which a school session is being held in, about or upon such grounds or
premises.
4. Parking for Sale, Display: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a
motor vehicle or any other article for the purposes of selling, displaying or
repairing said motor vehicle, or any other article or to sell any item from
said motor vehicle or any other article, on any street or highway within the
Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 8
5. Parking on Private Property: It shall be unlawful to park any motor
vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the
property.
6. No vehicle shall be parked in a non-designated space within the traveled
portion of a parking aisle, or in such a manner that the vehicle creates an
obstruction and/or impedes the smooth, safe and steady flow of traffic.
B. Recreational Vehicle Parking Regulations:
1. Prohibited Parking: Outdoor parking of recreational vehicles is prohibited
in residentially zoned districts except as allowed by subsection B hereof.
2. Permitted Parking: One (1) Recreational Vehicle may be parked outdoors
on a lot located in a residential zoning district, subject to the following
conditions:
a. The Recreational Vehicle shall be parked in an interior side
yard of a lot, on a paved surface, compacted surface, or
impervious surface, provided that no part of the Recreational
Vehicle projects beyond the predominant front plane or rear
plane of any residence or garage to which it is immediately
adjacent on said lot.
b. The Recreational Vehicle may be parked in a required interior
side yard but shall be parked no less than ten feet (10=) from
any interior side lot line.
c. The Recreational Vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as
to be properly and fully screened from adjoining properties,
excluding the right-of-way, as viewed at a height of six feet (6=)
from the prevailing grade level of said adjoining properties. For
purposes of this Section, proper and full screening shall
consist of any vegetation which is sufficiently tall and dense at
any time when said vehicle is parked on the lot to materially
screen the view of said vehicle.
3. Recreational Vehicles may be parked in a residence district temporarily
for a period not to exceed seven (7) days solely for the purposes of
loading or unloading or maintaining said vehicles. The owner seeking
to temporarily park said Recreational Vehicle must notify and receive
the permission of the Chief of Police or his designated agent prior to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 9
the parking of said vehicle.
4. Intentionally omitted.
5. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to licensed and registered
antique or handicapped automobiles.
6. Enforcement: Any authorized Village official or employee shall enforce
the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 14-3337-64 eff. 10/27/14)
7. Short Term Visitor's Parking:
a. The Chief of Police may, upon written application, issue a permit
allowing a visitor's recreational or commercial vehicle to be
parked on a private driveway in a residence district for a period
not to exceed fourteen (14) days; provided, however, that the
visitor agrees to maintain the vehicle in such a fashion so as to
avoid interfering with regular vehicular traffic or the enjoyment of
adjoining residential dwellings.
b. A decision of the Chief of Police to deny a permit requested
pursuant to paragraph 1 may be appealed by the applicant
directly to the Village Board of Trustees who shall, as soon as
practicable, hold a hearing thereon and issue a written decision
affirming or reversing said denial.
C. Parking Of Certain Second Division Vehicles In Residential Areas:
1. Findings: The driving habits of private individuals have changed over the
years so that certain small sized pickup trucks (examples: Subaru Brat,
Ford Ranger, and Chevy S-10) are now being used for private passenger
use on the same basis as the more standard family passenger vehicles.
2. Definition: For purposes of this Section, the term "second division" shall
mean those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying
freight or cargo.
3. Permitted Parking: One second division vehicle, as defined above, may
be parked in the driveway in a residential district subject, however, to the
following conditions:
a. That the vehicle shall be privately owned and operated
exclusively for family use in that it shall not be operated for the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 10
transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, including "for hire" and "notfor-
hire".
b. That the vehicle shall be registered to a member of the family at
the residence address and shall display both State and Village
registration.
c. That the licensing classification of the vehicle shall not exceed
the "B" classification as set forth in Section 3-815 of The Illinois
Vehicle Code.
d. That the vehicle shall not have painted or mounted thereon any
advertising, identifying symbols, lettering, logos or other
identification, including magnetic or any other type of signs.
e. That only one such vehicle shall be parked in a driveway at any one
time.
f. That there shall not be any cargo or debris stored in the bed area of
said vehicle at any time when the vehicle is parked in the driveway.
D. Commercial Vehicle Parking Regulations:
1. Prohibited Parking: Outdoor parking of Commercial Vehicles is prohibited
in residentially zoned districts except in the manner described in this
Section.
2. Commercial vehicles may be parked in a residence district temporarily for a
period not to exceed seven (7) days solely for the purposes of loading or
unloading or maintaining said vehicles. The owner seeking to temporarily
park said Commercial Vehicle must notify and receive the permission of the
Chief of Police or his designated agent prior to the parking of said vehicle.
3. At any time, only one Vehicle which bears Class B license plates, but which
does not qualify as a Commercial Vehicle for the purpose of this Title, shall
be permitted to be parked outdoors on a lot located in a residential district,
provided that it shall be prohibited when such vehicle contains cargo or
debris stored in the bed area of said vehicle. The Chief of Police may,
upon written application, issue a permit to the owner of a residential lot
allowing for a second Vehicle of such type to be parked on said lot for a
period of not to exceed fourteen (14) days; provided that the grantee
agrees to maintain the Vehicle in such fashion so as to avoid interfering
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 11
with regular vehicular traffic or the enjoyment of adjoining residential
dwellings.
4. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section, the outdoor parking of
Commercial Vehicles in a residence district is permitted between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. daily without
permission, allowing for Commercial Vehicles being operated by persons
providing services to residents. Between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. daily, when commercial services are required to
be provided on an emergency basis, the outdoor parking of Commercial
Vehicles in a residence district shall be permitted only during such time
while the emergency services are being performed.
E. Persons with Disabilities - Parking Privileges - Exemptions:
1. A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by Section 1-159.1, of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
herein referred to as the IVC, pursuant to Section 3-616 of the IVC, or to a
disabled veteran pursuant to Section 3-609 of the IVC, or a special decal or
device issued pursuant to Section 3-616 of the IVC or pursuant to
11-1301.2 of the IVC, or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction,
state, district, territory or foreign country upon which is displayed a
registration plate, special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction
designating the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities; shall
be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and exempt from any
statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations
of one-half hour or less, on any street or highway zone, or any parking lots
or parking places which are owned, leased or owned and leased by the
Village; but
2. Such vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in Ano
stopping@ and Ano standing@ zones in front of or near fire hydrants,
driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading
areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a
traffic hazard whereby such vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and
request of a law enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer.
3. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special decal or device
specified in this Section or in Section 3-616 of the IVC or such parking
device as specifically authorized in Section 11-1301.2 of the IVC, as
evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or
disabled veteran may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any
parking place specifically reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 12
official sign as provided under Section 11-301 of the IVC.
4. Parking privileges granted by this Section are strictly limited to the person
to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued
and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the
person with disabilities is present. A person to whom privileges were
granted shall at the request of a police officer or any other person invested
by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic, present an
identification card with a picture as verification that the person is the person
to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device was issued.
Such parking privileges granted by this Section are also extended to motor
vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the transportation of person
with disabilities when such motor vehicles display the decal or device
issued pursuant to Section 11-1301.2 of the IVC.
5. No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant
to Section 11-1303 of the IVC or where an official sign controlling such area
expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
6. Special Decals for Persons with Disabilities Parking:
a. The Secretary of State shall provide for, by administrative rules, the
design, size, color, and placement of a person with disabilities
motorist decal or device and shall provide for, by administrative rules,
the content and form of an application for a person with disabilities
motorist decal or device, which shall be used by the Village in the
issuance thereof to a person with disabilities, provided that the decal
or device is valid for no more then 90 days, subject to renewal for like
periods based upon continued disability for periods not longer than
one (1) year, and further provided that the decal or device clearly sets
forth the date that the decal or device expires. The application shall
include the requirement of an Illinois Identification Card number or a
State of Illinois driver=s license number. This decal or device shall be
the property of such person with disabilities and may be used by that
person to designate and identify a vehicle not owned or displaying
registration plates as provided in Sections 3-609 and 3-616 of the IVC
to designate when the vehicle is being used to transport said person
or persons with disabilities, and thus is entitled to enjoy all the
privileges that would be afforded a person with a disabilities licensed
vehicle. Any Person with disabilities decals or devices issued and
displayed pursuant to Section 1303.3 of the IVC shall be recognized
and honored by the Village regardless of which local authority issued
such decal or device. One additional decal or device may be issued
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 13
to an applicant upon the written approval of the Secretary of State.
A decal or device shall be issued by the Village only upon showing by
adequate documentation that the person for whose benefit the decal
or device is to be used has a temporary disability as defined in
Section 1-159.1 of the IVC.
b. The Village shall be responsible for the provision of such decal or
device, its issuance and designated placement within the vehicle. The
cost, if any, of such decal or device, and for replacement decals or
devices if the original is lost, stolen or destroyed, as established in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code.
7. Unauthorized Use of Parking Places Reserved for Persons with Disabilities:
a. It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not properly
displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by Section 1-159.1 of the IVC, pursuant to
Sections 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2 of the IVC or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to Section 3-609 of the IVC, as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled
veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off-street
parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign
as designated under Section 11-301 of the IVC for motor vehicles
bearing such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any
motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking
place specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting
of an official sign as designated under Section 11-301 of the IVC, for
motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the
parking privileges for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or
device must be displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly
visible to law enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview
mirror or placed on the dashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Any
motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a parking
decal or device containing the International symbol of access issued
to persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district,
territory or foreign country shall be recognized by State and local
authorities as a valid license plate or device and receive the same
parking privileges as residents of this State.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 14
b. An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a
parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability
under Sections 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2 of the IVC or to a
disabled veteran under Section 3-609 of the IVC is in violation of this
Section if (i) the person using the disability license plate or parking
decal or device is not the authorized holder of the disability license
plate or parking decal or device or is not transporting the authorized
holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device to or
from the parking location and (ii) the person uses the disability license
plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted
through the disability license plate or parking decals or devices under
this Code.
8. Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private
off-street parking facility may, after notifying the police or sheriff=s
department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other
place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use
by a person with disabilities which does not display person with disabilities
registration plates or a special decal or device as required under this
Section.
9. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of subsection C.1 shall
be fined in accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set
forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code, in addition to any costs or
charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle
authorized under this Section. It shall not be a defense to a charge under
this Section that either the sign posted pursuant to this Section or the
intended accessible parking place does not comply with the technical
requirements of Section 11-301 of the IVC, Department regulations, or
local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or
notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person
with disabilities.
10. As used in this Section, Aauthorized holder@ means an individual issued a
disability license plate under Section 3-616 of the IVC, and individual issued
a parking decal or device under Section 11-1301.2 of the IVC, or an
individual issued a disabled veteran=s license plate under Section 3-609 of
the IVC.
11. The Village shall grant the same parking privileges which are granted to
disabled residents of this State to any non-resident whose motor vehicle is
licensed in another state, district, territory or foreign country if such vehicle
displays the International Symbol of access or distinguishing insignia on
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 15
license plates or parking device issued in accordance with the laws of the
non-resident=s state, district, territory or foreign country. (Amd. Ord. 10-
3137-14, eff. 4/12/10)
10-1-6: DEPOSIT OF SNOW OR ICE UPON PUBLIC ROADWAYS - PROHIBITION:
No person, firm, corporation or institution, public or private, shall plow or
remove or cause to be plowed or removed, ice or snow from any shopping
center, parking lot, commercial or institutional service area, private roadway or
driveway or any other public or private service area or driveway and deposit
such ice or snow upon a public roadway or along the shoulder or edge of a
public roadway.
10-1-7: SAFETY SEAT BELTS
A. No person shall sell any 1965 or later model motor vehicle of the first division
unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped with two (2) sets of seat
safety belts. Motorcycles are exempted from the provisions of this Section.
B. No person shall operate any 1965 or later model motor vehicle of the first
division that is titled or licensed by the Secretary of State unless the front seat
of such motor vehicle is equipped with two (2) sets of seat safety belts.
C. As used in this Section, "seat safety belts" means a set of belts or a harness
meeting the specifications established by the Department and installed in such
manner as to prevent or materially reduce the movement of the person using
the same in the event of collision or upset of the vehicle.
D. The Department shall establish performance specifications for seat safety belts
and for the attachment and installation thereof.
E. All occupants of a motor vehicle of the First Division, a motor vehicle of the
Second Division with a gross vehicle weight rating of nine thousand (9,000)
pounds or less, a recreational vehicle, or the driver or front seat passenger of
Second Division motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight exceeding nine
thousand (9,000) pounds, operated on a street or highway in this Village shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt; except that, a child less
than six (6) years of age shall be protected as required pursuant to the Child
Passenger Protection Act. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child
six (6) years of age or more, but less than sixteen (16) years of age, shall
secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 16
F. When any person is transporting a resident child of this State under the age of
4 years in a non-commercial motor vehicle of the first division, a motor vehicle
of the second division with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000 pounds or
less, or a recreational vehicle on the roadways, streets or highways of this
State, such person shall be responsible for providing for the protection of such
child by properly securing him or her in a child restraint system, except in
cases of medical emergency. The parent or legal guardian of a child under the
age of 4 years shall provide a child restraint system to any person who
transports his or her child. Any person who transports the child of another
shall not be in violation of this Section unless a child restraint system was
provided by the parent or legal guardian but not used to transport the child.
G. Every person, when transporting a child 4 years of age or older but under the
age of 6, shall be responsible for securing that child in either a child restraint
system or seat belts, except in cases of medical emergency.
H. In no event shall a person's failure to secure a child under 6 years of age in an
approved child restraint system or properly secure such child, if age 4 or 5, in a
seat belt constitute contributory negligence or be admissible as evidence in the
trial of any civil action.
I. Subsection E shall not apply to any of the following:
1. A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle or
delivering property from the vehicle, if the speed of the vehicle between
stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
2. A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a physician
that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear a
seat safety belt.
3. A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license
endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or
country indicating that the driver is unable for medical, physical, or other
valid reason to wear a seat safety belt.
4. A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse.
5. A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.
6. A motorcycle or motor driven cycle
7. A motorized pedal cycle
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 17
8. A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with seat safety
belts under Federal law.
9. A motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier of the United States
postal service while performing duties as a rural letter carrier.
J. Failure to wear a seat safety belt in violation of this Section shall not be
considered evidence of negligence, shall not limit the liability of an insurer, and
shall not diminish any recovery for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
K. A violation of this Section shall be a petty offense in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fine Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code.
10-1-8: SIZE, WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall be
operated, unladen or with load, when the gross weight on the road surface
through any axle thereof exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, upon any
street or highway within the Village except the following:
Riverwoods Road
SBR Route 22 (Half Day Road)
SBR Route 21 (Milwaukee Road)
LCH 44 (Aptakisic Road)
Schelter Road
Bond Street
Heathrow Drive
Where the maximum gross weight of the vehicles shall be as specified in the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, or as otherwise determined by the
governmental authority having jurisdiction thereof; and except:
Barclay Blvd.
Knightsbridge Parkway
Marriott Drive
Tower Parkway
Where the maximum gross weight on the road's surface through any axle shall
not exceed sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds per axle; and except:
Londonderry Lane
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 18
Where the gross weight on the road's surface through any one axle shall not
exceed eight thousand (8,000) pounds
B. The following provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Section 15, with specific
amendments of Sections 15-111, 15-112, 15-113, 15-113.1, 15-113.2, 15-
113.3, are hereby adopted by reference and as they may be amended from
time to time.
C: Certain Vehicles Excepted: The provisions of this Article governing size,
weight and load do not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow and ice
removal operations owned or operated by any governmental body or to
implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon
a highway, provided such combination does not consist of more than three (3)
vehicles or, in the case of hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from
farm to the point of first processing, not more than three (3) wagons being
towed by an implement of husbandry, or to a vehicle operated under the terms
of a special permit issued by the Village.
D: Special Permit For Excess Weight; Application:
1. When in his judgment, an emergency or other circumstances exist, the
Village Manager, his designate, or in their absence, the Mayor of the
Village, with respect to streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the
Village may, in his discretion upon application in writing and good cause
being shown therefore, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the
applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a
size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum limitation or
otherwise not in conformity with the provisions of this Article upon any
street or highway under the jurisdiction of the Village.
2. The application for any such permit shall specifically describe and identify
the vehicle or vehicles and loads to be operated or moved and the
particular streets or highways for which permit to operate is requested,
and whether such permit is requested for a single trip or for continuous
operation, and include the date(s) and hours authorized.
3. The Village Manager, his designate or the Mayor of the Village, is
authorized to issue or withhold such permit when, in his judgment the
severity of the emergency, the size and weight of the vehicle, the type of
vehicle in question, the particular street's in question, and the weather
conditions, foundations, surfaces and structures warrant such action; or, if
such permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 19
seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicles described may
be operated on the streets or highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or
prescribe conditions of operation of such vehicle or vehicles, when
necessary to assure against undue damage to the road foundations,
surfaces or structures, and may require such undertaking or other
security as may be deemed necessary to compensate for any injury to
any roadway or road surface.
10-1-9: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES
10-1-9-1: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Parking, Nuisance Declared: The parking of all inoperable motor vehicles
whether on public or private property, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
Any person who fails to obey a notice received from the Village which states
that such person is to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles under his
control shall commit a nuisance and shall be guilty of a violation of this Section.
The Police Department may remove, after seven (7) days from the issuance of
the Village notice, any inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof.
B. Definitions, Exceptions: As used in this Section, "inoperable motor vehicle"
means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days,
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
"Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. However, nothing in this
Section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not
in use, or to historic vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age or to a motor
vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles.
10-1-9-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
A. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on
any highway in the Village is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth in
the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule as provided in Chapter 17, of Title 1
of this Code.
B. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on
private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the general public,
anywhere in the Village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 20
such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof
so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by the Police
Department after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more, or may be
removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor
vehicle under Section 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. A violation of
this Section is subject to penalties as set forth in the Comprehensive
Fine/Penalty Schedule as provided in Chapter 17, of Title 1 of this Code.
10-1-9-3: NOTIFICATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the Village, not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police
Department. Upon receipt of such notification, the police will authorize a
towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep
the towed vehicle and its contents and maintain a record of the tow as set forth
in Section 10-9-5, until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person
legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this
Chapter.
10-1-9-4: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
A. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban
district ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by the Police Department.
B. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a
highway other than a toll highway, interstate highway or expressway, outside of
an urban district for twenty four hours (24) or more, its removal by a towing
service may be authorized by the Police Department.
C. When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position
in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of
traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to
the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the Police Department.
D. When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is authorized by
the Police Department, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all
towing and storage charges.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 21
E. Except as provided in Section 4-203(f)(1 through 11) of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, the owner or lessor of privately owned real property within the Village, or
any person authorized by such owner or lessor, or any law enforcement
agency in the case of publicly owned real property may cause any motor
vehicle abandoned or left unattended upon such property without permission to
be removed by a towing service without liability for the costs of removal,
transportation or storage or damage caused by such removal, transportation or
storage. The towing or removal of any vehicle from private property without
the consent of the registered owner or other legally authorized person in
control of the vehicle is subject to compliance with the provisions of Section 4-
203(f) (1 through 11) of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
F. When a vehicle is determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle
within the Village boundaries pursuant to Section 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, its removal and impoundment by a towing service may be
authorized by the Police Department.
10-1-9-5: REPORTS ON TOWED VEHICLES:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away as
provided in Sections 10-1-9-3 and 10-1-9-4, the Police Department shall keep
and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of
manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body
style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number, and
registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall
also include the date and hour of the tow, location towed from, location towed
to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
10-1-9-6: IDENTIFYING VEHICLES:
A. When the Police Department authorizing the impounding of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle does not know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or
other legally entitled person, that Police Department will cause the vehicle
registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information. The Police Department authorizing the
impounding of a vehicle will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois
State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois State
Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois State
Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 22
National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois
State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
returned to the Police Department for its use in sending a notification by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled
person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made
and setting forth public sale information. Notification shall be sent no later
than ten (10) days after the date the Police Department impounds or
authorizes the impounding of a vehicle, provided that if the Police Department
is unable to determine the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten (10)
day period after impoundment, then notification shall be sent no later than two
(2) days after the date the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle is determined.
Exceptions to a notification by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder
and other legally entitled person are set forth in Section 10-9-8B.
B. Identifying and Tracing of Vehicle Ownership by Illinois State Police: When the
registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the possession
of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration
files of this State or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the Police Department shall notify the Illinois State Police, for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the possession
of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois State Police will be
immediately forwarded to the Police Department for notification of owner
purposes as set forth in subsection A hereof.
10-1-9-7: RECLAIMED VEHICLE, EXPENSES:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided in Section 10-1-9-8, the owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting
to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession
of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under
this Section until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
10-1-9-8: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty
(30) days after notice has been given as provided in Section 10-1-9-6, the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 23
Police Department or towing service having possession of the vehicle shall
cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an automotive
parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under Chapter 5 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code or the towing operator which towed the vehicle. Notice of the
time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least
ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been
impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the Police Department or
the towing service where the vehicle is impounded, shall cause a notice of the
time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner,
lienholder and other persons known by the Police Department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall
contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must
be taken by a legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified in Section 10-9-6
has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department or towing
service due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of this State, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.
B. Disposal of Unclaimed Vehicles Without Notice:
1. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled
to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7)
years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for
in this Title, the vehicle may be sold as provided in subsection A hereof
without notice to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle.
2. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is
impounded as specified by this Title, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in
person for a determination of disposition; and, an examination of the
Illinois State Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted
information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the
benefit of disposition information being received from the registered
owner, the Police Department will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as
junk or salvage.
An exception to the above is provided for if in the opinion of the police
officer processing the vehicle, it has value of two hundred dollars
($200.00) or more and can be restored to safe operating condition. In this
event, the agency may authorize its purchase as salvage and the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 24
Secretary of State may issue a salvage certificate.
3. A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may,
however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
10-1-9-9: DUTIES AFTER DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
A. Police Reports After Vehicle is Reclaimed or Disposed of: When a vehicle in
the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public
sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this Title, a report of the
transaction will be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one
year from the date of the sale or disposal.
B. Disposition of Proceeds of Sale of Unclaimed Vehicles: When a vehicle
located within the corporate limits of the Village is authorized to be towed away
by the Police Department and disposed of as set forth in this Title, the
proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage
and processing charges shall be deposited in the Treasury of the Village.
10-1-9-10: LIABILITY:
The Police Department, its officers and the towing service owner, operator or
employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action
brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal
representative, lienholders or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed
and sold or disposed of as provided by this Title.
10-1-10: SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
In addition to the laws governing the operation of snowmobiles and all-terrain
vehicles in the Illinois Vehicle Code, the following regulations apply to the
operation of snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles in the Village:
A. Definitions: The following words, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Chapter unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE A self-propelled device designed for travel on
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 25
natural terrain, or snow or ice, having two (2)
or more wheels not manufactured for use on
public streets, roads or highways.
OPERATE To ride in or on, other than as a passenger,
use or control the operation of a snowmobile or
all-terrain vehicle in any manner, whether or
not the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle is
under way.
OPERATOR Every person who operates or is in actual
physical control of a snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle.
SNOWMOBILE A self-propelled device designed for travel on
snow or ice or natural terrain steered by skis or
runners, and supported in part by skis, belts or
cleats.
B. Operation Restrictions: It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile or any all-terrain
vehicle anywhere in the Village, including the frozen surface of all public
waters; provided, however, that it is lawful to operate a snowmobile or allterrain
vehicle on private property between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile or allterrain
vehicle in the Village as provided for herein in the following ways:
1. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner.
2. While under the influence of intoxicating beverages or narcotic or
dangerous drugs, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
3. On private property, without first obtaining the written or verbal consent of
the owner or lessee thereof: Any person operating a snowmobile or allterrain
vehicle upon lands of another shall stop and identify himself upon
the request of the landowner, and shall promptly remove the snowmobile
or all-terrain vehicle from the premises if so requested.
C. Noise Suppression: Every snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle driven or operated
within the Village, as provided for in Section 10-11-2, shall at all times be
equipped with an adequate muffler or sound suppression system in constant
operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise.
If the noise emitted by the operation of any snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle
exceeds seventy eight (78) decibels on the A-scale at fifty feet (50') when
measured in accordance with rule 103(e)(1) of the Illinois Pollution Control
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 26
Board, it shall be deemed to be excessive or unusual noise.
10-1-11 CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY
10-1-11-1 REQUIREMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY:
Every owner of a second division vehicle, medical transport vehicle, tow truck,
or contract carrier transporting employees in the course of their employment in
a vehicle designed to carry 15 or fewer passengers shall, before operating the
vehicle in the village, submit it to a safety test and secure a certificate of safety
furnished by the Illinois Department of Transportation.
10-1-11-2 CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY DISPLAYED:
No person shall operate in the village any vehicle required to be inspected
under the provisions of this chapter unless there is affixed to that vehicle a
certificate of safety.
10-1-11-3 EXCEPTIONS:
None of the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the following:
A. Farm tractors, machinery and implements, wagons, wagon-trailers or similar
farm vehicles used primarily in agricultural pursuits;
B. Vehicles other than school buses, tow trucks and medical transport vehicles
owned or operated by a municipal corporation or political subdivision having a
population of 1,000,000 or more inhabitants and which are subject to safety
tests imposed by local ordinance or resolution;
C. A semitrailer or trailer having a gross weight of 5,000 pounds or less including
vehicle weight and maximum load;
D. Recreational vehicles as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code;
E. Vehicles registered as and displaying valid Illinois antique vehicle plates;
F. House trailers equipped and used for living quarters;
G. Vehicles registered as and displaying Illinois permanently mounted equipment
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 27
plates or similar vehicles eligible therefore but registered as governmental
vehicles provided that if said vehicle is reclassified from a permanently
mounted equipment plate so as to lose the exemption of not requiring a
certificate of safety, such vehicle must be safety tested within 30 days of the
reclassification;
H. Vehicles owned or operated by a manufacturer, dealer or transporter
displaying special plates while such vehicle is being delivered from the
manufacturing or assembly plant directly to the purchasing dealership or
distributor, or being temporarily road driven for quality control testing, or from
one dealer or distributor to another, or are being moved by the most direct
route from one location to another for the purpose of installing special bodies
or equipment, or driven for purposes of demonstration by a prospective buyer
with the dealer or his agent present in the cab of the vehicle during the
demonstration;
I. Pole trailers and auxiliary axles;
J. Special mobile equipment;
K. Vehicles properly registered in another state pursuant to law and displaying a
valid registration plate, except that vehicles of contract carriers transporting
employees in the course of their employment in a vehicle designed to carry 15
or fewer passengers are only exempted to the extent that the safety testing
requirements applicable to such vehicles in the state of registration are no less
stringent than the safety testing requirements applicable to contract carriers
that are lawfully registered in Illinois;
L. Water-well boring apparatuses or rigs;
M. Any vehicle which is owned and operated by the federal government and
externally displays evidence of such ownership; and
N. Second division vehicles registered for a gross weight of 8,000 pounds or less,
except when such second division motor vehicles pull or draw a trailer, semitrailer
or pole trailer having a gross weight of or registered for a gross weight of
more than 8,000 pounds and except for motor buses, religious organization
buses, school buses, senior citizen transportation vehicles, medical transport
vehicles and tow trucks.
10-1-11-4 VALID CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 28
A. Certificates of safety shall be in contrasting colors, as determined by the Illinois
Department of Transportation, with a number on the face of the certificate
indicating the month of the next inspection period in which the vehicle is
subject to inspection.
B. Certificates for school buses shall also indicate the mileage at which the school
bus shall be subject to inspection if it occurs before the next regular inspection
period.
10-1-12: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
10-1-12-1: SCHEDULE I, PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES:
When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, no person shall cause a
motor vehicle to stand or park on:
Barclay Boulevard East and West Sides
From LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road north of SBR 22 (Half
Day Road
Berkshire Lane East Side
From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) 200 feet south to
the intersection of
Robinhood Court
Bond Street East and West Sides From the northern
corporate limit of the
Village south to LCH 44
(Aptakisic Road)
Brampton Lane North and South Sides 200 feet each of LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Dover Circle East, North and West
Sides
Entire length of Dover
Circle on the right side of
street commencing at the
easternmost intersection of
Pembroke Drive to the
westernmost intersection of
Pembroke Drive
Elm Road East and West From the north side of SBR
22 (Half Day Road) 400
feet north
Fallstone Drive East Side
From Old Mill Road to 102
Fallstone Drive, adjacent
to Olde Mill Commons
Park
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 29
Fox Trail
West Side 50 feet north and south of
each entrance to
Bicentennial Park
Heathrow Drive
North and South Sides
From Schelter Road south
to Bond Street
Hotz Road East and West Sides From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) north to the Village
limits
IL State Route 22 North and South Sides From Interstate I-94 west
to the intersection of Apple
Hill Lane
Kings Cross Drive North Side From Reliance Lane 600
feet west
Knightsbridge
Parkway
Both Sides From Marriott Drive to
Schelter Road
Lincolnshire Drive North Side From the intersection of
Oxford Drive 700 feet west
Lincolnshire Drive South Side From the intersection of
Oxford Drive to 220 feet
west
Londonderry
Lane
South Side
600 feet east of the
Municipal Building
driveway
Margate Drive North and South Sides
From Schelter Road west
to Bond Street
Marriott Drive On any curb of the ingress
or egress streets nor in
any cut through or along
the median divider
separating the ingress or
egress streets
Northampton Lane North Side From LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road) 510 feet West
Northampton Lane South Side
From LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road) 450 feet West
Oakwood Lane East and West Sides From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) south 200 feet
Olde Half Day Rd North and South Sides From SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue to 300 feet west of
the intersection
Olde Half Day Rd East and West Sides From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) 300 feet north to
the intersection of SBR 45
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 30
Olde Half Day Rd North and South Sides From Trafalgar Square east
to SBR 22 (Half Day Road)
Old Mill Road
East and West Sides From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) north the entire
length to the northern
terminus of Old Mill Road
Overlook Point East and West sides Entire length of Overlook
Point from the southernmost
end north to the
intersection of Tower
Parkway
Oxford Drive West Side From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) 900 feet south to the
intersection of Lincolnshire
Drive
Pembroke Drive North and South Sides From LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road) west 125 feet to the
intersection of Dover Circle
Pembroke Lane North and South Sides From LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road) east 200 feet to the
Surrey Lane intersection
Port Clinton Road South Side From Stevenson Drive 800
feet East
Reliance Lane West Side 200 feet north from Kings
Cross Drive
Stonegate Circle
East and West Sides
From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) 100 feet south
Surrey Lane East Side From Pembroke to Durham
Court
Surrey Lane North Side
From Durham Court to LCH
24 (Riverwoods Road)
Surrey Lane North Side From the intersection of
LCH 24 (Riverwoods Road
325 feet west)
Sutton Court Neither Side From Westminster Way to
south end of Court
Tower Parkway North and South sides From SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue) west to the
intersection of Barclay
Boulevard
Westminster Way East and West From SBR 22 (Half Day
Road) to Windsor Drive
Westwood Lane North and South Sides
From LCH 24 (Riverwood
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 31
Road) east to the
intersection of Middlebury
Lane
Windsor Drive
North Side From Westminster Way
400 feet west
Yorkshire Drive
North Side
For a distance of 35 feet
west from the intersection
of LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Yorkshire Drive
South Side For a distance of 160 feet
west from the intersection
of LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
10-1-12-2: SCHEDULE II, PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN TIMES:
When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, no person shall cause a
motor vehicle to be parked on school days as listed below:
Abbey Road North, South and East
Sides
From 7:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M.
Briarwood Lane East end at cul-de-sac From 7:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M
Olde Half Day Road South Side from Indian
Creek
from eight thirty o'clock
(8:30) A.M.
Road to SBR 21 to four thirty o'clock
(4:30) P.M
10-1-12-3: SCHEDULE III, STOP STREETS:
When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, the following
intersections are designated stop street intersections:
Barclay Blvd.
Northbound and
Southbound
At Knightsbridge
Parkway
Berkshire Lane Northbound and
Southbound
At Kings Cross Drive
Berkshire Lane Northbound At SBR22 (Half Day
Road)
Brampton Lane
Westbound and
Eastbound
At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Briarwood Lane Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 32
Brittany Lane Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Buckingham Place Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Cambridge Lane Eastbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Cedar Lane
Eastbound
At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Cemetery Road Westbound
At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Cornell Drive Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Daniel Wright Middle
School Annex Road Eastbound Al LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Daniel Wright Middle
School Exit Eastbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Duffy Lane Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Fairfax Lane Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Fallstone Drive Southbound At Old Mill Road
Farrington Drive Annex
Road Westbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Farrington Drive Northbound and
Southbound
At Farrington Drive
Annex Road
G. K. Lane Southbound At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Indian Creek Road Northbound At Port Clinton Road
Indian Creek Road Southbound At Olde Half Day Road
Heathrow Drive Eastbound At Schelter Road
Heathrow Drive Westbound At Bond Street
Hotz Road Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Industrial Drive Northbound At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 33
Road)
Jamestown Lane Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Kings Cross Drive Eastbound and
Westbound
At Regent Lane
Kings Cross Drive Eastbound and
Westbound
At Berkshire Lane
Knightsbridge Parkway Northbound At Marriott Drive
Knightsbridge Parkway Eastbound and
Westbound
At Barclay Blvd.
Knightsbridge Parkway Westbound At Schelter Road
Londonderry Lane Eastbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Margate Drive Westbound At Bond Street
Marriott Drive Westbound At Barclay Blvd.
Middlebury Lane Northbound At Westwood Lane
Millbrook Drive Eastbound At Schelter Road
Northampton Lane Eastbound At LCH 24 (Riverwoods
Road)
Oakwood Lane Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Olde Half Day Road Eastbound and
Westbound
At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Olde Half Day Road Northbound At Olde Half Day Road
(Route 45)
Old Mill Road Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Pembroke Drive Eastbound and
Westbound
At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Plymouth Court Northwesterly and
Southeasterly
At Oxford Drive
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 34
Portshire Drive Eastbound and
Westbound
At Berkshire Lane
Regent Lane Northbound and
Southbound
At Kings Cross Drive
Reliance Lane Northbound and
Southbound
At Kings Cross Drive
Rivershire Lane Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Riverside Drive Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Riverside Road Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Schelter Road Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Stevenson Annex
Drive
Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Stevenson Annex
Drive
Northbound At Port Clinton Road
Stonegate Circle Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Surrey Lane Eastbound and
Westbound
At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Tower Parkway Westbound At Barclay Blvd.
Trafalgar Square Northbound At Olde Half Day Road
Tri-State Parkway Westbound At Westminster Way
Victoria Lane Eastbound At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Village Hall Annex
Drive
Northbound At Olde Half Day Road
(Route 45)
Westminster Way Northbound At Tri-State Parkway
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 35
Westminster Way Eastbound At Tri-State Parkway
Westwood Lane Eastbound At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Whitmore Lane Eastbound At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
Woodcreek Drive Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
10-1-12-4: SCHEDULE IV, TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL INTERSECTIONS:
When highway traffic-control signals are properly erected giving notice thereof,
the following intersections are designated as traffic-control signal intersections:
LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Westbound and
Eastbound
At Barclay Boulevard
LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Westbound and
Eastbound
At Bond Street
LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Westbound and
Eastbound
At Parkway Drive
LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Eastbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Barclay Blvd. Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Barclay Blvd. Southbound At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Bond Street Southbound At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
Elm Road Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Hewitt Drive Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Jamestown Lane Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 36
Knightsbridge Parkway Eastbound and
Westbound
At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Marriott Drive Eastbound and
Westbound
At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Olde Half Day Road Westbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Olde Half Day Road
(Route 45)
Westbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Overlook Point Northbound and
Southbound
At Tower Parkway
Oxford Drive Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Parkway Drive Northbound At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At LCH 44 (Aptakisic
Road)
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At Knightsbridge
Parkway
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At Marriott Drive
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At Olde Half Day Road
(Route 45)
SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Northbound and
Southbound
At Tower Parkway
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At Barclay Boulevard
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At LCH 24
(Riverwoods Road)
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At Olde Half Day Road
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 37
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At Oxford Drive
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At Stevenson Drive
SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Eastbound and
Westbound
At Westminster Way
SBR 45 (Route 45) Eastbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Stevenson Drive Southbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
Tower Parkway Eastbound At SBR 21 (Milwaukee
Avenue)
Tower Parkway Eastbound and
Westbound
At Overlook Point
Westminster Way Northbound At SBR 22 (Half Day
Road)
10-1-12-5: SCHEDULE V, YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS:
When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, the following
intersections shall be designated as yield right-of-way intersections. Drivers of
vehicles and riders of any device propelled by human power shall, when
proceeding on the following streets:
ANGLICAN LANE, eastbound, yield the right of way at the intersection of
Canterbury Road
LONDONDERRY LANE, northbound, yield the right of way at the intersection
of Lincolnshire Drive
MELROSE LANE, southbound, yield the right of way at the intersection of
Oxford Drive
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 38
PORTSHIRE, eastbound, yield the right of way at the intersection of Berkshire
10-1-12-6: SCHEDULE VI, TRAFFIC CONTROL TURNING PROVISIONS:
When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, the following turning
restrictions apply to all drivers of motor vehicles, with the exception of the
drivers of school buses while they are on their regularly scheduled school bus
routes; Village-owned vehicles; or other vehicles officially authorized by the
Village.
No left turn between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.,
Monday through Friday, for westbound Port Clinton Road traffic at the
intersection of Indian Creek Road.
No right turn between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.,
Monday through Friday, for eastbound Port Clinton Road traffic at the
intersection of Indian Creek Road.
No left turn between three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday, for eastbound Olde Half Day Road traffic at the
intersection of Indian Creek Road.
10-1-12-7: SCHEDULE VII, TRAFFIC CONTROL TURNING PROVISIONS:
When signs are properly erected given notice thereof, the following turning
restrictions apply:
1. No U-Turn for northbound Elm Road traffic north of SBR 22 (Half Day
Road).
2. No U-Turn for westbound Tower Parkway traffic west of SBR 21
(Milwaukee Avenue).
10-1-13 VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
10-1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 39
BUSINESS DAY Business Day means any day in which the
office of the Village Clerk of the Village of
Lincolnshire is open to the public for a
minimum of seven (7) hours.
MOTOR VEHICLE Motor Vehicle means every vehicle which is
self-propelled, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and
motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD Owner of Record means the recorded title
holder(s) of the vehicle.
10-1-13-2: USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES:
A. Conduct Prohibited: A motor vehicle that is used in connection with any of the
following violations may be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village,
and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an
administrative fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth
in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code, plus any applicable towing fees.
1. Driving under the influence, as provided in section 11-501(a) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)), or
2. Driving with a suspended or revoked license, as provided in section 6-303
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), as a result of a conviction
pursuant to section 11-501(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, section10-8-2
of the Lincolnshire Village Code, or similar provision of another municipal
ordinance, or suspension under 625 ILCS 11-501.1.
3. Any other violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100, et.
Seq.), Illinois Compiled Statutes or Lincolnshire Village Code which
require that the vehicle be towed.
4. Any violations of law which make the vehicle subject to seizure under 720
ILCS 5/36-1, et.seq.
5. Any other circumstances under which the vehicle must be towed pursuant
to the Lincolnshire Village Code, Lincolnshire Police Department Field
Operations Procedures, or Lincolnshire Police Department Administrative
Procedures.
10-1-13-3: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 40
A. Whenever a Police Officer has reason to believe that a vehicle is subject to
seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section, the Police Officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility approved by the Chief of
Police. This Section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was
stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should
have been discovered.
B. The Police Officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of
the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and
of the vehicle owner=s right to request an administrative hearing to be
conducted under this Section.
10-1-13-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. At the time a vehicle is seized and towed or impounded under the conditions
set forth in Section 10-13-2 of this Code, the person in control of the vehicle
shall be provided with a "Rights Pursuant to Notice of Vehicle Seizure" form.
This form details the conditions causing the vehicle seizure and instructions on
how to arrange for the return of the vehicle and how to request an
Administrative Hearing to contest the seizure and tow. Upon payment of the
penalty fee, the owner of the seized vehicle will be provided instructions on
how to request a Hearing and must sign a non-binding "Penalty/Bond Sheet"
receipt either requesting a Hearing or forfeiting a right to a Hearing. Copies of
both forms will be provided to the driver/owner of the seized vehicle at the time
of the seizure and penalty payment, or within a reasonable time period
thereafter.
The owner of the record seeking a Hearing must file a written request for a
Hearing with the Village Manager or his designee no later than ten (10)
business days after notice was provided in either written and/or verbal form.
The Hearing date must be no more than ten (10) business days after a request
for a Hearing has been filed.
B. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at
the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible. In a hearing on the propriety of
impoundment of a vehicle any sworn or affirmed report, citation or ticket that (i)
is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer=s duties and (ii)
sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment, shall be
admissible evidence of the vehicle owner=s liability, unless rebutted by clear
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 41
and convincing evidence to the contrary.
C. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of
evidence that the vehicle was used in violation of the Section, the Hearing
Officer shall then enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly
liable to the Village for the administrative penalty.
D. If, after a hearing, the Hearing Officer does not determine by a preponderance
of the evidence that the vehicle was used in such a violation, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for the return of the
vehicle.
E. If the owner of record requests a hearing but fails to appear at the hearing or
fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the owner of record shall be
deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the Hearing Officer
shall enter a default order in favor of the Village in the amount of the
administrative penalty.
F. If the owner of record pays such penalty and the vehicle is returned to the
owner, no default order need be entered if the owner is informed of his or her
right to a hearing and signs a written waiver, in which case an order of liability
shall be deemed to have been made when the Village receives the written
waiver.
10-1-13-5: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
A. A penalty imposed pursuant to this Section shall constitute a debt due and
owed the Village. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this Section shall remain
impounded until:
1. The fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in
Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code is paid to the Village and all applicable
towing fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case the owner of
record shall be given possession of the vehicle, or
2. A bond in the amount of the fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this Code is posted with the
Police Department and all applicable towing fees are paid to the towing
agent, at which time the vehicle will be released to the owner of record, or
3. The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 42
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
abandoned vehicles.
10-1-13-6: POSTING OF BOND:
A. If a bond is posted with the Police Department, the impounded vehicle shall be
released to the owner of record. The owner of the vehicle shall still be liable to
the towing agent for any applicable towing fees.
B. If a penalty is imposed for violation of this Section, the bond will be forfeited to
the Village; however if a violation of this Section is not proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, the bond will be returned to the person posting
the bond.
C. All bond money posted pursuant to this Section shall be held by the Village
until the Hearing Officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until
the court issues its decision.
D. The bond posted will be in the form of cash, money order or certified check.
Credit cards, personal checks, business checks or traveler=s checks will not be
accepted.
10-1-13-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the expiration of
the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the
Village=s action under this Section, or the time at which a final judgment is
rendered in favor of the Village, or the time a final administrative decision is
rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be disposed of as
an unclaimed or abandoned vehicle as provided by law, provided, however,
that where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset
forfeiture laws, the subject vehicle may not be disposed of by the Village
except as consistent with those proceedings.
10-1-14: PENALTY:
Any violation of said provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall hereinafter be
considered a violation of this Chapter and each such violation shall subject the
violator thereof to the penalty provisions provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code or
where superseded by the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule in Chapter
17, of Title 1 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 10-01: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Revised 10/27/14 Page 43
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-01: CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
Revised 12/13/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
SECTION:
11-1-1: Voluntary Act
11-1-2: Possession as Voluntary Act
11-1-3: Mental State
11-1-4: Intent
11-1-5: Knowledge
11-1-6: Recklessness
11-1-7: Negligence
11-1-8: Ignorance or Mistake
11-1-9: Absolute Liability
11-1-1: VOLUNTARY ACT:
Unless it is stated otherwise, amaterial element of every offense is a voluntary
act, which includes an omission to perform a duty which the law imposes on
the offender and which the offender is physically capable of performing.
11-1-2: POSSESSION AS VOLUNTARY ACT:
Possession is a voluntary act if the offender knowingly procured or received
the thing possessed, or was aware of having control over the thing for a
sufficient time to have been able to terminate possession.
11-1-3: MENTAL STATE:
A. A person is not guilty of an offense, other than an offense which involves
absolute liability, unless, with respect to each element described by the section
defining the offense, the person acts while having one of the mental states
described in Sections 11-1-4 through 11-1-7.
B. If the section defining an offense prescribes a particular mental state with
respect to the offense as a whole, without distinguishing among the elements
thereof, the prescribed mental state applies to each element. If the section
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-01: CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
Revised 12/13/10 Page 2
does not prescribe a particular mental state applicable to an element of an
offense (other than an offense which involves absolute liability), any mental
state defined in Sections 11-1-4, 11-1-5 or 11-1-6 is applicable.
C. Knowledge that certain conduct constitutes an offense, or knowledge of the
existence,meaning, or application of the section defining an offense, is not an
element of the offense unless the section clearly defines it as such.
11-1-4: INTENT:
A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a result or
engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense, when the
conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or engage in that
conduct.
11-1-5: KNOWLEDGE:
A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
A. The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct, described by the
Section defining the offense, when the person is consciously aware that the
conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a
material fact includes awareness of the substantial probability that such fact
exists.
B. The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining the offense,
when he or she is consciously aware that such result is practically certain to be
caused by his conduct.
Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully, within
the meaning of a section using the latter term, unless the section clearly
requires another meaning.
11-1-6: RECKLESSNESS:
A person is reckless or acts recklessly when he or she consciously disregards
a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will
follow, described by the section defining the offense; and such disregard
constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable
person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly is
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-01: CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
Revised 12/13/10 Page 3
performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the latter term,
unless the section clearly requires another meaning.
11-1-7: NEGLIGENCE:
A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he or she fails to be aware ofa
substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow,
described by the section defining the offense; and such failure constitutes a
substantial deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person
would exercise in the situation.
11-1-8: IGNORANCE OR MISTAKE:
A. A person's ignorance or mistake as to a matter of either fact or law, except as
provided in Section 11-1-3C of this Chapter, is a defense only if it indicates
that the existence of themental state which the statute prescribes with respect
to an element of the offense did not exist at the time of the offense.
B. A person's reasonable belief that his conduct does not constitute an offense is
a defense if:
1. The offense is defined by an administrative regulation or order which is
not known to the person and has not been published or otherwise made
reasonably available, and he or she could not have acquired such
knowledge by the exercise of due diligence pursuant to facts known to
the person; or
2. The person acts in reliance upon a section which later is determined to
be invalid; or
3. The person acts in reliance upon an order or opinion of an Illinois
Appellate or Supreme Court, or a United States Appellate Court later
overruled or reversed; or
C. Although a person's ignorance or mistake of fact or law, or reasonable belief,
described in this Section 11-1-8 may be a defense to the offense charged, he
or she may be found guilty of an included offense of which he or she would be
guilty if the fact or law were as the person believed it to be.
D. A defense based upon this Section 11-1-8 is an affirmative defense.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-01: CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
Revised 12/13/10 Page 4
11-1-9: ABSOLUTE LIABILITY:
A person may be guilty of an offense without having, as to each element, one
of themental states described in Sections 11-1-4 through 11-1-7 if the offense
is a misdemeanor which is not punishable by incarceration or by a fine in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set forth in
Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code, or the section defining the offense clearly
indicates a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability for the conduct
prescribed.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-02: PARTIES TO CRIME
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
PARTIES TO CRIME
SECTION:
11-2-1: Accountability for Conduct of Another
11-2-2: When Accountability Exists
11-2-3: Separate Conviction of Person Accountable
11-2-4: Accountability for Conduct of Corporation
11-2-1: ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER:
A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense if the
conduct is either that of the person, or that of another and he or she is legally
accountable for such conduct as provided in Section 11-2-2, or both.
11-2-2: WHEN ACCOUNTABILITY EXISTS:
A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:
A. Having a mental state described by the section defining the offense, he or she
causes another to perform the conduct, and the other person in fact or by
reason of legal incapacity lacks such a mental state; or
B. The section defining the offense makes the person so accountable; or
C. Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to
promote or facilitate such commission, he or she solicits, aids, abets, agrees or
attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or commission of the
offense. However, a person is not so accountable, unless the section defining
the offense provides otherwise, if:
1. The person is a victim of the offense committed; or
2. The offense is so defined that the conduct was inevitably incident to its
commission; or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-02: PARTIES TO CRIME
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
3. Before the commission of the offense, he or she terminates the effort to
promote or facilitate such commission, and does one of the following:
wholly deprives his or her prior efforts of effectiveness in such
commission, or gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement
authorities, or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission
of the offense.
11-2-3: SEPARATE FINDING OF GUILTY OF PERSON ACCOUNTABLE:
A person who is legally accountable for the conduct of another which is an
element of an offense may be found guilty upon proof that the offense was
committed and that he or she was so accountable, although the other person
claimed to have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or found
guilty, or has been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense, or is
not amenable to justice, or has been acquitted.
11-2-4: ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF CORPORATION:
A. A person is legally accountable for conduct which is an element of an offense
and which, in the name or in behalf of a corporation; he or she performs or
causes to be performed, to the same extent as if the conduct were performed
in the person's own name or behalf.
B. An individual who has been found guilty of an offense by reason of legal
accountability for the conduct of a corporation is subject to the punishment
authorized by law for an individual upon being found guilty of such offense,
although only a lesser or different punishment is authorized for the corporation.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-03: INCHOATE OFFENSES – SOLICITATION, CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Revised 03/22/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
INCHOATE OFFENSESSOLICITATION,
CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Solicitation
11-3-2: Conspiracy
11-3-3: Defense
11-3-4: Attempt
11-3-1: SOLICITATION:
A. Elements of the Offense: A person commits solicitation when, with the intent
that an offense be committed, he or she commands, encourages or requests
another to commit that offense.
B. Penalty: A person convicted of solicitation may be fined not to exceed the
maximum provided for the offense solicited.
11-3-2: CONSPIRACY:
A. Elements of the Offense: A person commits conspiracy when, with the intent
that an offense be committed, he or she agrees with another to the
commission of that offense. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to
commit an offense unless an act in furtherance of such agreement is alleged
and proved to have been committed by the person or by a co-conspirator.
B. Co-Conspirators: It shall not be a defense to conspiracy that the person or
persons with whom the accused is alleged to have conspired:
1. Has not been prosecuted or convicted, or
2. Has been convicted of a different offense, or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-03: INCHOATE OFFENSES – SOLICITATION, CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Revised 03/22/10 Page 2
3. Is not amenable to justice, or
4. Has been acquitted, or
5. Lacked the capacity to commit an offense.
11-3-3: DEFENSE:
It is a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy that if the criminal object
were achieved, the accused would not be guilty of an offense.
11-3-4: ATTEMPT:
A. Elements of the Offense: A person commits an attempt when, with intent to
commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a
substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
B. Impossibility: It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that because ofa
misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible for the
accused to commit the offense attempted.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-04: OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY, DEFINITIONS
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY,
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Property
11-4-2: Owner
11-4-3: Permanent Deprivation
11-4-4: Deception
11-4-5: Threat
11-4-6: Stolen Property
11-4-7: Obtain
11-4-8: Obtains Control
11-4-9: Value
11-4-1: PROPERTY:
As used in this Chapter, "property" means anything of value. Property includes
real estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or transportation
tickets, written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning
anything of value, labor, or services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things
growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building;
electricity, gas and water; telecommunications services, birds, animals and
fish, which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink;
samples, cultures, microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings,
documents, blueprints, drawings, maps, and whole or partial copies,
descriptions, photographs, computer programs or data, prototypes or models
thereof, or any other articles, materials, devices, substances and whole or
partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes, ormodels thereof which
constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific, technical,
merchandising, production or management information, design, process,
procedure, formula, invention, or improvement.
11-4-2: OWNER:
As used in the Chapter, "owner" means a person, other than the offender, who
has possession of or any other interest in the property involved, even though
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-04: OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY, DEFINITIONS
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
such interest or possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the
offender has no authority to exert control over the property.
11-4-3: PERMANENT DEPRIVATION:
As used in this Chapter, to "permanently deprive" means to:
A. Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner; or
B. Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property; or
C. Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner only if the owner
purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or other compensation for its
return; or
D. Sell, give, pledge, or otherwise transfer any interest in the property or subject it
to the claim of a person other than the owner.
11-4-4: DECEPTION:
As used in this Chapter, "deception" means knowingly to:
A. Create or confirm another's impression which is false and which the offender
does not believe to be true; or
B. Fail to correct a false impression which the offender previously has created or
confirmed; or
C. Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the disposition of the
property involved; or
D. Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to disclose a lien,
adverse claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property,
whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official
record; or
E. Promise performance which the offender does not intend to perform or knows
will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is not evidence that
the offender did not intend to perform.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-04: OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY, DEFINITIONS
Revised 01/07/97 Page 3
11-4-5: THREAT:
As used in this Chapter, "threat"means amenace, however communicated, to:
A. Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or on
property; or
B. Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
C. Commit any criminal offense; or
D. Accuse any person of a criminal offense; or
E. Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
F. Harm the credit or business repute of any person; or
G. Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person threatened; or
H. Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or withhold official
action, or cause such action or withholding; or
I. Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other similar collective action if the
property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the group which he
purports to represent; or
J. Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with respect
to another's legal claim or defense; or
K. Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the offender.
11-4-6: STOLEN PROPERTY:
As used in this Chapter, "stolen property" means property over which control
has been obtained by theft.
11-4-7: OBTAIN:
As used in this Chapter, "obtain" means:
A. In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or possession,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-04: OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY, DEFINITIONS
Revised 01/07/97 Page 4
whether to the offender or to another; and
B. In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance of the labor or
service.
11-4-8: OBTAINS CONTROL:
As used in this Chapter, the phrase "obtains or exerts control" over property,
includes but is not limited to the taking, carrying away, or the sale,
conveyance, or transfer of title, or interest in, or possession of property.
11-4-9: VALUE:
As used in this Chapter, the "value" of property consisting of any commercial
instrument or any written instrument representing or embodying rights
concerning anything of value, labor, or services or otherwise of value to the
owner shall be:
A. The "market value" of such instrument if such instrument is negotiable and has
a market value; and
B. The "actual value" of such instrument if such instrument is not negotiable or is
otherwise without amarket value. For the purpose of establishing such "actual
value", the interest of any owner or owners entitled to part or all of the property
represented by such instrument, by reason of such instrument,may be shown,
even if another "owner" may be named in the complaint, information or
indictment.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-05: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Theft
11-5-2: Prima Facie Evidence of Intent
11-5-3: Prima Facie Evidence, Theft by Lessee
11-5-4: Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property
11-5-5: Theft of Labor or Services or Use of Property
11-5-6: False Report of Theft and Other Losses
11-5-7: Offender's Interest in the Property
11-5-8: Theft from Coin-Operated Machines
11-5-9: Coin-Operated Machines, Possession of Key or Device
11-5-10: Unlawful Interference with Public Utility Services
11-5-1: THEFT:
A person commits theft when other than by the use of a firearm, not from the
person, and in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), he or
she knowingly:
A. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
B. Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner; or
C. Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner; or
D. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen
or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce the person to believe
that the property was stolen, and
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to
deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-05: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
3. Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit.
11-5-2: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF INTENT:
It shall be prima facie evidence of intent that a person "knowingly obtains by
deception, control over property of the owner" when he or she fails to return,
within forty five (45) days after written demand from the owner, the down
payment and any additional payments accepted under a promise, oral or in
writing, to perform services for the owner for consideration of three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) or more, and the promisor willfully without good cause
failed to substantially perform pursuant to the agreement after taking a down
payment of ten percent (10%) or more of the agreed upon consideration. This
provision shall not apply where the owner initiated the suspension of
performance under the agreement, or where the promisor responds to the
notice within the forty five (45) day notice period. A notice in writing,
addressed and mailed by registered mail, to the promisor at the last known
address of the promisor, shall constitute proper demand.
11-5-3: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE, THEFT BY LESSEE:
It shall be prima facie evidence that a person "knowingly obtains or exerts
unauthorized control over property of the owner" when a lessee of the personal
property of another fails to return it to the owner within thirty (30) days after
written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing, given after the
expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed by registered mail,
to the lessee at the address last given and shown on the leasing agreement
shall constitute proper demand.
11-5-4: THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY:
A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when
that person:
A. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of
a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and
B. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and
C. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-05: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 3
11-5-5: THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY:
A person commits theft when he or she obtains the temporary use of property,
labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by means of
threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the
person providing the property, labor or services.
11-5-6: FALSE REPORT OF THEFT AND OTHER LOSSES:
A person who knowingly makes a false report of a theft, destruction, damage
or conversion of any property to the Lincolnshire Police Department or other
Village governmental agency with the intent to defraud an insurer commits an
offense.
11-5-7: OFFENDER'S INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY:
A. It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest
therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is not
entitled.
B. Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution for
theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living together as man and
wife and were living in separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft.
11-5-8: THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINES:
A. A person commits theft from a coin-operated machine when he or she
knowingly and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such
machine, opens, breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin-operated
machine.
B. As used in this Section, the term "coin-operated machine" shall include any
automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin telephone,
coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement machine, music
machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services, money changer.
11-5-9: COIN-OPERATED MACHINES, POSSESSION OF KEY OR DEVICE:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-05: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 4
Whoever possesses a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device or a drawing,
print or mold of a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device designed to open,
break into, tamper with or damage a coin-operated machine as defined in
paragraph B of Section 11-5-8 of this Chapter, with intent to commit a theft
from such machine, shall be guilty of an offense.
11-5-10: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES:
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful interference with public utility
services when he or she knowingly, without the consent of the owner of the
services, impairs or interrupts any public water, sewer, telecommunications
service, or other public services, or diverts, or causes to be diverted in whole or
in part, any public water, sewer, telecommunications service or other public
services or installs or removes any device for the purpose of such diversion.
B. The term "public water, sewer, or other public service" mean any service that is
owned and operated by the Village of Lincolnshire.
C. Any instrument, apparatus, or device used in obtaining utility services without
paying the full charge therefore or any meter that has been altered, tampered
with, or bypassed so as to cause a lack of measurement or inaccurate
measurement of utility services on premises controlled by the customer or by
the person using or receiving the direct benefit of utility service at that location
shall raise a rebuttable presumption of the commission of the offense
described in subparagraph A by such person.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-06: RETAIL THEFT
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
RETAIL THEFT
SECTION:
11-6-1: Definitions
11-6-1-1: Conceal
11-6-1-2: Full Retail Value
11-6-1-3: Merchandise
11-6-1-4: Merchant
11-6-1-5: Minor
11-6-1-6: Person
11-6-1-7: Peace Officer
11-6-1-8: Premises of Retail Mercantile Establishment
11-6-1-9: Retail Mercantile Establishment
11-6-1-10: Shopping Cart
11-6-1-11: Under-Ring
11-6-1-12: Theft Detection Shielding Device
11-6-1-13: Theft Detection Device Remover
11-6-2: Offense of Retail Theft
11-6-3: Presumptions
11-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases defined in Sections
11-6-1-1 through 11-6-1-11 have the meanings ascribed to them in those
Sections unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context.
11-6-1-1: CONCEAL:
To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of
its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
11-6-1-2: FULL RETAIL VALUE:
"Full retail value" means the merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-06: RETAIL THEFT
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
11-6-1-3: MERCHANDISE:
"Merchandise" means any item of tangible personal property.
11-6-1-4: MERCHANT:
"Merchant" means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment
or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
11-6-1-5: MINOR:
"Minor" means a person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is unemancipated
and resides with his or her parents or legal guardian.
11-6-1-6: PERSON:
"Person" means any natural person or individual.
11-6-1-7: PEACE OFFICER:
"Peace officer" means any person who by virtue of his or her office or public
employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to
specific offenses.
11-6-1-8: PREMISES OF RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT:
"Premises of a retail mercantile establishment" includes, but is not limited to,
the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such
retail mercantile establishment.
11-6-1-9: RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-06: RETAIL THEFT
Revised 01/07/97 Page 3
"Retail mercantile establishment" means any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
11-6-1-10: SHOPPING CART:
"Shopping cart" means those push carts of the type or types which are
commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores
and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
11-6-1-11: UNDER-RING:
"Under-ring" means to cause the cash register or other sales recording device
to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
11-6-1-12: THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE:
"Theft detection shielding device" means any laminated or coated bag or
device designed and intended to shield merchandise from detection by an
electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
11-6-1-13: THEFT DETECTION DEVICE REMOVER:
"Theft detection device Remover" means any tool or device specifically
designed and intended to be used to remove any theft detection device from
any merchandise.
11-6-2: OFFENSE OF RETAIL THEFT:
A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
A. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or
transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment, the full retail value of which does not exceed
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-06: RETAIL THEFT
Revised 01/07/97 Page 4
B. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or
any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise
displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment,
the full value of which does not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and
attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another
at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of
the full retail value of such merchandise; or
C. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a
retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
D. Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value
of the merchandise; or
E. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart.
F. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property,
knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to convey
that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for
money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
G. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection
device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
11-6-3: PRESUMPTIONS:
If any person:
A. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment; and
B. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-06: RETAIL THEFT
Revised 01/07/97 Page 5
payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such
merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving
the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-07: DECEPTION
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
DECEPTION
SECTION:
11-7-1: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES
11-7-1: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
A. As used in this Chapter:
1. A financial institution means any bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, or other depository of money, or medium of savings and
collective investment.
2. An account holder is any person having a checking account or savings
account in a financial institution.
3. To act with the "intent to defraud" means to act willfully, and with the
specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the purpose of causing financial
loss to another, or to bring some financial gain to oneself. It is not
necessary to establish that any person was actually defrauded or
deceived.
B. General Deception: A person commits a deceptive practice when, with intent
to defraud:
1. With the intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property, labor
or services of another of less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), he
or she issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious
depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by
the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the
depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered, or when
such check or other order is presented for payment and dishonored on
each of two (2) occasions at least seven (7) days apart, is prima facie
evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the depository,
and that he has the intent to defraud.
2. He issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-07: DECEPTION
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
depository in an amount of less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
in payment of an amount owed on any credit transaction for property,
labor or services, or in payment of the entire amount owed on any credit
transaction for property, labor or services, knowing that it will not be paid
by the depository, and thereafter fails to provide funds or credit with the
depository in the face amount of the check or order within seven (7) days
of receiving actual notice from the depository or payee of the dishonor of
the check or order.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-08: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
Revised 03/22/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 8
DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
SECTION:
11-8-1: Criminal Damage to Property
11-8-1-1: Criminal Damage to Fire Fighting Apparatus, Hydrants or Equipment
11-8-2: Criminal Trespass to Vehicles
11-8-3: Criminal Trespass to Land
11-8-4: Criminal Trespass to State Supported Land
11-8-5: Persons Entering School Building
11-8-6: Posting Bills on Fences, Buildings or Poles
11-8-7: Criminal Trespass to Village of Lincolnshire Land and Easements
11-8-8: Damage, Possession and Removal of Village Property or Structures or
Installations on Village Property
11-8-1: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property when he
knowingly commits any of the following acts and the resulting damage to the
property is in an amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less:
A. Knowingly damages any property of another without the other's consent; or
B. Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damages property of another; or
C. Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without the other's consent; or
D. Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without the other's consent; or
E. Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without the other's
consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
F. Damages any property with intent to defraud an insurer.
G. Knowingly damages the property of another without the other's consent by
defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint
or any other similar substance.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-08: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
Revised 03/22/10 Page 2
11-8-1-1: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIRE FIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS
OR EQUIPMENT:
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to firefighting apparatus,
hydrants or equipment who willfully and maliciously cuts, injures, damages,
tampers with or destroys or defaces any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire
engine, or other public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus
appertaining to such equipment, or intentionally opens any fire hydrant without
proper authorization.
11-8-2: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass to vehicles who knowingly
and without authority enters any part of or operates any vehicle, aircraft,
watercraft, snowmobile, golf cart or other motorized apparatus, or any part
thereof of another without the other's consent.
11-8-3: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND:
A. Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another, after receiving,
prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is
forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart, commits the offense of criminal trespass to land.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning
of subsection A, if he or she has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.
11-8-4: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO STATE SUPPORTED LAND:
A. Whoever enters upon land supported in whole or in part with State funds, or
Federal funds administered or granted through State agencies or any building
on such land, after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the State or its
representative that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon such land or in
such building after receiving notice from the State or its representative to
depart, and who thereby interferes with another person's lawful use or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-08: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
Revised 03/22/10 Page 3
enjoyment of such building or land, commits the offense of criminal trespass to
State supported land.
B. A person has received notice from the State within the meaning of subsection
A if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or
written notice forbidding such entry to him or a group of which he is a part, has
been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or
the forbidden part thereof.
11-8-5: PERSONS ENTERING SCHOOL BUILDING:
Teachers and other employees may request any person entering a public
school building or the grounds which are owned or leased by the board and
used for school purposes and activities to identify himself or herself and the
purpose of entry. A person who refuses to provide such information and still
enters the building or grounds is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
11-8-6: POSTING BILLS ON FENCES, BUILDINGS OR POLES:
No person shall post up or place any handbill or placard or notice or sign upon
any building, fence, telephone, light, electric, or other pole, or tree or lawn or
shall mark, scratch, cut or otherwise deface any part of any building, fence, or
tree box, unless the party posting the handbill, placard, notice or sign had the
consent of the owner or occupant of the premises to so place any such bill and
is in accordance with Village ordinances regulating the posting of bills, signs,
notices, advertisements or posters or other materials.
11-8-7: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE LAND AND
EASEMENTS:
A. Whoever enters upon land supported in whole or in part with Village of
Lincolnshire funds or any building on such land after receiving, prior to such
entry, notice from the Village or its representative that such entry is forbidden,
or remains upon such land or in such building after receiving notice from the
Village or its representative to depart, commits the offense of criminal trespass
to Village supported and maintained land.
11-8-8: DAMAGE, POSSESSION AND REMOVAL OF VILLAGE PROPERTY OR
STRUCTURES OR INSTALLATIONS ON VILLAGE PROPERTY:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-08: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
Revised 03/22/10 Page 4
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently damage, break,
deface, destroy or injure, in any manner whatsoever:
1. Any structure or installations located on Village property or public
rights of way; or
2. Any property of any kind or nature and wherever located, belonging to the
Village, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streets, curbs, pavement,
trees, manhole covers and any other Village property not specifically
named herein, but excluding such other specific property asmay bemore
particularly and specifically named and included within other sections of
this Code.
3. If a business invitee, business guest or other commercial user violates
this Section 11-8-8, then the owner of the inviting premises, the occupant
of the inviting premises and the party actually causing the damage shall
be jointly and severally responsible for the damage and liable for any
penalties assessed pursuant to this Section.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with or possess
any sign which is the property of the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-09: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Revised 11/22/99 Page 1
CHAPTER 9
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
SECTION:
11-9-1: Assault
11-9-2: Battery
11-9-3: Reckless Conduct
11-9-4: Hazing
11-9-1: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he or she
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
11-9-2: BATTERY:
A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means: (1) causes bodily harm to an individual; or (2)
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
11-9-3: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he or she performs
recklessly the acts which cause harm or endanger safety, whether they
otherwise are lawful or unlawful.
11-9-4: HAZING:
A person commits hazing who knowingly requires the performance of
any act by a student or other person in school, college, university, or other
educational institution of this State, for the purpose of induction or admission
into any group, organization, or society associated or connected with that
institution if the act is not sanctioned or authorized by that educational
institution. (Ord. No. 99-1684-68, eff. 11/8/99)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 1 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 11: MESDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
SECTION:
11-10-1: Disorderly Conduct, Elements of the Offense
11-10-1-1: Public Intoxication
11-10-1-2: Public Nuisance Assemblages
11-10-2: Transmission of Obscene Messages Prohibited
11-10-3: Harassment by Telephone or through Electronic Communications
11-10-3-1: Harassment by Telephone
11-10-3-2: Harassment through Electronic Communications
11-10-3-3: Definitions
11-10-3-4: Evidence Inference
11-10-4: Resisting or Obstructing a Peace Officer
11-10-4-1: Obstructing Identification
11-10-5: Refusing to Aid an Officer
11-10-6: Illegal Control of Cannabis
11-10-6-1: Definitions
11-10-6-5: Synthetic Cannabinoids and Synthetic Stimulants
11-10-7: Gambling Offenses
11-10-7-1: Gambling
11-10-7-2: Definitions
11-10-8: Weapons
11-10-8-1: Unlawful Use of Weapons
11-10-8-2: Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition
11-10-8-3: Exemptions
11-10-9: Air Rifles
11-10-9-1: Unlawful Use of Air Rifles
11-10-9-2: Seizure and Removal
11-10-9-3: Exemptions
11-10-10: Assault Weapons
11-10-10-1: Definition
11-10-10-2: Possession of Assault Weapon
11-10-11: Unauthorized Possession or Storage of Weapons
11-10-11-1: Concealed Weapons; Discharge Of Firearms
11-10-12: Definitions
11-10-13: Drug Paraphernalia
11-10-13-1: Definitions
11-10-13-2: Unlawful Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
11-10-13-3: Sale or Delivery - Public Nuisance
11-10-13-4: Exemptions
11-10-14: Prohibited Deliveries Within 300 Feet of a Residence
11-10-15: Unlawful Possession of Fraudulent, Fictitious or Altered Identification Card
11-10-15-1: Definitions
11-10-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT, ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE
A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 2 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach
of the peace; or
B. Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire protection district
a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such fire exists; or
C. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of
any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place; or
D. Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the
effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is
no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; or
E. Transmits in any manner to the police department or fire department of any municipality or fire
protection district, or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such assistance is required; or
F. Enters upon the property of another and without attempting first to notify the occupant of the
person's presence deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
G. While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "Collection Agency Act", sections 225 ILCS
425/1 et seq., of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or as an employee of such collection agency, and
while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
H. Congregates with other persons in a public place and refuses to comply with a lawful order of the
police to disperse where failure to disperse would result in likelihood of riot, rout, affrays, noises,
disturbances, trespasses and disorderly assemblies which could result in serious harm or alarm
to the public.
11-10-1-1 PUBLIC INTOXICATION
It is unlawful for any person to be in a state of intoxication from alcoholic liquor, cannabis,
controlled substances, or any combination thereof in or upon any public way or other public place
within the Village so as to:
A. Unreasonably alarm and disturb other persons and create a breach of the peace; or
B. Interfere with the free passage of persons or vehicles on the public ways; or
C. Interfere with persons attempting to enter or exit public or private buildings; or
D. Be an immediate hazard to the health and safety of said person.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 3 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
11-10-1-2 PUBLIC NUISANCE ASSEMBLAGES
A. Definition: For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall apply:
OWNER: A person either leasing, residing in, or in any way exerting control over any real
property within the Village.
B. Endangering Peace and Safety: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property within the
Village to knowingly cause, permit, host or condone thereon any assemblage of persons which
endangers the peace and safety of the residents of the Village.
C. Endangering Acts Declared: Acts which are hereby declared to endanger the peace and safety of
the residents of the Village shall include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, cannabis, and cannabis-infused
products by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years, and others prohibited by
Village ordinance and/or Illinois statute.
2. Use or clear evidence of use of controlled substances prohibited by Village ordinance
and/or Illinois statute.
3. Illegal use or possession of fireworks as defined in Section 425 ILCS 35/1 of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
4. Fighting, battery, assaults or threats or the throwing of objects capable of causing physical
injury or property damage.
5. Depositing of trash, garbage or hazardous material upon public or private property.
6. Trespass of person on parked vehicles by persons attending such assemblage upon private
property.
7. Such circumstances and conditions which, taken as a whole, constitute a condition of
encouraging and contributing to the delinquency of minors.
D. Police Notice: Upon being given notice by any member of the Police Department of the existence
of any of the activities set forth in subsection C, such owner shall immediately act to terminate the
assemblage. Failure to do so shall constitute a further violation of this Section.
11-10-2 TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MESSAGES PROHIBITED
The sending of messages or use of language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral under
circumstances which would offend a person of reasonable sensibilities by means of or while using
a telephone or telegraph facilities, equipment or wires of any person, firm or corporation engaged
in the transmission of news or messages between states or within the Village is prohibited. The
use of language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral is prima facie evidence of the intent
to offend.
11-10-3 HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE OR THROUGH ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 4 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
11-10-3-1 HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE
Harassment by telephone is use of a telephone communication for any of the following purposes:
A. Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy
or indecent when not specifically requested to do so by the other person; or
B. Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten or
harass any person at the called number; or
C. Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with intent to harass any person
at the called number; or
D. Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person
at the called number; or
E. Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control to be used for any of the purposes
mentioned herein. Harassment by telephone prohibited.
11-10-3-2 HARASSMENT THROUGH ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS
A. Harassment through electronic communications is the use of electronic communication for any
of the following purposes:
1. Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene with an intent to
offend;
2. Interrupting with the intent to harass, the telephone service or the electronic
communication service of any person;
3. Transmitting to any person, with the intent to harass and regardless of whether the
communication is read in its entirety or at all, any file, document, or other communication
which prevents that person from using his or her telephone service or electronic
communications device;
4. Threatening injury to the person or to the property of the person to whom an electronic
communication is directed or to any of his or her family or household members; or
5. Knowingly permitting any electronic communications device to be used for any of the
purposes mentioned in this subsection A.
11-10-3-3 DEFINITIONS
A. Electronic communication" means any transfer or signs, signals, writings, images, sounds, data or
intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic,
photoelectric or photo-optical system.
B. Family or household member" includes spouses, former spouses, parents, children, stepchildren
and other persons related by blood or by present or prior marriage, persons who share or formerly
shared a common dwelling, persons who have or allegedly share a blood relationship through a
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 5 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
child, persons who have or have had a dating or engagement relationship, and persons with
disabilities and their personal assistants. For purposes of this Title, neither a casual
acquaintanceship nor ordinary fraternization between two individuals in business or social
contexts shall be deemed to constitute a dating relationship.
11-10-3-4 EVIDENCE INFERENCE
Evidence that a defendant made additional telephone calls or engaged in additional electronic
communications after having been requested by a named complainant or by a family or household
member of the complainant to stop may be considered as evidence of an intent to harass unless
disproved by evidence to the contrary.
11-10-4 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his or her official capacity commits an
offense.
11-10-4-1 OBSTRUCTING IDENTIFICATION
A. It is a violation of this Code for any person to intentionally or knowingly furnish a false or fictitious
name, residence address or date of birth to a peace officer who has:
1. Lawfully arrested the person;
2. Lawfully detained the person; or
3. Requested the information from a person that the peace officer has good cause to believe
is a witness to a criminal offense. (Ord. 11-3206-28, eff. 6/13/11)
11-10-5 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER
Whoever upon command refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person known by him or
her to be a peace officer in:
A. Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
B. Preventing the commission by another of any offense, commits an offense.
11-10-6 ILLEGAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person 21 years or older and a resident of the State of Illinois to possess
more than 30 grams of raw cannabis, cannabis-infused product or products containing a total of
more than 500 milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), or 5 grams of cannabis product in
concentrated form.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person 21 years or older and a non-resident of the State of Illinois to
possess more than 15 grams of raw cannabis, cannabis-infused product or products containing a
total of more than 250 milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), or 2.5 grams of cannabis
product in concentrated form.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the following acts:
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 6 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
1. Possessing cannabis:
a. In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
b. On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless permitted
for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act;
c. In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a reasonably secured,
sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the vehicle is moving; or
d. In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care or other
similar social service care on the premises;
2. Consume cannabis:
a. On a school bus;
b. On the grounds of any preschool, primary, or secondary school unless authorized
in the medical cannabis program;
c. In any motor vehicle;
d. In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care or other
similar social service care on the premises;
e. In any public place or knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21
year of age;
f. In any public place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by
others; or
g. In any location where smoking is prohibited by the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410
ILCS 82/1 et seq.), including hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices,
commercial establishments, etc.
11-10-6-1 DEFINITIONS
CANNABIS Includes marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and
including derivatives or subspecies, such as indicia, of all strains of
cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin
extracted from any part of the plant; and any compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
other naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether
produced directly or indirectly by extraction; however, "cannabis"
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from
it), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is
incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial
hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act.
"Cannabis" also means concentrate and cannabis-infused
products.
CANNABIS-INFUSED
PRODUCTS
A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical formulation, or
another product containing cannabis that is not intended to be
smoked.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 7 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
PUBLIC PLACE Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others and includes all parts of buildings owned in
whole or in party, or leased by the State or a unit of local
government. A public place does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care,
foster care or other similar social service care on the premises.
11-10-6-5 SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS AND SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires different meaning. The omission of any product from any definition
is not intended to represent exclusion from the intended scope of such definition so long as such
product exhibits similar chemical or biological characteristics to the category being defined.
1. A PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID OR A SYNTHETIC
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT OR PRODUCT(S) means any product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant, as those terms are defined herein such as,
but not limited to, the following examples of brand names or identifiers: Spice, Chronic
Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, K2, K2 Sky, K2 Solid Sex, K2 Orisha, K2 Amazonian
Shelter, K2 Thai Dream, K3, K3 Legal, Stinger, Red X Dawn, Spike 99, Spicylicious, Zohai,
Serenity, Genie, Yucatan Fire, Earthquake, Mystery, Black Mamba, Mr. Nice Guy, Skunk,
Pulse, Ivory Wave, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Vanilla Sky, Bliss, Meow Meow, Zoom,
Sextacy, Molly=s Plant Food, Purple Monkey Plant Food, Buzz Grow, 4MMC, m-Cat and
Energy 1.
2. SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID means any laboratory-created compound that functions
similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including, but
not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts
of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as:
• JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoylindole)
• JWH-015(2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone)
• JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
• JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
• JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone)
• JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
• JWH-09(4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-yl) methanone)
• JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole)
• JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
• JWH-200(1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)
• JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)ethanone
• JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
• JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
• JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole)
• JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole)
• HU-210((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
• HU-211((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 8 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
• HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
• HU-331((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-
yl]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
• CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
• CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and
its homologues
• WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
• RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone)
• RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl) ethanone)
3. SYNTHETIC STIMULANT means any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and
MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers,
and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant effect on the central
nervous system, such as:
• 3-Fluoromethcathinone
• Fluoromethcathinone
• 3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
• 3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
• 4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
• 4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
• 4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
• Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-
MBDB)
• Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
• Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
1. In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or
halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring by one or
more other univalent substituents;
2. At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
3. At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups;
4. Or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
4. MANUFACTURE means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of a product containing a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic
stimulant, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural origin, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of such products or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include the preparation,
compounding, packaging, or labeling of such products as an incident to lawful research,
teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 9 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
B. Sale or Delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver any product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant.
C. Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant with the intent of using the product for ingestion,
consumption, inhaling, or intravenous use. In determining intent under this subsection, a trier of
fact may take into consideration, among other things: the proximity of the product to drug
paraphernalia (see, Lincolnshire Municipal Code, '11-10-13-1(D)); the presence of the product on
or within drug paraphernalia; the proximity of the product to a different controlled substance;
and whether or not the individual in possession of the product is exhibiting physical effects
commonly associated with being under the influence of a controlled substance.
D. Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic cannabinoid or a
synthetic stimulant.
E. Manufacture. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, or assemble the ingredients
with the intent to manufacture, a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant. In determining
intent under this subsection, a trier of fact may take into consideration, among other things: the
proximity of the product or ingredients to drug paraphernalia (see, Lincolnshire Municipal Code,
'11-10-13-1(D)); the presence of the product or ingredients on or within drug paraphernalia; the
proximity of the product or ingredients to a different controlled substance. (Ord. 12-3232-02, eff.
1/9/12)
11-10-7 GAMBLING OFFENSES
11-10-7-1 GAMBLING
A. A person commits the offense of gambling when he or she:
1. Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in
subsection B of this Section;
2. Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination,
appointment or election; or
3. Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or
lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling device; or
4. Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which bets
or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or knowingly possesses any money
which he or she has received in the course of a bet or wager; or
5. Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination,
appointment or election; or
6. Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for
any lottery; or
7. Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 10 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or other similar device; or
8. Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or knowingly drafts, prints or publishes
any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device,
or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game, except for such activity related to the
Illinois State lottery, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance
with State law.
9. Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or changes in betting odds
by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means; or knowingly installs or
maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information; except that
nothing in this subsection A.9 prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for
use in news reporting of sporting events or contests.
B. Participants in the activities as provided for in 720 ILCS 5/28-1(b)1 through 11 of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes shall not be convicted of gambling.
11-10-7-2 DEFINITIONS
A. A "gambling device" is any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machine or device for the
reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill or upon the action of which money
or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture,
fixture, equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A "gambling
device" does not include:
1. A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement which rewards the
player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which device is so constructed or
devised as to make such result of the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of
the player and which returns to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive
money or property.
2. Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the money invested and
in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
B. A lottery is any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance
among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes,
whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name;
provided raffles conducted in compliance with Title 3, Chapter 4G shall not be considered a
Lottery and the conduct of raffles in such manner shall not be deemed Gambling. (Amd. Ord.
10-3140-17, eff. 5/10/10)
C. A "policy game" is any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees by any
instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any particular number, character,
ticket or certificate shall in the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the
purchaser or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
11-10-8 WEAPONS
11-10-8-1 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 11 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
A. OFFENSE: A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he or she
knowingly:
1. Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon, blackjack, slung-shot,
sand-club, sand bag, metal knuckles, throwing star or any knife, commonly referred to as
a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied
to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is
a device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic
material or compressed gas; or
2. Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger,
dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun
or taser or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character; or
3. Carries on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun projector or bomb
or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance, other than an object containing
a nonlethal noxious liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal defense carried
by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older; or
4. Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or her person except
when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business any pistol, revolver, stun
gun or taser or other firearm; or
5. Sets a spring gun; or
6. Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in
silencing the report of any firearm; or
7. Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries:
a. A machine gun, which shall be defined for the purposes of this subsection as any
weapon, which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot,
automatically more than one shot without manually reloading by a single
function of the trigger, including the frame or receiver of any such weapon, or
sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses, or carries any combination of parts
designed or intended for use in converting any weapon into a machine gun, or
any combination or parts from which a machine gun can be assembled if such
parts are in the possession or under the control of a person;
b. Any rifle having one or more barrels less than 16 inches in length or a shotgun
having one or more barrels less than 18 inches in length or any weapon made
from a rifle or shotgun, whether by alteration, modification, or otherwise, if such
a weapon as modified has an overall length of less than 26 inches; or
c. Any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive
substance of over one-quarter ounce for like purposes, such as, but not limited to,
black powder bombs and Molotov cocktails or artillery projectiles; or
8. Carries or possesses any firearm, stun gun or taser or other deadly weapon in any place
which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 12 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
to a license issued by any governmental body or any public gathering at which an
admission is charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration or lecture
involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted; or
9. Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his or her person any pistol, revolver,
stun gun or taser or firearm or ballistic knife, when the person is hooded, robed or
masked in such manner as to conceal his or her identity; or
10. Carries or possesses on or about his person, upon any public street or other public lands
within the corporate limits of the Village, except when an invitee thereon or therein, for
the purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except
when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any handgun, rifle,
shotgun, stun gun, taser or other firearm of any description, except assault weapons (see
Section 11-10-10), and as otherwise provided for in Section 11-10-8-3.
a. For the purposes of this Section, "Firearm: means any device, by whatever name
known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an
explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas.
b. A "stun gun" or "taser", as used in this Section, means any device which is
powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which fires one or
several barbs attached to a length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can
send out current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a
manner as to render the person incapable of normal functioning, or any device
which is powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which, upon
contact with a human or clothing worn by a human, can send out a current
capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render
the person incapable of normal functioning.
11. Sells, manufactures or purchases any explosive bullet. For purposes of this section
"explosive bullet" means the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which
contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of
a human or an animal. "Cartridge" means a tubular metal case having a projectile
affixed at the front and a cap or primer at the rear end, with the propellant contained in
the tube between the projectile and the cap.
B. EXEMPTIONS
1. Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paint ball gun or B-B gun which either expels a single
globular projectile not exceeding .8" in diameter or breakable paint balls containing
washable marking colors; or
2. Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety as required or recommended by the
United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; or
3. Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar
industrial ammunition; or
4. An antique firearm (other than a machine gun) which, although designed as a weapon,
the Department of State Police finds by reason of the date of manufacture, value, design,
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 13 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
and other characteristics is primarily a collector's item and is not likely to be used as a
weapon.
11-10-8-2 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION:
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or firearm ammunition when:
A. He or she is under eighteen (18) years of age and has in his or her possession any firearm of a
size which may be concealed upon the person; or
B. He or she is under twenty one (21) years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than
a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or
her possession; or
C. He or she has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this State or any other jurisdiction,
and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession; or
D. He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession; or
E. He or she has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five (5) years and has any
firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or
F. He or she is mentally retarded and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her
possession; or
G. He or she has in his or her possession any explosive bullet as defined in Section 11-10-8-1 (A) 11.
H. He or she does not possess a firearm owner's identification card issued in his or her name
pursuant to the provisions of 430 ILCS 65/1 et seq.
11-10-8-3 EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of Section 11-10-8 shall not apply to the exemptions as listed in 720 ILCS 5/24-2
of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
11-10-9 AIR RIFLES
11-10-9-1 UNLAWFUL USE OF AIR RIFLES
A. Definition: "Air rifle" means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B
gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels a breakable
paint ball containing washable marking colors or, a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead
or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to inflict pain or cause bodily
harm. An "AirSoft" gun means any air gun which impels a pellet constructed of a soft plastic
polymer using compressed air as a propellant.
B. It is unlawful for any person to carry or possess any air rifle on the public street, roads, highways
or public lands within the Village, private property or the common property of a residential or
commercial development without the express written permission of the property owner, unless
such air rifle meets one of the following conditions:
1. Is broken down in a non-functioning state;
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 14 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
2. Is not immediately accessible; or
3. Is unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other
container.
C. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle (excluding paint ball and "AirSoft" guns)
within the Village.
D. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any paint ball or "AirSoft" gun from, across or into any
street, sidewalk, road, highway, public land, private property or the common property of a
residential or commercial development, or any public place, except, however on a safely
constructed target range, or entirely within the private property of a consenting owner.
11-10-9-2 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL
The Lincolnshire Police Department shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of this Chapter.
11-10-9-3 EXEMPTIONS
The relevant exemptions described in 720 ILCS 5/24-2 shall apply to the provisions of Section
11-10-9.(Ord. 05-2008-72, eff. 11/28/05)
11-10-10 ASSAULT WEAPONS
11-10-10-1 DEFINITION
"Assault Weapon", for the purposes of this Chapter, is defined to include:
A. All of the following specified rifles:
1. Norinco, Mitchell and Poly Technologies Avtomat Kakashi-kovs (all models)
2. Action Arms Israeli Military Industries UZI and Galil
3. Beretta AR-70 (SC-70)
4. CETME G3
5. Colt AR-15 and CAR-15
6. Daewoo K-1, K-2, Max 1 and Max 2
7. Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR and FNC
8. FAMAS MAS223
9. Heckler & Koch HK-91, H-93, HK-94 and PSG-1
10. MAC 10 and MAC 11
11. SKS with detachable magazine
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 15 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
12. SIG AMT, SIG 500 Series, and SIG PE-57
13. Springfield Armory BM 59 and SAR-48
14. Sterling MK-6 and SAR
15. Steyr AUG
16. Valmet M62-M71S and M78
17. Armalite AR-180 Carbine
18. Bushmaster Assault Rifle (armgun)
19. Calico M-900 Assault Carbine
20. Mandall THE TAC-1 Carbine
21. Plainfield Machine Company Carbine
22. PJK M-68 Carbine
23. Weaver Arms Nighthawk
B. All of the following specified pistols:
1. Action Arms UZI
2. Encom MP-9 and MP-45
3. MAC 10 and MAC 11
4. INTRATEC TEC-9
5. Mitchell Arms Spectre Auto
6. Sterling MK-7
7. Calico M-900
C. All of the following specified shotguns:
1. Franchi SPAS 12 and LAW 12
2. Gilbert Equipment Company Striker 12
3. Encom CM-55
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 16 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
D. Other models by the same manufacturer that are identical to firearms listed above except for
slight modification, including, but not limited to a folding or retractable stock; an adjustable
sight; a case deflector for left-handed shooters; a shorter barrel; a wooden, plastic or metal
stock; a larger clip size; a different caliber, provided the caliber exceeds .22 rimfire; or a bayonet
mount.
E. Firearms that have been redesigned from, renamed, renumbered, or patterned after one of the
listed firearms, regardless of the company of production or distribution, or country or origin, or
firearms which have been manufactured or sold by another company under a licensing
agreement to manufacture or sell the identical or nearly identical firearms as those listed above,
regardless of the company of production or distribution, or the country of origin.
11-10-10-2 POSSESSION OF ASSAULT WEAPON
It is unlawful for any person to possess, harbor, control, transfer, sell, offer for sale, give, deliver
or carry upon his or her person or in a vehicle within the corporate limits of the Village any
assault weapon unless such weapon has been modified to render it permanently inoperable.
11-10-11 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR STORAGE OF WEAPONS
A. Whoever possesses or stores any weapon enumerated in Section 11-10-12, paragraphs A, B, or C,
of Section 11-10-12 on land supported in whole or in part with any government funds or in a
building on such land without prior written permission from the chief security officer for such
land or building or the chief managing officer of the governmental entity commits a Class A
misdemeanor.
11-10-11-1 CONCEALED WEAPONS; DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
It shall be and is unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in said Village without complying
with the laws of the State of Illinois, and it is further unlawful to discharge any firearms or air
guns or pellet guns in said Village; provided that this Section shall not be construed to prohibit
any officer of the law to discharge a firearm within the Village when lawfully defending his
person or property or when necessary in the process of making an arrest or otherwise in the
performance of his duty within the law; or any State of Illinois licensed and registered hunter(s)
when operating under the guidelines of an Animal Management Program approved and adopted
by the Village Board and approved and permitted by the State of Illinois.
11-10-12 DEFINITIONS
A. "Armed with a Dangerous Weapon". A person is considered armed with a dangerous weapon for
purposes of this Title, when he or she carries on or about his or her person or is otherwise armed
with a category I or category II weapon.
B. A category I weapon is a pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, spring gun, or any other firearm, sawedoff
shotgun, a stun gun or taser as defined in 11-10-8-1 of the Chapter, knife with a blade of at
least three (3) inches in length, dagger, dirk switchblade knife, stiletto, or any other deadly or
dangerous weapon or instrument of like character.
C. A category II weapon is a bludgeon, blackjack, slungshot, sand-bag, sand-club, metal knuckles,
billy or other dangerous weapon of like character.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 17 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
11-10-13 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
11-10-13-1 DEFINITIONS
A. "Controlled Substance" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 102 of the "Illinois
Controlled Substances Act" (720 ILCS 570/102) as if that definition were incorporated herein.
B. "Deliver" or "Delivery" means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with
or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
C. "Drug Paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/102 et seq.) It includes but is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance;
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any
controlled substance;
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting a controlled
substance by private persons;
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing a
controlled substance into the human body including, where applicable, the following
items:
a. Water pipes;
b. Carburetion tubes and devices;
c. Smoking and carburetion masks;
d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
e. Carburetor pipes;
f. electric pipes;
g. air-driven pipes;
h. chillums;
i. bongs;
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 18 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
j. ice pipes or chillers;
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation
of this Section.
11-10-13-2 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
A. A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing a controlled substance for that use. This subsection (A) does not apply to a person
who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic
Syringes and Needles Act.
B. In determining intent under subsection (A), the tryer of fact may take into consideration the
proximity of the controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.
11-10-13-3 SALE OR DELIVERY - PUBLIC NUISANCE
A. Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers for any commercial consideration
any item of drug paraphernalia. Any person 18 years of age or older who sells or delivers for any
commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age.
B. Any person who sells or delivers for a commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia
to a woman he or she knows to be pregnant.
C. Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for
sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a
public nuisance.
The Village may commence an action in the circuit court to abate the public nuisance as
described in this subsection (C).
Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged nuisance exists, the
court may, without bond, enter a temporary restraining order to enjoin any defendant from
maintaining the nuisance and may, without bond, enter a preliminary injunction restraining any
defendant from removing or interfering with any property used in connection with the public
nuisance.
11-10-13-4 EXEMPTIONS
This Section shall not apply to:
A. Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a
controlled substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for
sale.
B. Items historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 19 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles,
baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling papers.
C. Items listed in Section 11-10-13-2 which are used for decorative purposes, when such items have
been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose
prohibited by this Section.
D. A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the
Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact
should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
1. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been
put;
2. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of
any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device upon its functioning;
3. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes
or uses to which the item can or may be put;
4. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or
commercial delivery;
5. Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or use of the item
involved, and the entire context in which such advertising occurs;
6. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as
any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the
sale was made;
7. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or
related items to the community such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco
products;
8. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
11-10-14 PROHIBITED DELIVERIES WITHIN 300 FEET OF A RESIDENCE.
A. It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts in the Village between 6:00 P.M.
Saturday and 8:00 A.M. on Sunday and between 6:00 P.M. Sunday and 7:00 A.M. Monday and
between 7:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. the remainder of the week and within 300 feet (300') of any
residence or the R1, R2, R2A, R3 or R4 residential districts.
1. Driving of a commercial vehicle (with the exception of residential moving vans) to a
specific address within the Village for the purpose of loading or unloading such a vehicle
at that address; or
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 20 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
2. Running of the engine and/or refrigeration unit of a parked commercial vehicle;
or
3. Loading or unloading of a commercial vehicle (with the exception of residential
moving vans) regardless of who is doing the loading or unloading; or
4. Operating a business that suffers or permits, either deliberately or by
inadvertence, the loading or unloading of any commercial vehicle regardless of
who is doing the loading or unloading; or
5. Operating a business that suffers or permits, either deliberately or by
inadvertence, the running of the engine or refrigeration unit of any commercial
vehicle regardless of who is running the engine or refrigeration unit.
11-10-15 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FRAUDULENT, FICTITIOUS OR ALTERED
IDENTIFICATION CARD
It is a violation of this Code for any person to knowingly possess, display, or cause to be
displayed any fraudulent,fictitious or unlawfully altered identification card. (Ord. 11-
3206-28, Eff. 6/13/11)
11-10-15-1 DEFINITIONS
A. FRAUDULENT IDENTIFICATION CARD: Any identification card that purports to
be an official identification card for which a computerized number and file have not been
created by the Illinois Secretary of State, the United States Government or any state or
political subdivision thereof, or any governmental or quasi-governmental organization.
B. FICTITIOUS IDENTIFICATION CARD: Any issued identification card for which a
computerized number and file have been created by the Illinois Secretary of State, the
United States Government, any other state or political subdivision thereof, or any
governmental or quasi-governmental organization that contains false information
concerning the identity of the individual issued the identification card;
C. UNLAWFULLY ALTERED IDENTIFICATION CARD: Any issued identification
card for which a computerized number and file have been created by the Illinois
Secretary of State, the United States Government, any other state or political subdivision
thereof, or any governmental or quasi-governmental organization that has been
physically altered or changed in such a manner that false information appears upon the
identification card.
D. IDENTIFICATION CARD: Any identification card that resembles an official
identification card in either size, color, photograph location, or design or uses the word
"official", "Lincolnshire" "state", "Illinois", or the name of any other state or political
subdivision thereof, or any governmental or quasi-governmental organization
individually or in any combination thereof to describe or modify the term "identification
card" or "I.D. card" anywhere on the card, or uses a shape in the likeness of Illinois or
any other state on the photograph side of the card, is deemed to be a fraudulent
identification card unless the words "This is not an official Identification Card", appear
prominently upon it in black colored lettering in 12 point type on the photograph side of
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 10: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH SAFETY
Page 21 of 21
Revised 12/09/2019
the card, and no such card shall be smaller in size than 3 inches by 4 inches, and the
photograph shall be on the left side of the card only.
E. LEGAL NAME: The full given name and surname of an individual as recorded at
birth, recorded at marriage, or deemed as the correct legal name for use in reporting
income by the Social Security Administration or the name as otherwise established
through legal action that appears on the associated official document presented to the
Illinois Secretary of State. "Personally identifying information" means information that
identifies an individual, including his or her identification card number, name, address
and telephone number. (Ord. 11-3206-28, Eff. 6/13/11)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-11: SEX OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 1
CHAPTER 11
SEX OFFENSES
SECTION:
11-11-1: Public Indecency
11-11-2: Prostitution
11-11-3: Soliciting for a Prostitute
11-11-4: Patronizing a Prostitute
11-11-5: Pimping
11-11-6: Obscenity
11-11-7: Harmful Material
11-11-1: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs the
following act in a public place commits a public indecency:
1. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the
sexual desire of the person.
B. "Public place", for purposes of this Section, means any place where the
conduct is or may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
11-11-2: PROSTITUTION:
Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual
penetration as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-12 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes for
money, or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by
another, for money or anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification, commits an act of prostitution.
11-11-3: SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE:
Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting for a
prostitute:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-11: SEX OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 2
A. Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; or
B. Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of
prostitution; or
C. Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of
prostitution.
11-11-4: PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE:
Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not his or her
spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
A. Engages in an act of sexual penetration as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-12 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, with a prostitute; or
B. Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of
sexual penetration as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-12 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
11-11-5: PIMPING:
Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not for
lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from the
practice of prostitution, commits pimping.
11-11-6: OBSCENITY:
A. Elements of the Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with the
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, he or she:
1. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide
any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
2. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-11: SEX OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 3
3. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
4. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of
his or her body for gain; or
5. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this Section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
6. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale ofmaterial represented or held
out by the person to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
B. Obscene Defined: Any material or performance is obscene if:
1. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
2. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or stimulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or
lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
3. Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
C. Interpretation of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference to
ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or
other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the
material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for
or directed to such an audience.
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination,
distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being commercially exploited
for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to
the nature of thematter and can justify the conclusion that thematter is lacking
in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
In any prosecution for an offense under this Section, evidence shall be
admissible to show:
1. The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to
which it was directed;
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-11: SEX OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 4
2. What the predominant appeal of thematerial would be for ordinary adults
or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people;
3. The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or othermerits of thematerial,
or absence thereof;
4. The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this State;
5. Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other
promotion of the material;
6. Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
D. Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of
amold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for
reproducingmultiple copies, or the possession ofmore than three (3) copies of
obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate.
E. Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the
dissemination:
1. Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age;
2. Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special
justification for possession of such material.
11-11-7: HARMFUL MATERIAL:
A. Elements of the Offense: It shall be unlawful for a person with knowledge that
a person is a child, knowingly distribute to or sends or cause to be sent to, or
exhibit to, or offer to distribute or exhibit any harmful material to a child. For
purposes of this Section, a person will be deemed to have knowledge of a
child's age if the person actually knows the age or fails to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the child's true age.
B. Definitions:
1. Material is harmful if, to the average person, applying contemporary
standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is prurient interest,
that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, which
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-11: SEX OFFENSES
Revised 01/07/97 Page 5
goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or
representation of such matter, and is material the redeeming social
importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
2. Material, as used in this Section, means any writing, picture, record or
other representation or embodiment.
3. Distribute means to transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
4. Knowingly, as used in this Section, means having knowledge of the
contents of the subjectmatter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable
inspection which would have disclosed its contents.
C. Interpretation of Evidence: The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the
material shall be judged with reference to average children of the same
general age of the child to whom suchmaterial was offered, distributed, sent or
exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of thematter or the circumstances
of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case the predominant appeal of thematerial shall
be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
In prosecution under this Section, where circumstances of production,
presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate thematerial
is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such
evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the material and can justify
the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is in fact
substantially less than its prurient appeal.
D. Affirmative Defenses: Affirmative defenses are those set forth in 720 ILCS
5/11-21(e) of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 1 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Definitions
11-12-2: Parental Responsibility
11-12-2-1: Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency of a Minor
11-12-2-2: Improper Supervision of Minors
11-12-2-3: Parental Responsibility for Violations By Minors
11-12-12-4: Parental Responsibility for Unpaid Penalties
11-12-3: Curfew
11-12-3-1: School Curfew for Minors
11-12-3-2: Truancy Prohibited
11-12-4: Alcoholic Liquor Prohibitions Regarding Persons Under Twenty-One (21)
11-12-5: Unlawful Transfer of Telecommunication Devices or Device to a Minor
11-12-6: Sale or Possession of Tobacco by Persons Under Twenty-One (21) Prohibited
11-12-6-1: Sale or Possession of Tobacco Accessories and Smoking Herbs by Under-Aged
Persons Prohibited
11-12-7: Sale or Possession of Cannabis and Cannabis-Infused Products by Persons Under
Twenty-One (21) Prohibited
11-12-1: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT A person 21 years of age or older.
ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR
Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of
one percent (.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
CANNABIS Includes marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, "cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination.
"Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under
the Industrial Hemp Act. "Cannabis" also means concentrate and cannabisinfused
products.
CANNABIS-INFUSED
PRODUCTS
Any beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical formulation, or another
product containing cannabis that is not intended to be smoked.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA As defined under the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/2 et seq.)
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 2 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICE
An electric and/or battery operated device, the use of which may resemble
smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled does of nicotine or other
substances. Electronic Smoking Device includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, and electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. An electronic smoking
device excludes any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration as a nontobacco product used for medicinal purposes and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
IDENTIFICATION CARD A written, printed or photostatic document issued by a public officer of a
federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency
thereof, in the performance of his or her official duties and evidencing the age
and identity of a person, including without limitation a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective
Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces.
KNOWINGLY Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief
which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
LEGAL GUARDIAN A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court
of this State, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given
custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act of 1987 [705 ILCS
405/1-1 et seq.].
MINOR A person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
RECKLESSLY Acting in a manner or under circumstances such as evince disregard of, or
indifference to, consequences involving danger to the property, life or safety of
others.
SMOKING HERBS All substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including but not limited
to Broom, Calea, California Poppy, Damiana, Hops, Ginseng, Lobelia, Jimpson
Weed and other members of the Datura Gensus, Passion Flower and Wild
Lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for the use as smoking
materials.
TELECOMMUNICATION
DEVICE
A device which is portable or which may be installed in a motor vehicle, boat
or other means of transportation, and which is capable of receiving or
transmitting speech, data, signals or other information, including but not
limited to paging devices, cellular and mobile telephones, radio transmitters,
transmitters and receivers, but not including radios designed to receive only
standard AM and FM broadcasts.
TOBACCO
ACCESSORIES
Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette
rolling machines, and other items, designed primarily for the smoking or
ingestion of tobacco products or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or
exchange is made unlawful by the Illinois Complied Statutes (720 ILCS 685 et
seq.).
UNEMANCIPATED
MINOR
A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19 years of age and still
under the care and custody of at least one of his or her parents or a legal
guardian.
UNSUPERVISED A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of sufficient proximity to
obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
WILLFUL Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the will.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 3 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
11-12-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Presumption of Knowledge: For purposes of this section, the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated
minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, to have knowingly permitted such minor to have committed a
violation of this section if:
A. Such minor shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting willful or malicious acts causing damage or injury to a person, animal or property or
shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an
admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful or malicious acts
causing damage or injury to a person, animal or property; and
B. The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof; either by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certification of personal
service returned, from the Lincolnshire Police Department following such adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
C. Within one year following receipt of the notice set forth in paragraph (B) above, such minor is
either adjudicated to have violated within the corporate limits of the village any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting willful or malicious acts causing damage or injury to a person, animal or
property or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from
an admission of guilt of a violation within the corporate limits of the village of any ordinance, law
or statute prohibiting willful or malicious acts causing damage or injury to a person, animal or
property.
11-12-2-1: CONTRIBUTING TO THE CRIMINAL DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR
It shall be unlawful for any person, including a parent or legal guardian, to knowingly or willfully
cause, aid or encourage any minor to violate or attempt to violate any federal or state law or
municipal ordinance or to knowingly or willfully act in such a manner, or attempt to act in such a
manner, as to directly tend to cause a minor to violate or attempt to violate any federal or state
law or municipal ordinance.
11-12-2-2: IMPROPER SUPERVISION OF MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with
such parent or legal guardian to fail to make all reasonable, necessary and effective efforts to
prevent such minor from violating any provisions of this Code. If, after written notice is given by
a member of the Lincolnshire Police Department to any such parent or legal guardian of any such
violation by such minor, there is a continued or repeated violation by such minor, such parent or
legal guardian shall be guilty of a violation of this section unless such parent or legal guardian
shall have first notified the Lincolnshire Police Department in writing of his or her inability to
prevent such continued or repeated violation and shall request the Lincolnshire Police
Department or the proper public authority to take the necessary legal proceedings toward having
such minor declared and dealt with as a delinquent minor.
11-12-2-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS BY MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a minor to knowingly suffer, permit or
allow such minor to violate any provision of this Code.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 4 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
11-12-2-4: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNPAID PENALTIES
The parent or legal guardian of an un-emancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal
guardian shall be liable for any fine, condition or restriction imposed by a court upon such minor
for a violation of any provision of this Code, but only if (I) such minor has not paid the fine or
made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court and (ii) said parent or legal
guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause as provided by
law.
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal
guardian is liable for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause
injury to a person or property, including damages caused by a minor who has been adjudicated a
delinquent for violating Section 21-1.3 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
No recovery under this Section may exceed $20,000 actual damages for each person, or legal
entity, for the first act or occurrence of such willful or malicious acts by the minor causing injury,
and $30,000 if a pattern or practice of willful or malicious acts by a minor exists for a separate
act or occurrence.
11-12-3: CURFEW
A. Curfew Established: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present
at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times:
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday.
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday.
Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day.
B. Exceptions:
1. When a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is accompanied and supervised by a
parent or legal guardian;
2. When a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is accompanied by another responsible
companion at least eighteen (18) years of age, approved by a parent or legal guardian;
3. When a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is engaged in a business or occupation
which the laws of this State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
perform;
4. When a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is participating in, going to or coming
from a religious event; or
5. When a person less than seventeen (17) years of age is participating in, going to or coming
from an activity involving the exercise of his/her rights protected under the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution, or Article I, Sections 4 and 5 of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both, such as freedom of speech and right of
assembly.
Before an officer may detain an individual for violation of the curfew ordinance, the officer
must reasonably determine if an offense has occurred under the curfew ordinance, and if
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 5 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
an assertion of First Amendment rights is offered by the person less than seventeen (17)
years of age, the officer must take reasonable steps to investigate the validity of the his/her
claim.
C. Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly
permit a person in his or her custody to violate any of the provisions of subsection A hereof.
11-12-3-1: SCHOOL CURFEW FOR MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is enrolled in any
public, private or parochial primary (k-8 grade) or secondary (9-12th grade) school to be present
at or upon, or to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon, any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park,
playground or other public place, or in or on any public building, place of amusement or
entertainment or any vacant lot in this Village, other than school, during any hours when school
is in session during the regular school term, unless he or she is:
A. Traveling to or from school by the most direct route; or
B. Engaged in school related activities with the written approval of school authorities or as otherwise
authorized by written school policy; or
C. Engaged in personal business, including without limitation employment, medical care and
religious activities, with prior written consent from a parent, legal guardian or other adult having
lawful custody or supervision of such person to school authorities; or
D. Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other adult having lawful custody or
supervision of such person.
11-12-3-2: TRUANCY PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person enrolled in any public, private or parochial primary (k-8 grade)
or secondary (9-12th grade) school within the corporate limited of the Village who is required by
law to attend school and is subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois
School Code to absent himself or herself from attendance at school without parental or school
permission.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any child to be absent from
school in violation of this Section, or to knowingly employ or harbor, while school is in session,
any child absent from school in violation of this Section.
C. No individual shall be cited under this Section until the school has fulfilled all of the steps required
for truant students as set forth in applicable State law.
11-12-4: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PROHIBITIONS REGARDING PERSONS UNDER TWENTYONE
(21)
A. Acts Prohibited: Subject to the exceptions set forth in subsection (b) below:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, deliver, dispense or furnish alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 6 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
2. It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, to sell, give, deliver, dispense or furnish such alcoholic liquor to any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase,
obtain, receive, accept, have in his or her possession or control, sell, give, deliver, mix,
dispense, serve, furnish or consume alcoholic liquor.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to misrepresent
his or her age to circumvent the provisions of this chapter, including without limitation
presenting or offering to any person any identification card that is false, fraudulent, forged
or not actually his or her own.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or use
any identification card that is false, fraudulent, forged or the identification card of another
or to obtain an identification card by means of false information.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, deliver or furnish to any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years any identification card that is false, fraudulent, forged, or of
another person.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to forge, alter or deface any identification card.
8. It shall be unlawful for any retail liquor dealer's licensee, or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to suffer, permit or allow any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be or remain on such licensee's licensed
premises, or in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to such licensed premises.
9. It shall be unlawful for any owner of, or other person having control over, any vehicle or
premises to knowingly initiate, suffer, permit or allow one (1) or more occupants, invitees,
visitors, guests, trespassers or other persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
assemble or be assembled in such vehicle or premises in possession of any alcoholic liquor
in violation of this section.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, or pay for, any hotel, motel or bed and breakfast
room or facility from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of, or with knowledge
that, such room or facility shall be used for consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
11. It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a minor to knowingly suffer, permit
or allow such minor to violate any provision of this chapter.
B. Exceptions:
1. The possession, mixing, dispensing and serving, or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in the performance of a bona fide religious
service or ceremony is not prohibited by this Code.
2. The possession, mixing, dispensing and serving, or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the direct supervision and approval
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 7 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
of a parent or legal guardian in the privacy of such parent's or legal guardian's residence
is not prohibited by this Code; provided, however, that his exception shall not be extended
to any other occupant, invitee, visitor or guest that is under the age of twenty-one (21)
years.
3. The possession and serving of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years as an employee of any licensee under this Code in such licensee's licensed
premises is not prohibited by this Code; provided, however, that this exception shall not
extend to those persons under the age of nineteen (19) years nor shall this exception
extend to the mixing or dispensing of alcoholic liquor, or to bartending, by any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
4. The possession and delivery of any alcoholic liquor in its original package and not for
consumption on the premises where sold by a person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years as an employee of any licensee under this chapter or pursuant to the order of his or
her parent or legal guardian is not prohibited by this Code.
5. The location or assembly of any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in any retail
premises licensed under this chapter or in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent
to any such licensed premises is not prohibited by this Code if such person is accompanied
by his or her parent or legal guardian; or if such licensed premises derives its principal
business from the sale or service of commodities other than alcoholic liquor; or if such
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is an employee of any licensee under this
chapter in such licensee's licensed premises whose duties do not include the mixing or
dispensing of alcoholic liquor or bartending and, if under the age of nineteen (19) years,
whose duties do not include the handling or serving of alcoholic liquors.
6. The action or omission to act of any person at the express lawful, or apparently lawful,
direction of a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her official duties is not
prohibited by this Code.
C: Presumption of Knowledge:
1. Presence in Vehicle or Premises: Whenever a person is present within any vehicle or
premises of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal possessor or
occupier thereof at the time that a violation of the provisions of this section is occurring
and has not informed the police thereof, it shall be prima facia evidence that such person
had knowledge of such violation.
2. Failure to Control Access: An owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal possessor or occupant
of any vehicle or premises shall be deemed to have permitted such vehicle or premises to
be used in violation of this section if he or she knowingly authorizes such use or enables
such use to occur by failing to control access to such vehicle or premises or to the alcoholic
liquor maintained therein.
3. Parental Residence: Every parent or legal guardian of any minor whose residence is used
by any occupant, invitee, visitor, guest or other person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years in a manner that constitutes a violation of this section shall be presumed to have
permitted the conduct that constitutes the violation unless the contrary is established by
a preponderance of the evidence.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 8 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
D. Reliance on Identification Card: Proof that any person demanded, was shown and reasonably
relied upon an identification card evidencing the identity of a person and that such person is of
lawful age in any transaction prohibited by this section is an affirmative defense in any criminal
prosecution therefore, in any prosecution for a violation of this section, or in any proceedings for
the suspension or revocation of any license, or the imposition of any fine or penalty based thereon;
provided, however, that it shall not be an affirmative defense if such person accepted the
identification card knowing it to be false, fraudulent, forged or the identification card of another
person.
11-12-5 UNLAWFUL TRANSFER OF A TELECOMMUNICATION DEVICE TO A MINOR
A person commits unlawful transfer of a Telecommunication Device to a minor when he gives,
sells or otherwise transfers possession of a Telecommunication Device to a person under (18)
years of age with the intent that the Telecommunication Device be used to commit any offense
under this Act, the Illinois Controlled Substances Act [720 ILCS 570 et. seq.] or the Cannabis
Control Act [720 ILCS 550 et seq.]. Each Telecommunication Device so transferred shall
constitute a separate offense.
11-12-6: SALE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY UNDER-AGED PERSONS PROHIBITED
A. No individual under twenty-one (21) years of age shall buy any cigar, cigarette, pipe, smokeless
tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms, any product containing nicotine, or an electronic smoking
device within the corporate limits of the village.
B. No individual under eighteen (18) years of age shall possess any cigar, cigarette, pipe, smokeless
tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms, any product containing nicotine, or an electronic smoking
device within the corporate limits of the village.
C. No person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette, pipe, smokeless
tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms, any product containing nicotine, or an electronic smoking
device, to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age within the corporate limits of the village.
D. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply when a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is
directed to use, under the supervision of a doctor, any product approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration as a nontobacco product used for medicinal purposes and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
(Amd. Ord. 16-3404-131, eff. 07/01/16, Ord. 17-3747-175, eff. 06/12/17)
11-12-6-1: SALE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS BY
PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) PROHIBITED
A. Sale to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age: No person shall knowingly sell, barter,
exchange, deliver or give away or cause or permit or procure to be sold, barter, exchanged,
delivered or given away any product containing nicotine, an electronic smoking device, tobacco
accessories or smoking herbs to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. No person under
eighteen (18) years of age shall possess any product containing nicotine, an electronic smoking
device, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the corporate limits of the Village.
LINCOLNSHIRE VILLAGE CODE
TITLE 11: MISDEMEANORS
CHAPTER 12: MINORS
Page 9 of 9
Revised 12/09/2019
B. Sale of Cigarette Paper: No person shall knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give
away cigarette paper or cause, permit, or procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered,
exchanged, delivered, or given away to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
C. Sales From Vending Machine: No person shall knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or
give away cigarette paper or any product capable of being used by an electronic smoking device
or cause, permit, or procure cigarette paper or any product capable of being used by an electronic
smoking device to be sold, offered, bartered, exchanged, delivered, or given away by use of a
vending or coin-operated machine or device to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
D. Use of Identification Card: No person under twenty-one (21) years of age in furtherance or
facilitation of obtaining a product containing nicotine, an electronic smoking device, smoking
accessories and smoking herbs shall display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer,
alter or deface an identification card.
E. Warning Notice: Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation operating a place of
business where a product containing nicotine, an electronic smoking device, tobacco accessories
and smoking herbs are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon the premises
a sign upon which there shall be imprinted the following statement: "SALE OF ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICES, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH
A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW". The sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at
least one-half inch in height.
(Amd. Ord. 16-3404-131, eff. 07/01/16; Ord. 17-3747-175, eff. 06/12/17)
11-12-7: SALE OR POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCTS BY
PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase, obtain,
receive, accept, have in his or her possession or control, sell, give, deliver, dispense, serve, furnish
or consume cannabis or cannabis-infused products or drug paraphernalia.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, deliver, dispense or furnish cannabis or cannabisinfused
products or drug paraphernalia to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
C. No person under twenty-one (21) years of age in furtherance or facilitation of obtaining cannabis
or cannabis-infused products or drug paraphernalia shall display or use a false or forged
identification card or transfer, alter or deface an identification card.
D. The prohibitions prescribed in paragraphs (A) and (B) above shall not apply to the extent such
conduct is permitted by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act and the minor
can present evidence of compliance with the requirements of such Act.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 1
CHAPTER 13
ANIMALS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Cruelty to Animals
11-13-2: Animals Disturbing the Peace, At Large
11-13-3: Dangerous or Diseased Animals
11-13-4: Keeping or Harboring Animals; Number Restricted
11-13-5: Animals on Public Property
11-13-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the Village in any way; any
person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any
animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.
11-13-2: ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE, AT LARGE:
A. Noises: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the
peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
B. Strays: It shall be unlawful to permit any animal, including but not limited to
cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the Village;
any such animal running at large in any public place within the Village shall
be impounded. It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such animal
upon any public way within the Village for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
11-13-3: DANGEROUS OR DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Dangerous Animals: It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious
animal of any kind to run at large within the Village; exhibitions or parades of
animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted
only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.
The members of the Police Department or any other person in the Village,
are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary
for the protection of any person or property.
B. Diseased Animals: No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease
or an infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 2
any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner thereof, except under the provisions of the County Health Officer.
The County Health Officer shall be requested to secure such disposition of
any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent
the communication and spread of contagion or infection, except in cases
where only the State Veterinarian is empowered to act.
11-13-4: KEEPING OR HARBORING ANIMALS; NUMBER RESTRICTED:
A. It shall be unlawful to maintain any stable, veterinary hospital, kennel, dovecote
or other place for the keeping or harboring of any cattle, horses, goats,
pigs, chickens, geese, ducks, pigeons, rabbits or similar animals or fowl, or
to keep or harbor any such animals or fowl upon any residential lot within
the Village.
B. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in excess of three (3) dogs or three (3)
cats or any combination of such animals in excess of a total of three (3)
upon any residential lot within the Village.
11-13-5: ANIMALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for the owners of any animal to permit such animal to be
in the parks, public parkways, or any other public property except for the
Village owned bicycle path and Village owned roadways, whether running at
large or leashed. The owner of any animal utilizing the Village owned
bicycle path or Village owned roadways to exercise said animal must have
the animal under leash and must have in his or her possession an
implement suitable for removal of animal feces. Said implement must be
utilized immediately to remove animal feces deposited on the Village owned
bicycle path or Village owned roadways.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 3
CHAPTER 13
ANIMALS
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
11-13A-1: Definitions
11-13A-2: Rabies Control
11-13A-3: Running at Large; Restrictions and Prohibitions
11-13A-4: Offenses Concerning Dogs and Cats
11-13A-5: Impoundment Procedures
11-13A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Where used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
CATS All members of the feline species.
COMPETENT PERSON A person who is physically and mentally capable of
managing and controlling a dog which is under his
restraint while off the premises of the owner or keeper
thereof.
DOGS All members of the canine species.
FIERCE, VICIOUS or Any dog is hereby declared fierce, vicious or dangerous
DANGEROUS DOG that, without provocation, attacks and/or bites a human
or other animal.
KENNEL Any establishment engaged in the commercial business
of breeding, showing, buying, selling or boarding of
dogs and cats, but not including veterinary service.
OWNER or KEEPER Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or
keeping a dog or cat within the Village.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 4
RABIES INSPECTOR The Rabies Inspector of the County.
RESTRAINT A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this
Article if it is on its owner's or keeper's premises; or on a
stout leash not more than eight feet (8') in length; or at
heel near a competent person and obedient to that
person's commands.
RUNNING AT LARGE (DOGS) Any dog shall be deemed to be running at large when it
is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under
adequate restraint of a competent person.
RUNNING AT LARGE (CATS) Any cat shall be deemed to be running at large when it
is:
1) On the property of another, and;
2) the owner or agent of the property makes a
complaint to the Police Department against the cat
being on the property.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL Any establishment maintained and operated a licensed
veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals and including temporary
boarding of such animals.
11-13A-2: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Except as otherwise in this Section provided, it shall be unlawful to keep or
harbor within the Village any dog which has not been vaccinated against rabies
by a licensed veterinarian within the preceding twelve (12) months, or within
the then calendar year; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful if said dog
has been vaccinated in accordance with the Illinois Animal Control Act1 and
lawful regulations promulgated thereunder and further provided, however, that
it shall not be unlawful to keep or harbor an unvaccinated dog which is under
four (4) months of age. Evidence of vaccination shall be the standard
vaccination tag issued by Lake County through its Animal Control Warden or
other lawfully designated agent and worn around the neck of the animal.
1225 ILCS 605/1
B. Report, Suspicion of Rabies: Every dog or cat which bites a person shall be
promptly reported to the Police Department and shall thereupon be securely
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 5
quarantined in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten (10) days. The owner,
upon
demand made by any police officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which
has bitten a person or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies for
a supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog or cat which has bitten
a person, or which is suspected of having rabies, upon demand of any police
officer of the Village to refuse to immediately deliver such dog or cat to such
officer. The Police Department of the Village, upon receipt of any such
notification or report of dog or cat bites, or symptoms indicative of rabies, shall
immediately notify the Rabies Inspector and shall, in cooperation with said
Rabies Inspector, determine so far as possible the identities of all persons
known or suspected to have been bitten by, handled or come in contact with
such dog or cat, so that such persons or their parents or guardians may be
given such warnings as may appear advisable.
The owner or keeper of such dog or cat shall be liable for all veterinarian and
laboratory fees incurred pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
11-13A-3: RUNNING AT LARGE; RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or cat to permit or suffer
such dog or cat to run at large as defined in Section 11-13A-1 at any time
within the Village. Any dog or cat which shall run at large shall be taken up and
returned to the owner if the owner=s identity is known and if practical to do so,
or shall be impounded as hereinafter provided at the expense of the owner or
keeper of such dog or cat.
11-13A-4: OFFENSES CONCERNING DOGS AND CATS:
A. Female Dogs and Cats in Heat: It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of
any female dog or cat to permit or suffer such dog or cat, while in heat, to be
upon any public way, or other public place, or upon any private premises, other
than the premises of the owner or keeper, or, if outdoors, upon any unfenced
part of the premises of the owner or keeper which is closer to a public way or
other public place, than ten feet (10').
B. Keeping of Certain Dogs or Cats Declared a Nuisance: It is hereby declared a
nuisance to keep within the Village any dog or cat which disturbs the peace
and quiet of any neighborhood by habitual barking, howling or whining, or to
keep on the premises a female dog or cat in heat which causes other dogs or
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 6
cats to disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood by habitual barking,
howling, whining or yowling.
Unless otherwise provided for in Section 1-17-10, upon complaint made under
oath and filed with any court having jurisdiction setting forth the maintenance of
any such nuisance within the Village, by any owner or keeper, the court shall
proceed to hear and determine the case. If, upon hearing, it shall appear that
such owner or keeper has so maintained a nuisance, then he shall be subject
to a fine and the court may order such dog or cat to be removed from the
Village forthwith. In the event of the failure of the owner or keeper to remove
the dog or cat from the Village, or to destroy the dog or cat, within twenty-four
(24) hours after receipt of such order, such owner or keeper shall be subject to
an additional fine for each day on or during which he refused to comply with
such order.
C. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor within the Village any fierce, vicious, or
dangerous dog. At the time and place set for trial for violation of this subsection
if it shall appear that any dog has, without provocation, attacked or bitten any
human or animal, the court may order such dog to be removed from the Village
forthwith or order that such dog be destroyed. Upon a satisfactory showing to
the court that said dog has been removed or destroyed, the court may, in its
discretion, cause a nonsuit to be entered in said cause.
D. Compliance With State Law: It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor any
dog or other animal within the Village when the same would constitute a
violation of the Illinois Animal Control Act and any lawful regulations
promulgated thereunder from time to time.
11-13A-5: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Unlicensed and At Large Dogs and Cats: Unlicensed dogs or cats of an age of
four (4) months or more, or dogs or cats found running at large, or dogs or cats
found abandoned shall be taken up by the Police Department and placed for
impoundment. The Police Officer impounding shall make a record of the same
entering the breed, color and sex and whether licensed or not and the name
and address of the owner or keeper, if known, and maintain the information at
a central location within the Police Department. Such dogs or cats so
impounded will be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than
five (5) days and may thereafter be disposed of in a humane manner if not
claimed by their owners. Dogs and cats not claimed by their owners shall be
humanely disposed of except as hereinafter provided in the cases of certain
animals.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-13: ANIMALS
Revised 03/22/10 Page 7
B. Redemption or Disposal:
1. Immediately upon impoundment of dogs or cats, the Police Department
shall make every possible effort to notify the owners of such dogs and
cats impounded, including mailing a notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, and inform such owners of the manner whereby
they may regain custody of such animals.
2. Any dog or cat so impounded may be redeemed by the owner or keeper
thereof by the payment of any impounding fees plus any fines, provided
that if the owner or keeper of the dog or cat is a resident of the Village,
such dog or cat shall not be released unless and until such dog or cat
shall have been vaccinated, registered and the license fee paid as herein
provided.
3. Anything in this Chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, no dog or cat
suspected of having rabies shall be released within less than ten (10)
days following its impounding, and any such dog or cat shall be held and
dealt with in the manner hereinafter provided.
C. Records: It shall be the duty of the Police Department to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate records of all impoundments and other dispositions of all dogs
or cats coming into their custody.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 11-14 PENALTY
Revised 03/22/2010 Page 1
CHAPTER 14
PENALTY
SECTION:
11-14-1: PENALTY
11-14-1: PENALTY: Unless stated otherwise, whoever violates any provisions of this
Title 11 shall be fined in accordance with the fines and penalties as prescribed
in the Comprehensive Fine/Penalty Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1
of this Code.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE
SECTION:
12-1-1 PURPOSE
The following purposes are hereby adopted:
A. It is necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of
the Village that the design, erection, construction, location and maintenance of all signs be
regulated and controlled.
B. To balance the optimum conditions for meeting sign user's needs, with the legitimate public
purpose of protecting the property and aesthetic values and physical appearance of the
Village.
C. To establish aesthetics and property values as explicit components of the health, safety and
welfare sought to be protected by the enforcement of the regulations contained in this
ordinance.
D. To enhance the economy of the Village by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective
display of signs.
E. To address the need for adequate site identification and to encourage better communication
with the public.
F. To assure the design, construction, installation and maintenance of signs such that they do
not endanger pedestrians or vehicular traffic safety.
G. To assure the compatibility of exterior signs with surrounding land uses.
H. To protect the property values and economic well-being of the Village.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 2
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES
SECTION:
12-2-1 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES
A. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to modify or alter the provisions of
any other chapter of the Village Code. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of
this Title and those of any other part of the Village Code, the later adopted ordinance shall
prevail and control.
B. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this Title is, for any reason, held invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this Title and the
application of these provisions to any persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 03/13/2017 Page 1
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-3-1 DEFINITIONS
A-Frame Sign. Any temporary advertising device ordinarily in the
shape of an “A,” or some variation thereof, located on the ground,
not permanently attached and easily movable, and usually twosided.
Also called a “sandwich board” sign. This definition includes
reference to the illustration of such sign on this page for
explanatory, but not limiting, purposes.
Abandoned or Obsolete Sign. Any sign which after fifteen (15)
days no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a
business, lessor, owner, or activity or product available on the
premises where the sign is displayed.
Approved Combustible Material. Any material more than six-hundredths (0.06) inch thickness,
which burns at a rate of not more than two and one-half (2½) inches per minute when subjected
to the then prevailing American Society for Testing Materials standard test for flammability in
sheets of six-hundredths (0.06) inch in thickness.
Attention Getting Device. Any pennant, flag, valance, banner, propeller, spinner, streamer,
searchlight, balloon, ornamentation, sparkler or similar device designed for the purpose of
attracting attention, promotion or advertising.
Awning. A structure of canvas, canvas-like or other materials extended over a window or door or
over a patio, deck, etc. as a protection from the sun or rain.
Balloon. A flexible container, generally made of rubber or Mylar, inflated with air and then sealed
at the neck, used for decoration.
Balloon Sign. A sign comprised of balloons. Displays designed to
inflate or move by use of a fan or blower shall be prohibited.
Banner Sign. Any temporary sign printed or displayed upon cloth or
other flexible material with or without frames.
Blade Sign or Projecting Sign. A sign which extends out from a
building face or wall so that the sign face is perpendicular or at an
angle to the building face or wall. This definition includes reference
to the illustration of such sign on this page for explanatory, but not
limiting, purposes.
Building. Anything constructed for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and
which is permanently affixed to the land.
Building Face or Wall. The entire window and wall area of a building in one place or elevation.
Building Frontage. The linear length of a building facing the street.
Blade sign or
Projecting sign
Typical A-frame sign
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 2
Building Sign. A sign lettered to give the name or address of a building itself, as opposed to the
name of occupants or services.
Cabinet Sign. An internally illuminated cabinet style box sign in which each letter is not
individually articulated.
Canopy. Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth,
metal, or other material, attached to and deriving its support from
the side of a building or structure for the purpose of shielding a
platform, stoop or sidewalk from the elements. This definition
includes reference to the illustration of such sign on this page for
explanatory, but not limiting, purposes.
Classic Sign. An original sign or a duplicate of an original sign,
which is at least twenty-five (25) years old, that possesses unique
physical design characteristics and has been determined to be of
extraordinary significance to the Village.
Combustible Material. Any material which will ignite at or below
a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,200° F) and will continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
Construction Sign. A Temporary Sign which functions to identify a residential subdivision or
non-residential developments where the vehicular entrance and/or existing permanent
identification sign may be removed, relocated, or hidden due to surrounding construction, which is
unrelated to any such development.
Copy (Permanent and Temporary). The wording and numbering on a sign either in permanent
or removable letter form.
Copy Area. The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure, which encloses the actual
copy of a sign. For Wall Signs, the copy area refers to the message, not to the illuminated
background.
Department of Community and Economic Development. The Department authorized by the
Village Manager to administer the provisions of this Title.
Directional Sign. Any sign which serves solely to designate the location or direction of an
activity, business or event. Directional signs may also identify walkways, parking lot entrances
and exits, and features of a similar nature.
Directory Sign. A sign located on the exterior of a building which functions to identify the
occupants of the building or group of buildings which are divided into rooms or suites used as
offices or studios.
Double-Faced Sign. A sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two (2)
identical and opposite planes erected at an angle of thirty degrees (30°) or less.
Electrical Sign. Any sign containing electrical wiring which is attached or intended to be attached
to an electrical energy source.
Electronic Sign. Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic informational content can be
changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electrically illuminated segments. For
the purposes of this Code, electronic signs within Ground or Wall Signs are regulated as one (1)
of the two (2) following types:
Typical canopy sign
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 3
A. Electronic Display Screen. A sign, or portion of a sign,
that displays an electronic image or video, which may
include text. This definition includes television screens,
or video panels, whether made of plasma, LED, OLED
or other digital projection technology and holographic
displays. This definition includes reference to the
illustration of such sign on this page for explanatory, but
not limiting, purposes.
B. Electronic Message Sign. Any sign, or portion of a
sign, that uses changing lights to form a message or
messages in text form wherein the sequence of
messages and the rate of change is electronically
programmed and can be modified by electronic
processes. This definition includes reference to the
illustration of such sign on this page for explanatory, but
not limiting, purposes.
Erected. This term shall mean attached, altered, built,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or moved, and shall include
the painting of wall signs, but does not include copy changes on
any sign.
Exempt Signs. Signs exempted from normal permit
requirements.
Externally-Illuminated Sign. Any sign, any part of which is illuminated from an exterior artificial
light source mounted on the sign, another structure or the ground.
Facade. The face of a building from grade to parapet in height and from side wall to side wall in
width.
Frontage. All the property on one (1) side of a street between two intersecting streets measured
along the street line, or, if the street is a dead-end, then all the property abutting on one (1) side
between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
Glare. A distinct light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the ambient
level of brightness to which the eyes are adapted to cause a visual disturbance or nuisance.
Grade. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the base of the sign.
Ground Floor. Any floor that is not more than three (3) feet above or below Grade.
Ground Sign. A sign that is attached to a completely self-supporting structure, which is regulated
as one (1) of the two (2) following types:
A. Ground Sign – Monument. Any sign, other than a double
post sign, placed upon or supported by a foundation in the
ground independent of any other supporting structure. As
distinguished from a Pole Sign, the base of any monument
sign must be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) or
more of the width of the Sign Face that is to be situated
upon the base. This definition includes reference to the
illustration of such sign on this page for explanatory, but not
limiting, purposes.
Electronic message sign
Electronic display screen
Monument sign
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 4
B. Ground Sign – Double Post. A sign erected and
maintained between two (2) freestanding supports and
not attached to any building, but not including a ground
monument sign. As distinguished from a ground
monument sign, both supports of the sign must be
identical in design and structure. This definition
includes reference to the illustration of such sign on this
page for explanatory, but not limiting, purposes.
Home Occupation Sign. Any sign indicating an occupation or
profession practiced by a person lawfully residing on the premises, which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.
Identification Sign. Any sign which functions to identify the legal corporate or registered trade
name of a business, an institution, occupant, apartment, residence, school or church, and not
advertising any product or service.
Incombustible Material. Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one
thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200° F) and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
Individual Letter Sign. Any sign made of self-contained letters, characters, icons, logos or
symbols that are mounted on the face of a building, or on top of or below a marquee. For the
purpose of this Title, a change, but not the replacement and repair of any character, icon, logo or
symbol of an individual Letter Sign shall be deemed a change to the Sign Face regardless of
whether the changed Sign comprises more, less or the same Sign Area.
Institutional Bulletin Board Sign. A sign which accommodates manually changeable copy and
displays information on activities and events of a Village entity or community-oriented
organization.
Institutional Sign. A sign erected by a not-for-profit entity, that has its principal place of
business in Lincolnshire, which advertises a noncommercial event or activity being organized by
such not-for-profit entity.
Internally-Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated by a light source, either incandescent,
fluorescent, neon or other light that is enclosed by the sign panel(s) or within the sign.
Lot. A Zoning Lot, except as the context herein shall indicate a Lot of Record.
Lot of Record. A lot shown on a plat properly recorded in the office of the Lake County Recorder
of Deeds prior to the effective date of this Code.
Lot, Zoning. A parcel of land, at least one (1) lot line of which is a public street line, which is
located within a single block, and which is or will be used, developed or built upon as a unit or as
a lot within a planned unit development. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Lot Line. A boundary of a zoning lot.
Marquee. Any fixed hood other than a canopy or awning which is supported solely by the building
to which it is attached, constructed of metal or other noncombustible material, and includes a sign
or advertising announcements regarding entertainment and amusement.
Master Sign Plan. A plan that establishes and coordinates the overall sign design of a building or
building site in order to provide direction for current and future tenants.
Double post sign
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 5
Menu Board. A device which functions to list items for sale at a drive-thru restaurant.
Message, Advertising. That copy on a sign describing products or services being offered to the
public.
Message, Noncommercial. That copy on a sign which does not direct attention to a business or
to a service or commodity for sale, and is typically of a political, religious, or ideological nature.
Moving Sign. A sign or other advertising structure with moving, revolving or rotating parts, or
visible mechanical movement of any kind, including wind-activated signs. Clocks are not
considered signs with moving parts.
Nit. A non-SI (International System of Units) unit of luminance equal to one candela per square
meter (1 nit = 1 cd/m5) used to measure brightness of an Electronic Sign. For the purposes of
measuring nits, a light meter which computes brightness in “luminance” shall be used per the
instructions of the specific light meter used.
Nonconforming Signs. Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and
continuously maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this Title and any
amendments hereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of
this Title.
Off-Premise Institutional Sign. A freestanding sign erected by a not-for-profit entity, that has its
principal place of business in Lincolnshire, which advertises a noncommercial event or activity
being organized by such not-for-profit entity which is located on any property or right-of-way other
than where the event or activity shall occur.
Off-Premises Sign. Any sign which directs attention to a business, service, product or
entertainment not sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located. Also called a
“billboard.” Off-premises Identification signs in unified commercial/mixed-use developments
granted a Planned Unit Development designation shall be permitted, regardless of property
ownership, provided such signs are designed as Ground Monument or Ground Double-Post
signs.
Owner. Any person who is the record title owner of any lot or parcel of land and all duly
authorized agents of such owner, beneficiaries of a land trust which is the record owner of any
such lot or parcel of land, any purchaser including contract purchasers, any person having a
vested or contingent interest in the lot or parcel of land in question, or the legal representatives of
any such persons. For the purposes of this Chapter, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that
the person to whom tax bills have been sent for the past year, according to the records of the
Lake County, is an Owner.
Parapet or Parapet Wall. That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
Pennant Sign. Any geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other lightweight material normally fastened
to a stringer, which is secured or tethered so as to allow movement of the sign.
Permanent Sign. A sign attached to a structure or the ground which is made of materials
intended for long-term use, such that it is considered a fixture of such structure or property.
Person. Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, whether for profit or not for profit.
Pole Sign. A sign which is supported by one (1) pole extending from the ground.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 6
Political Sign. A sign whose function is to draw attention to or communicate a position on any
issue, candidate or measure that is the subject of national, state or local debate.
Portable Sign. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building that includes
changeable copy.
Project Announcement Sign. A Temporary Sign which functions to identify an upcoming
construction project, architect, contractor, builder, engineer and/or tenants related to new
residential subdivisions or non-residential buildings and/or developments.
Real Estate Sign. A sign erected for purposes of advertising a parcel or building to be available
for sale or lease.
Real Estate Sign Rider. A sign panel attached to the main real estate sign structure displaying
additional items of information.
Residential Development Sign. A permanent identification Sign located at major entrances
designed to identify a residential subdivision and containing no commercial advertising.
Roof Line. The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the
building elevation.
Roof Sign. Any sign located on or attached to and extending above the roof of a building. For a
building with a mansard roof, any sign affixed to the roof but which does not extend higher than
the top of the roof shall be designated a wall sign.
Sign. Any visual device or representation designed or used for the purpose of communicating a
message or identifying a product, service, person, organization, business or event, with the use of
words or characters, visible from outside the premises on which such device is located.
Sign Area. The entire area of the sign background, including any material or color forming the
background used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed.
Sign Face. The visible sign proper including all characters and symbols, excluding essential
structural elements which are not an integral part of the display.
Sign Height. The entire height of the sign, including decorative elements, as measured from
grade.
Sign Structure. Any structure, or material which supports, has supported or is capable of
supporting or keeping a sign in a stationary position, including foundation and decorative covers.
Street. A right-of-way dedicated or used as a public thoroughfare or easement that affords
primary means of access to contiguous property.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. Without limitation on the foregoing, a structure
shall include buildings, fences, walls, billboards and signs.
Temporary Sign. A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
Temporary Advertisement Sign. A sign advertising a temporary event or product/service and
not intended or designed for permanent display.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/12/2018 Page 7
Temporary Identification Sign. A sign cover not intended or designed for permanent display
placed over an existing ground sign for a change in building occupancy that results in an
immediate need to identify the legal corporate or registered trade of a new occupant.
Temporary Window Sign. A sign attached to or placed upon a window or door of a building
intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building and not intended or designed for
permanent display.
Under-Awning Sign. Any sign attached to and mounted under an awning.
Under-Canopy Sign. Any sign attached to and mounted under a canopy.
Variance. A relaxation of the terms of this Chapter where such relaxation will not be contrary to
the public interest and where, due to conditions peculiar to the property and not the direct result
of the actions of the owner, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in unnecessary
hardship.
Vehicle Sign. Any sign that is displayed in or on an automobile, truck, bus, trailer or other vehicle
that is being operated or stored in the normal course of business, such as signs indicating the
name of the owner or business which is located on moving vans, delivery trucks, retail trucks and
trailers, and the like provided that the vehicle is parked and stored in areas appropriate to their
use and in compliance with other applicable Village ordinances.
Village. The Village, or Municipality of Lincolnshire, Illinois.
Wall Sign. A sign attached to or erected against a façade, the wall of a building or retaining wall
with the face in a parallel plane of the wall to which it is attached.
Window Display. Any presentation of merchandise along with associated artwork placed behind
a window. Window displays are not considered signs.
Window Identification Sign. A window sign that identifies the legal corporate name or registered
trade name of the entity therein.
Window Sign. Any sign located within a building interior that is intended for viewing from the
exterior of such a building.
Window Wrap. A non-advertising design element comprised of a film or acetate bonded to the
interior of a window that depicts either images that incorporate the exterior design elements/style
of the building on which the window is located, or provides a graphic representation of elements
of the business within. Lettering and company logos are prohibited.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 4
SIGN PERMIT
SECTION:
12-4-1 SIGN PERMIT
A. Applicability
No sign, except those identified as exempt, shall be erected, constructed, altered or relocated
without first obtaining a sign permit from the Department of Community and Economic
Development.
B. Authority and Execution
The Department of Community and Economic Development shall be responsible for
determining compliance with this Title.
C. Permit Application
An application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, signed by the applicant, and contain or have
attached thereto the following information:
1. Name of person, firm, corporation or association constructing and erecting the sign.
2. Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which sign is to be attached or
erected.
3. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the name of a responsible
party in the case of corporate applications.
4. Written consent of the owner of the building structure or land on which the sign is to be
erected.
5. Site plan showing location of the sign upon the lot and copy of the sign.
6. Elevation of proposed sign showing size of sign and height of top of sign above grade.
7. Four (4) sets of plans and specifications showing the method of construction, location,
support, attachment to the buildings or grounds, illumination and the lighting intensity. If
not included therein, four (4) sketches showing the sign faces, exposed surfaces and
proposed message, all accurately represented in scale as to size, proportion and color. If
the sign is to be attached to a building, a drawing shall be submitted showing the sign on
the facade of the building.
8. A Landscape Plan which meets the requirements of subsection 12-8-1-E of the Sign
Ordinance.
9. If required by the Department of Community and Economic Development, a copy of
stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for deadload and
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 2
wind pressure in any direction, in the amount required by this and all other laws and
ordinances of the Village.
10. Any electrical permit required for this sign.
11. Such other information that the Department of Community and Economic Development
shall require to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the Village.
D. Permit Issuance
1. Upon the filing of an application for a sign permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a
sign, the Department of Community and Economic Development shall determine whether
the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the Department of
Community and Economic Development shall promptly notify the applicant of any
deficiencies, and shall not process the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
2. The Department of Community and Economic Development shall examine the plans and
specifications, and the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this Title and all other applicable ordinances of the
Village.
3. The Department of Community and Economic Development shall issue the sign permit if
the sign complies with the requirements of this Title and all other ordinances of the Village,
and involves any sign other than new ground sign applications or applications for structural
ground sign changes.
4. New ground sign applications or applications for structural ground sign changes shall be
reviewed and approved by the Architectural Review Board prior to sign permit issuance
by the Department of Community and Economic Development. The Architectural Review
Board’s determination for code-compliant signs is final.
E. Approval of Electrified Signs
The application for an electrical permit for the erection of an Electrical Sign shall be submitted
to the Department of Community and Economic Development, who shall forward the
specifications regarding all wiring and connections to the Village’s Building Official. The
Building Official shall examine the plans and specifications to determine compliance with the
Electrical Code of the Village as a condition of granting the sign permit.
F. Permit to Alter Sign
Whenever a holder of a permit desires to enlarge or alter the Sign Area or Sign Face, he shall
be required to submit an application for a new permit and pay the full fee. There shall be no
refund or credit for fees previously paid, the existing permit will be canceled, and a new
permit issued. However, the repairing, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of a
sign shall not be deemed to be alterations.
G. Inspection
The Village’s Building Official may inspect, at such times as deemed appropriate, each sign
regulated by this Title. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is
secure or not secure, in need of repair or removal, or in conformance with the permit and the
provisions of this Title and Title 5, Chapter 4 of the Village Code, Building Codes.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 3
H. Sign Permit Void
If there is no activity of the work authorized under a sign permit within six (6) months after the
date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void. The building official is authorized to grant
one (1) or more extensions of time for additional periods not six (6) months each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
I. Revocation of Permit
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this section are licenses revocable
at any time by the Village Manager if he/she finds noncompliance with this Title which is not
corrected within twenty (20) days after written notice by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to the permittee, with a copy to the Village Manager. Upon the
termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee shall remove the sign within five (5)
days without cost or expense to the Village. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on
the part of the licensee to do so, the sign shall be considered a nuisance and the Village may
proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the licensee.
J. Sign Permit Fees
The fee to be charged for any permit issued for the erection or alteration of a sign shall be as
prescribed in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule as set forth in Chapter 15 of Title 1 of this
Code. Any not-for-profit organization may file an application with the Village for a waiver of
fees imposed by the Village as per section 5-3-2(A) of the Village Building Code.
K. Penalties
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
continues or occurs.
2. If a person installs, permits to be installed, or begins to install, any sign without first
securing a permit as required by this Title such installation shall cease until a sign permit
is issued. In addition, the fee for such a building permit shall be twice the sign permit fee
provided for by this Title.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 5
MASTER SIGN PLAN
SECTION:
12-5-1 MASTER SIGN PLAN
A. For new commercial development with multiple tenants, where multiple signs are proposed,
the applicant must submit a Master Sign Plan for review and approval by the Architectural
Review Board prior to final approval by the Village Board. The purpose of a Master Sign Plan
is to coordinate signs on multi-tenant buildings, and create a plan that establishes a building
or site’s overall sign design, which then provides direction to future tenants. A Master Sign
Plan must include, at a minimum, criteria and specifications for general appearance, location,
and approved construction materials.
B. Amendments to existing Areas of Special Sign Control, authorized by the Village Board prior
to June 22, 2009 (the adoption of this Title), shall be subject to regulations of Title 6, Chapter
14.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 6
ESTABLISHMENT OF SIGN DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12-6-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF SIGN DISTRICTS
A. Purpose
The establishment of the following sign districts is based upon the dominant uses found in
each district to ensure that signage is consistent with the unique development character
maintained in each district. Regardless of sign district, signage in the Village shall be of the
highest aesthetic standards and promote the Village as a unique destination with clear and
specific requirements.
B. Sign Districts
1. Commercial Sign District
The purpose of the Commercial Sign District is to ensure that signs located within the
downtown area and along major arterials provide an effective means of advertising, as
well as presenting a positive and coordinated appearance of the Village along the
roadway. Signs within the Commercial Sign District are primarily oriented toward the
automobile.
In the interest of creating and maintaining an identity and character for the District, for
each property or planned unit development located within the Commercial Sign District,
three (3) of the five (5) types of building Identification Signs shall be selected for all of the
buildings in the development: ground signs, wall signs, window signs, blade signs,
awning or canopy signs. In addition, directional signs are permitted in the Commercial
Sign District for each property or planned unit development.
In addition to the properties entirely located within the Commercial Sign District, those
properties with frontage along Milwaukee Avenue (bounded by Half Day Road and
Aptakisic Road), with facades oriented towards and directly visible from Milwaukee
Avenue, are permitted signage pursuant to the Commercial Sign District.
2. Office/Industrial Sign District
The purpose of the Office/Industrial Sign District is to ensure that signs located within the
Village’s Office/Industrial Districts provide an effective means of identifying the location
and services of the businesses in the District, as well as presenting a positive and
coordinated appearance of the Village along the roadway. Signs within the
Office/Industrial areas are primarily oriented toward the automobile.
In the interest of creating and maintaining an identity and character for the District, for
each property or planned unit development located within the Office/Industrial Sign
District, two (2) of the following types of building Identification Signs shall be selected for
all of the buildings: ground signs, or wall signs. In addition, directional signs are permitted
in the Office/Industrial Sign District for each property or planned unit development.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 2
In addition to the properties entirely located within the Office/Industrial Sign District, those
properties with frontage along Milwaukee Avenue (bounded by Half Day Road and
Aptakisic Road), with facades oriented towards and directly visible from Milwaukee
Avenue, are permitted signage pursuant to the Office/Industrial Sign District.
3. Residential Sign District
The purpose of the Residential Sign District is to ensure proper regulation of signs
common to residential areas for both permitted non-residential uses that need to identify
their location, and the variety of temporary and non-commercial signs residents may
desire, provided they are not displayed in a manner that is contrary to the predominant
residential character of the district.
In the interest of creating and maintaining an identity and character for the District, for
each non-residential property or planned unit development located within the Residential
Sign District, one (1) of following types of building Identification Signs shall be selected
for all of the buildings in the development: ground sign, or wall sign. In addition,
directional signs are permitted in the Residential Sign District for each non-residential
property or planned unit development.
C. Sign District Location
The locations of the Village of Lincolnshire’s Sign Districts are indicated on the following
page. Upon being annexed, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to assign
properties not depicted on the Sign District map described in this Title to the appropriate Sign
District based on the applicable zoning and the Sign District(s) to which the property is
contiguous.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 3
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 7
DIMENSION MEASUREMENT
SECTION:
12-7-1 DIMENSION MEASUREMENT
A. Computation of Sign Area
Sign area is calculated as described in this Section.
1. For signs on a background, the entire area of the background shall be calculated for sign
area, including any material or color forming the Sign Face or background used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. For
Monument Signs, Sign Area includes any supporting framework, bracing or structure.
For all other sign types, Sign Area does not include any supporting framework or bracing,
unless such framework, bracing or structure contains part of the message, Sign Face or
Copy.
2. For a double-post sign, two (2) separate area calculations are necessary, one (1) for the
sign area and one (1) for the total area of the structure including both sign posts. The
sign area includes the entire area of the sign, including any material or color forming the
sign face or background used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed. Sign area does not include any supporting framework or
bracing, unless such framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face. The area
of the sign structure is calculated by means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass
the extreme limits of the supporting posts, framework or bracing of the sign.
Illustration of sign area for 12-7-1-A-1,
Monument sign
Illustration of sign area for 12-7-1-A-1,
Non-monument sign
Illustration of double-post sign for 12-7-1-A-2
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 2
3. For signs consisting of freestanding letters or logos, the area of a sign face (“sign area”)
is calculated by means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of
the writing, representation, emblem or other display. Sign area does not include any
supporting framework or bracing, unless such framework or bracing contains part of the
message, Sign Face or Copy.
4. The sign area of free-form or sculptural (non-planar) signs is calculated as fifty percent
(50%) of the sum of the area of the four (4) vertical sides of the smallest cube that will
encompass the sign.
5. For a Double-Faced Sign, the sign area is computed as the area of one (1) face only. For
a Sign where the angle between two (2) sign faces is greater than 30 degrees (30?), the
sign area is computed as the sum of the areas of the two (2) faces.
Illustration of sign area for 12-7-1-A-4
Illustration of double-faced sign for 12-7-1-A-5
Illustration of sign area for 12-7-1-A-3
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 3
B. Measurement of Sign Height
Sign height is measured as described below. In terms of measuring sign height, the height of
the entire structure, including decorative elements, must be included.
1. Ground Signs: The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign,
which shall also include any berming or mounding at the base of the sign.
2. Signs attached to buildings: The vertical distance from the grade, as used to measure
Building Height in Title 6, of the building to which a sign is attached to the highest point of
the sign structure.
Monument Sign Double-Post Sign
Illustration of sign height for 12-7-1-B-1
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 8
SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN: GENERAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-8-1 SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN: GENERAL STANDARDS
The following standards apply to all signs, unless specifically noted otherwise.
A. Location
1. Only signs placed by federal, state and/or local government may be erected upon public
property, including but not limited to rights-of-way.
2. No sign mounted on the exterior of a building shall cover any windows, doors or any
architectural building features.
3. All portions of letters/logo shall be a minimum of three (3) feet from the building edge of
any face, roof line, ground line or floor/ceiling/roof/wall lines which separate individual
tenant spaces.
4. On a corner lot, no freestanding sign over two (2) feet tall may be placed within the
visibility triangle. The visibility triangle is an area with one (1) point at the intersection of
the intersecting streets’ centerlines, and the other two (2) points located on each street’s
centerline one-hundred (100) feet away from the intersection of said centerlines. The
clear sight area is illustrated below.
Illustration of vision triangle for 12-8-1-A-4
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 2
B. Sign Structure and Installation
Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains or wires
used for supports or braces shall be hidden from public view to the extent technically feasible.
C. Wind Pressure and Direct Load
All signs must be designed and constructed to receive dead loads and withstand a wind
speed of no less than ninety (90) miles per hour.
D. Illumination
Any sign illumination, including gooseneck reflectors must be designed, located, shielded and
directed to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon roadways and surrounding
properties, or to distract the operators of motor vehicle or pedestrians in the public right-ofway.
In the case of internally illuminated signs, the sign face must function as a filter for any
illumination.
1. Illuminated signs located within 120 feet of any dwelling and for which the sign face has a
direct line of sight toward windows of such dwelling shall be turned off and not operated
no later than one o’clock (1:00) A.M. or when the premises is no longer open to the
public, whichever is earlier, and may be turned and operated no earlier than when the
premises opens to the public or six o’clock (6:00) A.M., whichever is earlier.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for businesses which are open to the
public 24 hours each day, illuminated signs are not required to be turned off any time the
business remains open. For the purpose of this section D.1, the measurement shall be
from the face of the sign to the nearest façade of the nearest dwelling. Except as
provided in this paragraph, all other signs are not required to be turned off.
2. Lighting for signs shall be in harmony with the signs' and the project's design. If outside
lighting is used, it should be arranged so the light source is shielded from view.
3. The maximum lighting shall be one-half (½) footcandle, as measured at the property line
reflecting from a white background aimed at the face of the sign.
4. All illuminated signs shall be equipped with a safety shut-off switch.
E. Ground Sign Landscaping
All Ground Signs must be landscaped at the base of the sign in accordance with the
following:
1. For every one (1) square foot of gross sign area, there shall be provided a minimum of
two (2) square feet of landscape area.
2. The sign landscape plan must be drawn to scale, and shall show the dimensions of the
proposed landscape area. The sign landscape plan shall provide a species list which
includes the common and scientific name, size, quantity, and period of flowering (annuals
and perennials), for all proposed plant material.
3. The sign landscape plan will utilize a variety of plant types including, but not limited to;
deciduous and evergreen shrubs, annual and perennial plants and grasses, and ground
covers, to achieve both height variation and color interest throughout the four seasons.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 3
Ground signs must be landscaped with small shrubs a minimum of eighteen (18) inches
in height at planting. The remainder of the landscaped area must be planted with
perennials or other groundcover.
4. To provide diversity, at least two (2) different types of plant material must be installed,
excluding turf and annual flowers, provided that at least one plant type shall consist of
evergreen shrubs or groundcovers. If any portion of the required planting area is located
less than fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the street, evergreen shrubs or groundcovers
are not required, but at least three (3) different types of plant material must be installed, one
of which may be annual flowers.
5. In addition to the plantings described above, the sign landscape plan shall also include
soil protection such as, but not limited to, ground cover plants or organic hardwood
mulch. However, no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total landscape bed may
be void of plants at any one time.
6. All landscaping must be maintained in good condition, and free and clear of rubbish and
weeds.
7. Sign landscaping must conform to the requirements of this section within one (1) year
after the effective date of this Code.
F. Glass
Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass with a minimum thickness of onefourth
(1/4) inch.
G. Lettering
All letters, figures, characters or representations, in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in
conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign must be safely and securely
built or attached to the sign structure.
H. Items of Information
1. All signs must limit the number of items of information on any single sign face to no more
than two (2) items to prevent traffic hazards for passing motorists and to minimize the
cluttered appearance of signs.
2. Each descriptive or identifying word, set of words, icon, logo, symbol or image on a
sign shall be defined as an “item of information”. For example, but not in limitation
thereof, each of the following would be one (1) item of information: (a) the name of
the business, even if multiple words, or (b) the business logo. The street number
address of the business is not counted as an item of information. A company
catchphrase or motto may be included on a sign only if it is a part of the legal name
of a business. Products, services, telephone number, or a website address shall not
be permitted as part of the Copy on a permanent sign unless it is part of the legal
name of a business. The prohibition against displaying the names of products or
services shall not apply to Awning/Canopy Signs. Temporary signs shall be exempt
from any limitations on items of information.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 4
3. Changeable message signs where the items of information are changed manually or
electronically, only as expressly permitted by other sections of this Title, are counted as
one (1) item of information.
4. All signs on a zoning lot must be related to the resident or business located on such
zoning lot, with the exception of non-commercial or political signs.
5. Ground signs for commercial developments with multiple tenants that advertise the
names of the tenants located within the development are limited to one (1) item of
information per tenant. Ground signs for multi-tenant developments shall have a total limit
of four (4) items of information. The name of the multi-tenant development shall not be
included as an additional item of information.
6. Directory signs are exempt from the items of information limitation.
I. Maintenance
1. All signs shall be kept and maintained in a safe, neat and orderly condition and
appearance.
2. The owner and/or lessee of each sign shall maintain such sign to prevent corrosion or
deterioration caused by the weather, age or any other condition, and otherwise to keep
the same in a safe, neat and orderly condition and appearance.
J. Design Criteria
The purpose of these design criteria is to establish a checklist of those items relative to signs
that affect the aesthetics of Lincolnshire's environment. Pertinent to signs is the design of the
sign and its relation to buildings, structures, planting, street furniture and the distance to the
nearest public street.
The following criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather
to assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop
a satisfactory visual appearance within the Village, preserve property values and promote the
public health, safety and welfare.
1. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship
to buildings and surroundings.
2. Sign materials, size, color, lettering, location and arrangement shall be an integral part of
site and building design.
Illustration of number of items of information for 12-8-1-H-2
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 5
3. The colors and materials of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious.
4. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to
convey the sign's principle message, and shall be composed in proportion to the area of
the sign face. Text should be kept to permitted items of information.
5. Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains or
wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from public view to the extent
technically feasible.
K. Sign Face to be Smooth
Any sign, other advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning, as defined in this Title,
which is within ten (10) feet of a street, shall have no nails, tacks, wires or other hazardous
projections protruding therefrom.
L. Copy Area Appearance
The Copy on any sign must be legibly and professionally rendered on a suitable contrasting
background, which enhances the visibility of the Copy and is consistent with the design
criteria described herein.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11//19 Page 1
CHAPTER 9
SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN: SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE
SECTION:
12-9-1 SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN: SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE
The following signs are the only types of permanent signs permitted in the Village.
A. Ground Signs
Ground signs are permitted subject to the following:
1. Ground signs are permitted only in the districts listed in Tables 1 and 2, subject to the
regulations of Tables 1 and 2 and this Title.
2. One (1) ground sign is permitted per street frontage of a zoning lot with a maximum of
two (2) sign faces, except that any lot or parcel with a frontage of eight hundred (800) feet
or more may have two (2) ground signs located not less than four hundred (400) feet
apart. If a zoning lot has frontage on more than one (1) street then said lot will be allowed
one (1) ground sign per frontage, provided there is sufficient frontage to place the two (2)
signs no closer than one hundred (100) feet apart.
3. Ground signs must be setback a minimum distance from the edge of the street, as shown
in Table 1: Ground Signs – Monument and Table 2: Ground Signs – Double Post. All
signs must be located entirely on private property. No part of any ground sign may be
located within or over a street.
4. All ground signs shall be approved by the Department of Community and Economic
Development as being in compliance with Title 5, Chapter 4 of the Village Code and shall
be constructed of incombustible or approved combustible materials as defined in Section
12-3-1 Definitions.
5. Ground signs may be illuminated by backlit/reverse channel or channel lighting or by
external lighting fixtures such as goosenecks and flood lights, with lighting color restricted
to shades of white. Internally illuminated ground signs shall be designed so light is filtered
through the face of individually cut letter sets.
6. The sign structure and sign face of ground signs shall exhibit good scale and proportion;
and shall be an integral part of the site and building design by sharing architectural
features with the principal structure, including one or more building materials, colors, or
design elements.
7. The sign material of ground signs shall consist of materials such as wood, stone, brick,
copper, bronze, steel, brushed aluminum, iron, concrete, or similar. Synthetic plaster
shall be permitted if it is used as a primary exterior material on the approved principal
structure.
8. Letters and logo(s) are limited to no more than two (2) colors and must be individually
carved, etched, or raised and may consist of plastic, wood, or metal letters, with a nonreflective
surface, on a contrasting background. Multiple colors used on a logo or mark
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 2
registered with the United States Patent and Trademark Office are permitted.
Consistency must be provided between ground sign lettering and the accompanying wall
signs on the building.
9. Ground signs for multi-tenant buildings shall exhibit the same design characteristics;
including materials, color, fonts, lighting, tenant panels, etc, and shall be consistent in
design where there are multiple ground signs on a single property. Ground signs for
multi-tenant buildings are limited to four (4) tenants per sign face and a development
name. The development name must be larger than the name of individual tenants. In
addition, the development name may be distinguished from the individual tenants by font,
color or material.
10. The Copy Area shall be a minimum of 2 inches (2”) from the perimeter of each Sign Face
and shall not exceed a maximum of seventy percent (70%) of the Sign Area.
TABLE 1
GROUND SIGNS – MONUMENT
SIGN DISTRICT Maximum Sign
Area
Maximum Height
of Monument
Maximum Length
of Monument
Minimum
Setback
Commercial Sign
District
- Single Tenant
60 sq. ft. 6 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.
Commercial Sign
District
- Multi Tenant
75 sq. ft. 7.5 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.
Office/Industrial Sign
District 72 sq. ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 15 ft.
Residential Sign
District 30 sq. ft. 5 ft. 6 ft. 15 ft.
TABLE 2
GROUND SIGNS – DOUBLE POST
SIGN DISTRICT Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Structure
Area
Maximum
Structure
Height
Maximum
Structure
Length
Minimum
Setback
Commercial Sign
District 30 sq. ft. 72 sq. ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 15 ft.
Office/Industrial
Sign District 30 sq. ft. 72 sq. ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 15 ft.
Residential Sign
District 20 sq. ft. 44 sq. ft. 5.5 ft. 8 ft. 15 ft.
B. Wall Signs
Permanent wall signs are permitted in the Commercial Sign District, the Office/Industrial Sign
District and for non-residential uses in the Residential Sign District, subject to the following
standards.
1. Wall signs are permitted only in districts listed in Table 3, subject to the regulations of
Table 3 and this Title. The maximum Sign Area of a wall sign shall be ten percent (10%)
of the area of the wall to which it is attached, including doors and windows, or the
maximum wall sign area listed in Table 3, whichever is less.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 3
2. Wall signs are permitted for each building wall that faces a public street or parking lot, with
no more than one (1) wall sign permitted on any wall, unless permitted by Section 12-9-
1(B)(11) and Section 12-9-1(B)(13). Where there is a secondary customer entrance, an
additional wall sign is permitted but shall be limited to no more than sixteen (16) square feet
and shall only indicate the name of the business and the words “entrance,” “enter” or similar
term.
3. The total area of a side wall sign or signs shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the area
of the side façade of the principal building, including doors and windows, or twenty-five
(25) square feet, whichever is less. Any side wall sign must be located facing a side yard
of twelve (12) feet or more in width on the same lot.
4. Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building wall. Wall signs must be
affixed flat against the building wall and must not project more than six (6) inches from
the building wall. Illuminated wall signs shall not be permitted to extend more than twelve
(12) inches beyond the sign face or sign structure.
5. No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support structure, may project beyond the
ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. On buildings existing on the effective date
of this Title, July 1, 2009, a parapet wall must not be constructed for the sole purpose of
increasing the allowable height of a wall sign.
6. Wall signs shall not cover windows, doors or architectural features.
7. For buildings in commercial use, wall signs should be located on the sign frieze, or the
portion of the building immediately above the first floor windows and below the second
floor window sills in the case of a two-story building. For buildings in office use that are
larger than two-stories, wall signs may be located on the top floor of the building no more
than five (5) feet above the windows on the top floor and no portion of such wall sign shall
extend above the roof line.
8. Wall signs may be constructed of wood, metal or plastic.
9. Wall signs may have either channel lit letters or reverse channel lit letters. Sign bands
shall not be illuminated. In the Office/Industrial Sign District, channel lit letters are
permitted under the following conditions: a) the majority of gross floor area must be
devoted to office use; b) the wall sign shall only identify the office occupant; c) the
building height must be a minimum of forty (40) feet; and d) the wall sign shall be
mounted a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet above grade. Gooseneck reflectors are
permitted on all wall signs provided the reflectors concentrate the illumination upon the
sign face only.
10. On multi-tenant commercial buildings, all wall signs must be located at a generally
uniform height on the building wall in similar proportion to one another. Wall signs
identifying individual tenant spaces in multi-tenant structures shall be centered within
each leaseable space unless otherwise approved by the Department of Community and
Economic Development. Signs within a multi-tenant commercial development must be of
a natural or white finish, however a logo or mark registered with the United States Patent
and Trademark Office shall not be limited by color. Where a single principal building is
devoted to two (2) or more business or commercial uses, the operator of each such use
may install a wall sign. The maximum area of each such sign shall be determined by the
proportionate share of the front façade, including doors and windows, of the principal
building occupied by each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 4
permitted for the front wall of the building.
11. On multi-tenant office buildings, one wall sign shall be permitted per building frontage,
provided signs have a minimum separation from the common edge of each building
frontage equal to ten feet (10’) or one third (1/3) of the length of the respective frontage,
whichever is lesser.
12. On multi-tenant industrial buildings, individual tenant wall signs shall be permitted only for
those tenant spaces that have individual entrances facing a public street or a parking lot.
Such signs must be located over or next to a corresponding entrance at a uniform height
on the building wall in similar proportion to one another. Regardless of whether the first
wall sign in any multi-tenant building is installed over the entry or next to the entry, that
same placement type shall be required for any additional signs in the same building. The
maximum area of each such sign shall be determined by the proportionate share of the
front façade, including doors and windows of the principal building occupied by each
tenant space and applying such proportion to the total sign area permitted for the front
wall of the building. Any two adjoining wall signs placed next to entrances shall be
located no closer than 1 foot (1’) from each other. Any two adjoining wall signs placed
above entrances shall be located no closer than 5 feet (5’) from each other.
13. Within a single-tenant commercial development, signs utilizing carved, etched, or raised
letters are not limited by color. Metal letters and logos shall have a non-reflective metal
surface.
14. Wall signs shall be attached to a building façade at a height of not less than eight (8) feet
above any sidewalk, and may not extend over said thoroughfare and/or sidewalk.
15. Consistency must be provided between ground sign lettering design for individual tenants
and the corresponding lettering of wall signs on the façade of the building.
TABLE 3
WALL SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Maximum Sign Area Maximum
Sign Length
Maximum
Height of
Sign Face
Maximum
Height of
Letters
Maximum
Height of
Logo
Commercial Sign
District
10% of the area of the
wall to which the sign is
attached
18 ft. 3 ft. 24 in. 30 in.
Office/Industrial Sign
District
10% of the area of the
wall to which the sign is
attached
20 ft. 3 ft. 24 in. 30 in.
Residential Sign
District
- Non-residential Use
10% of the area of the
wall to which the sign is
attached,
or 24 sq. ft.,
whichever is less
8 ft. 2 ft. 12 in. 18 in.
C. Awnings and Canopies
Awnings and canopies that are considered an architectural feature of a building not used for
advertising are not considered a sign. Awnings and canopies containing an advertising
message shall be considered a sign, subject to review by the Architectural Review Board and
are subject to the following regulations:
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 5
1. Awnings and canopies are permitted signs in any non-residential sign district.
2. All awnings or canopies must maintain a minimum eight (8) foot clearance from grade.
Awnings and supports for canopies must not extend past a setback two (2) feet from the
curb line, or if there is no curb line the property line.
3. An advertising message on any individual awning or canopy is limited to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the surface of the vertical face of the awning or canopy on which it is
placed. The advertising may contain one (1) of the following items of information per
awning or canopy: the legal business name, logo, or a business product or service; all of
a consistent color and font size. No more than four (4) awning or canopy signs are
permitted on each frontage described in Paragraph 4 below.
4. Awning and canopy signs shall be permitted for each facade of a building or tenant space
that has been designed to include a customer entrance, display or decorative window, or
for which the architectural design treatment and details are the same as those used in the
primary facade of the building, subject to review by the Architectural Review Board.
5. Awning or canopy signs shall be centered on the awning or canopy to which they are
affixed and located parallel to the building facade upon which the awning or canopy is
attached.
6. Awnings and canopies shall be constructed out of incombustible, non-reflective material.
Back-lit awnings and canopies are prohibited.
7. Awnings and canopies must be securely attached to and supported by a building. All
frames and supports must be made of metal or other similar rigid material and meet the
requirements of Title 5, Chapter 4.
8. All awnings or canopies shall comply with the following design standards:
a. Awnings and canopies shall be compatible in material and construction to the style
and character of the building. The color of the awning or canopy shall be compatible
with the overall color scheme of the façade.
b. Awnings and canopies shall be generally aligned with others nearby in order to
maintain a sense of visual continuity.
Examples of awnings that meet the standards of 12-9-1-C
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 6
c. Awnings and canopies shall be tailored to the façade of the building and positioned
so that distinctive architectural features remain visible.
d. All awning and canopy signs located on an individual building shall be of a similar
size with no more than one (1) line of horizontal sign copy permitted per awning or
canopy sign. However, if the awning or canopy sign message is part of a business
registered name displayed over two lines, two lines shall be permitted.
e. Awning or canopy signs will not be permitted on the sloped or curved face of an
awning or canopy.
9. The following maximum dimensions are permitted for awning and canopy signs:
a. Letter Height: Twelve (12) inches.
b. Logo Height: Eighteen (18) inches.
c. Sign Face Height: Eighteen (18) inches.
d. Sign Length: Ten (10) feet.
e. Sign Surface Area: Ten (10) square feet.
D. Blade Signs
1. Location
Blade signs shall be erected perpendicular to the structure to which they are attached.
Signs erected at the corner of a building may be placed at a one-hundred-thirty-five
(135°) degree angle to the facade of the building used for customer entrance. No portion
of a blade sign shall be permitted to be less than ten (10) feet above the level of the
walkway or predominant grade over which it extends.
2. Size
Blade signs are permitted up to a maximum surface area of four (4) square feet for
tenants in multi-tenant buildings and twenty (20) square feet for free-standing
businesses.
3. Quantity
One (1) blade sign shall be permitted for each public entrance into an individual
tenant/business space. However, for tenant spaces or buildings with a corner building
entrance orientation, one (1) blade sign shall be permitted per building frontage.
4. Sign Design and Materials
a. All blade signs located on an individual building shall be of a similar size and
proportion.
b. A blade sign shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the wall/ceiling to which it
is attached.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 7
c. Blade signs shall be designed to relate to the architectural design of the building to
which they are attached.
d. Blade signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or similar materials, at the
recommendation of the Architectural Review Board and approval by the Village
Board.
E. Marquee Signs
Marquee signs shall be restricted to a position over the main entrance into a building.
1. Location
No marquee shall be erected in any residential district.
2. Construction Materials Required
All marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces thereof, shall be
constructed of incombustible or approved combustible materials, shall be designed by a
structural engineer and shall be approved by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as being in compliance with the Village Building Code. If
appropriate, an electrical inspection shall be made to determine if the marquee is in
compliance with all electrical provisions of this Code.
a. Drainage: The roof of all marquees shall be properly guttered and connected by
downspouts to a storm sewer or other drainage that is acceptable to the Department
of Community and Economic Development so that the water therefrom will not flow
onto public property.
b. Roofs: The roofs of all marquees shall be used for no other purpose than to form and
constitute a roof, and shall be constructed of incombustible materials.
c. Erection, Bracing, Anchorage and Supports: Marquees shall be supported solely by
the building to which they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be permitted
as support therefore.
d. Roof Live Load Requirements: The roof of any marquee shall be designed and
constructed to support a live load of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot.
e. Anchorage to Wood Structure Prohibited: No marquee shall be erected on any
building of wood frame construction.
3. Height above Sidewalk
No portion of a marquee shall be permitted to be less than ten (10) feet above the level of
walkway over which it extends.
a. Setback from Curb Line: No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond the
property line or over a street.
b. Width: No marquee shall be wider than the entrance or entrances of the building, plus
five (5) feet on each side thereof, unless approval is recommended from the
Architectural Review Board and approved by the Village Board.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 8
4. Signs Attached to Marquees
No temporary sign as defined elsewhere within this Title, shall be attached to, or hung
from a marquee except changeable copy affixed or illuminated directly upon the vertical
hanging fascias of the marquee. The Sign Face on any marquee shall be limited to fifty
percent (50%) of the gross surface area of the vertical hanging fascias of the marquee.
F. Vehicle Fueling Station Signs
For vehicle fueling stations, regardless of which sign district each is located in, all signs must
comply with the regulations contained in Paragraphs A (Ground Signs) or B (Wall Signs) above.
In addition, the following permanent signs shall be permitted:
1. Wall signs limited to those which identify the brand name or logo of the fueling station.
2. Additional signage may be integrated into ground signs for the purpose of indicating the
price of gasoline only, subject to the following criteria:
a. Manual Changeable Copy Sign: The sign area of such signs shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet, in surface area.
b. Electronic Message Sign:
i. Shall consist of L.E.D. panels that, at a minimum, utilize Multi-Segment L.E.D.
Technology (MST) digit configuration displays.
ii. Not more than two (2) gasoline products shall be displayed per sign face.
iii. Digits shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height and are limited to three (3) digit
numerical displays, not including a 9/10th fractional digit or decimal point.
iv. L.E.D. color shall be limited to one (1) color on black background and shall be the
same color for each L.E.D. display used.
v. The maximum brightness permitted shall not exceed 3,250 nits during the day and
500 nits at night. Additionally, each L.E.D. panel shall include a circuit board
equipped with light sensors per side to automatically adjust L.E.D. brightness
based on ambient light level.
Illustration of three digit numerical display for
12-9-1-F-2-biii,
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 9
vi. Shall be turned off at the close of daily business operating hours, unless such
vehicle fueling station operates 24 hours per day.
vii. All electronic images must remain static. No flashing, blinking, chasing, animations
or other attention seeking effects shall be permitted.
3. One (1) sign over each pump stand not to exceed eighteen (18) inches in height with
length governed by the length of the pump structure itself.
G. Directional Signs
Directional signs accessory to parking and driveway areas are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
1. One (1) sign may be erected to designate each entrance to or exit from a parking or
driveway area. One (1) additional directional sign is permitted for each intersection of
drive aisles within a site, to identify traffic routing, entrances and services, such as drivein
lanes. Each such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. Directional signs
may be double-faced signs and placed no higher than four (4) feet above grade.
2. Directional signs must identify use only by means of a logo, shape, or color with the
exception of words such as ENTRANCE or EXIT. Directional signs may also identify
walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar nature.
3. When more than one (1) directional sign is located on a single site or unified
development, each Directional Sign shall maintain a consistent sign design.
4. Directional signs must be located entirely on the property to which they pertain and must
be located so as not to interfere with the safe sight distances of vehicles traveling into,
out of, or throughout the site.
H. Menu Boards
One (1) menu board is permitted for each restaurant drive-through aisle where patrons may
order and receive food or beverages at a drive through service aisle, subject to the following
conditions:
1. Menu boards will be designed only as a monument sign or double post sign.
2. Menu boards will only be located adjacent to, and the sign face must aim toward, the
drive through service aisle.
3. Each menu board shall conform with the following regulations:
a. No more than forty (40) square feet in sign area,
b. No more than six (6) feet in height; and
c. No less than twenty (20) feet from any lot line.
4. Menu boards shall be landscaped at the base with evergreen plantings.
5. Menu boards may use an electronic sign, provided it complies with the following
standards:
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/19 Page 10
a. The menu board content may change only once per meal service (breakfast, lunch
and dinner).
b. Electronic signs shall be turned off when the drive-through service aisle is closed to
patrons.
c. Menu boards may not emit sound, except as part of the communication between the
business and the patron.
d. The content displayed on the electronic sign, and the transition between messages
or images, will not use any flashing, blinking or intermittent lights or other means not
providing constant illumination, including strobe lights, spotlights or floodlights.
e. The content displayed on the electronic sign will use static images and will not use
any animation.
f. The brightness level of the electronic sign will be limited to no more than 2,500 nits
during the day and no more than 500 nits at night, with the electronic sign equipped
with a light sensor programmed to automatically adjust the brightness based on
ambient light levels.
g. The copy area shall have a light-colored background with contrasting letters during
daytime display and a black background with contrasting letters during nighttime
display.
h. Pursuant to Section 12-8-1(H)(3), each electronic message sign shall be counted as
one item of information. The Village shall interpret and apply this rule so that the
electronic message portion of the menu board shall count as one item of information
only if all content of the electronic message pertains to the same subject matter at
any one time. Electronic messages containing more than one subject matter at the
same time shall be characterized as two items of information.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 10
ABANDONED OR UNSAFE SIGNS
SECTION:
12-10-1 ABANDONED OR UNSAFE SIGNS
A. Abandoned Signs
1. Any sign, whether existing on or erected after the effective date of this Title, which
advertises an event which has already occurred, a business no longer being conducted
or a product no longer being sold from the premises to which the sign relates, shall be
considered abandoned. Notwithstanding anything in the Title to the contrary, this
provision shall apply to both exempt and non-exempt signs.
2. In the event the owner or permittee fails to remove an abandoned sign within five (5)
days after written notice from the Department of Community and Economic Development,
each additional day the sign remains shall be considered a separate violation and a fine
shall be rendered for each additional day in accordance with the fee schedule in Chapter
15 of Title 1 of this Code. This is the joint and several obligation of the property owner
and permittee.
3. Any sign for which a permit is required and such permit has expired and is not renewed
within sixty (60) days after the expiration thereof shall be considered abandoned.
4. Abandoned signs shall be removed within three (3) business days of the sign being
deemed abandoned.
B. Unsafe Signs
When any sign becomes unsafe or insecure by reference to the regulations of Title 5,
Chapter 4, or becomes a nuisance, or has been constructed, or is being maintained in
violation of the provisions of this Title or other provisions of the Zoning Code, the owner
thereof or the person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice of the Department
of Community and Economic Development, within no more than fifteen (15) days, make such
sign conform to the provisions of this Title, or the applicable provision of the Village Code, or
remove it. The Village Manager or his designee may declare any sign which is an immediate
peril to persons or property a nuisance and cause it to be removed with or without prior
notice, at the owner's expense. Notice will then be sent to the owner of the sign within three
(3) days after its removal describing the owner’s rights to redeem the sign and prompt postdeprivation
hearing. The Village shall keep and store the removed sign for up to ninety (90)
days; provided the owner may redeem the sign by reimbursing the Village the full cost of its
removal and storage. Upon written petition of the owner of the sign, filed thirty (30) days and
no later than sixty (60) days after the removal of the sign, the Village Board may hold a
hearing to determine whether removal of the sign was warranted and, if appropriate, establish
conditions for reconstructing the removed sign, however in no case shall a sign permit be
granted for such reconstruction unless all provisions of this Ordinance and all other Village
ordinances are met.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/2019 Page 1
CHAPTER 11
PROHIBITED SIGNS
SECTION:
12-11-1 PROHIBITED SIGNS
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any of the following signs:
A. Signs which emit sounds including, but not limited to, voice, music, and similar methods of
advertising.
B. Any sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by flashing, blinking, or intermittent lights or
other means not providing constant illumination, including strobe lights, spotlights and
floodlights. A sign whereon the time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting
shall be deemed to be a flashing sign.
C. Moving signs. No sign or part of any sign shall move or give the illusion of movement in any
manner.
D. Feather signs, bunting, pennants and items of a similar nature, not including those permitted
in accordance with this Title.
E. Roof signs.
F. Signs of an obscene nature.
G. Signs which are not erected, placed or located by a governmental entity and that constitute a
traffic hazard, including those signs that:
1. Obstruct free and clear vision at any street, intersection, parking lot entrance or exit, or
driveway.
2. Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device because of its position, shape or color, including signs illuminated in red,
green or amber color to resemble a traffic signal.
3. Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in a manner that misleads, interferes with, or confuses traffic.
H. Signs which obstruct the use of driveways, doors, windows, fire escapes, or any such
opening intended to provide access or egress for any building or structure.
I. Off-premise or billboard signs, except as permitted in Section 12-3-1 as part of a Master Sign
Plan.
J. Any goods, wares, or merchandise suspended from, the exterior of any building or structure.
K. Ground signs, wall signs and directional signs erected in any residential district, except as
defined in this Title.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 11/11/2019 Page 2
L. Internally illuminated cabinet style ground and wall signs in which each letter is not
individually articulated.
M. Signs on fences, trees, or utility poles, which are not required by State or Federal law.
N. Signs consisting of a cluster or series of lights, except on such clocks and weather gauges as
may be authorized by other sections of this Title.
O. Home occupation signs.
P. Pole type signs, temporary or permanent.
Q. Attachments to any advertising structure or real estate sign.
R. Signs composed of exposed neon tubing and Electronic Signs, unless otherwise permitted by
Section 12-9-1(H)(5), 12-9-1(F)(2)(b) or a Planned Unit Development or Master Sign Plan.
S. Temporary wall signs.
T. Window signs for office buildings.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 12
EXEMPT SIGNS
SECTION:
12-12-1 EXEMPT SIGNS
The provisions and regulations of this Title shall not apply to the following signs; however, said
signs shall be subject to the provisions of Section 12-10-1.
A. Decorations and traditional lighting schemes displayed in connection with civic, patriotic or
religious holidays.
B. Directory signs no more than six (6) square feet in surface area.
C. Institutional Bulletin Board. One (1) bulletin board sign with a Sign Area not more than twelve
(12) square feet not to exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet for a place of worship, library,
school or other public building, provided such sign shall be located on the same zoning lot as
the principal building.
D. Miscellaneous information signs. The following types of miscellaneous information signs shall
be exempt from sign permit requirements:
1. Matter appearing on newspaper vending boxes.
2. Matter appearing on or adjacent to entry doors such as PUSH, PULL, OPEN and/or
CLOSED.
3. Matter appearing on display windows or doors denoting hours of operation, credit cards
accepted, and similar information.
4. Information pertaining to the operating instructions, name or logo of vending machines
and automatic teller machines. Such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of that
portion of the machine upon which the sign is placed and shall appear on only one (1) of
its faces.
E. Official federal, state or local government traffic, directional and informational signs and
notices issued by any court, person or officer in performance of a public duty or any other
sign that is required to be posted by any government agency, including but not limited to
signs described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the Illinois Vehicle Code
and the Illinois Highway Code.
F. Plaques or tablets, denoting names of buildings and date of erection cut into any masonry
surface.
G. Political signs are permitted only on private property and require consent of the property
owner. Signs may be double-sided and shall be limited to six (6) square feet in area per side
and a maximum height of four (4) feet.
H. Residential street and/or house signs not exceeding one and one-half (1½) square feet in
area, which are limited to address information.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 2
I. On property owned or leased by the owner of one or more vehicles, one sign placed on the
inside of only one of such owner’s or lessee’s vehicles shall be exempt from the regulations
of this Chapter.
J. Signs warning of construction, excavation or similar hazards so long as the hazard exists.
K. Signs placed by utilities to show the location of underground facilities.
L. The following alteration and maintenance operations are exempt from sign permit
requirements:
1. Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing changeable copy sign or
similar approved sign, whether illuminated or non-illuminated.
2. Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving structural changes or changes in the
electrical components of the sign.
3. Subject to the sign owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be
substituted, in whole or in part, for any commercial message or any other noncommercial
message provided that the sign structure or mounting device is permitted without
consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without
any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific
provision to the contrary within the Title. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speed, or favoring of any
particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This
provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, nor
does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted.
M. Warning sign. Warning signs, such as “no trespassing,” “beware of dog,” “no solicitation”,
etc., each not more than one (1) square foot in size and not to exceed two (2) per zoning lot.
N. Umbrella signs may display only the name and logo of the business operating on the
premises where the umbrella signs are located. Umbrella signs shall be of a color and
appearance that is harmonious with the color and appearance of the business to which they
belong.
O. Window signs for permanent display are permitted in the Commercial Sign District, subject to
the following standards.
1. Window signs affixed to, on the inside of, or within the interior of a window shall occupy
no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the surface of each window area and be
located at least six (6) inches from the edges of any individual window area. “Window
area” is counted as a continuous surface comprised of one (1) or more window panes until
divided by an architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element
that divides a window area. A “window pane” is each discrete piece of glass which is
mounted in its own frame.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 3
2. One (1) window sign shall be permitted for each facade of a building or tenant space that
faces a street which includes a display or decorative window, or parking lot where there is
a customer entrance or shared customer entrance for multi-tenant commercial
development.
3. Permanent window signs shall be designed to read as individual letters, with the
exception of logos, which may read as a single item. A company catchphrase or motto
may be included on a window sign only if it is a part of the legal name of a business.
Products, services, telephone number, or a website address shall not be permitted as
part of the Copy on a window sign unless it is part of the legal name of a business.
Individual letters and logos may be carved, etched or raised, and must be of a material
that is compatible with the architectural style of the building. Logos may also be
constructed of a hard synthetic material.
4. Permanent window signs are not limited by color, except for second floor window signs
which shall be limited to white, black, silver, or gold and only one color shall be
consistently used on the second floor windows per development.
5. No window sign shall be located above the second floor of a building or tenant space.
6. Window signs that are directly attached to the interior of a window surface shall have
professionally designed lettering or decals. All other window signs shall have a flexible or
hardened backing, of a minimum one-eighth (1/8) inch thickness. No sign shall be affixed
directly to the exterior of a window surface, unless otherwise permitted by Section 12-12-
1.
Illustration of window sign area 12-12-1-O-1
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 4
7. Any sign located within a building interior that is intended for viewing from the exterior of
such a building is considered a window sign.
8. No sign may be attached to, placed upon or printed on the exterior of a window or door of a
building.
P. Window Wrap. Window Wrap is permitted for a full window dimension for windows looking
into areas where the public is not invited or at blank walls.
Q. A-Frame Sign. A-Frame signs shall have a maximum height of three (3) feet and a maximum
sign area of six (6) square feet per sign face and may be double-sided. Signs shall be located
on the nearest sidewalk no further than ten (10) feet from a public entrance to the said business
within the Commercial Sign District. The sign must maintain a 3’ clearance on either side to
maintain accessible pedestrian access. The signs shall be professionally fabricated, be
constructed with wood or metal frames, and contain either a blackboard or poster inserts for the
advertising message, The sign shall only be displayed during normal business hours and must
be removed at the close of each business day. The sign shall not be displayed in conjunction
with other temporary signs for the same business.
R. Carry-Out Sign. Parking lot signs designating specific parking spaces for patrons receiving
carry-out or to-go orders from food establishments shall be displayed on a single rectangular
panel not to exceed 18” in length and 12” in width and shall be no taller than 6 feet (6’) in
height. No more than 2 carry-out signs shall be allowed per food establishment occupying
less than 5,000 square feet of building area and not more than 3 such signs shall be
permitted per food establishment occupying 5,000 square feet of building area or more. Food
service establishments which operate primarily on carry-out service shall be permitted up to 3
carry-out signs, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, based on the availability of
long-term parking for patrons of other occupants of the retail center, if any.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 1
CHAPTER 13
TEMPORARY SIGNS
SECTION:
12-13-1 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. General Regulations for All Temporary Signs
1. Except as otherwise permitted herein, signs shall be located entirely on property
owned or controlled by the owner of the sign and shall be placed a minimum of
five (5) feet from the property line.
2. Off-premise temporary signs for owners or tenants in unified commercial/mixeduse
developments granted a Planned Unit Development designation shall be
permitted, regardless of property ownership, so long as the sign is located within
the boundaries of the Planned Unit Development.
3. Up to twenty-four (24) off-premises institutional signs are permitted, provided
they are no larger than four (4) square feet in area, no taller than three (3) feet,
and are displayed for no longer than twelve (12) days each display period. The
display of an off-premises institutional sign shall not result in the diminution of the
annual display period otherwise permitted for temporary signs on a given
property.
4. No temporary sign may be illuminated.
5. No exposed framing shall be visible on temporary signs. All temporary signs
must remain in good condition during the display period. Throughout the display
period, corrective action must be taken immediately should there be any
problems with the appearance, condition or maintenance of the sign and/or
support hardware. Signs in disrepair are subject to removal by the Village.
6. No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, nor any sidewalk, or other
public thoroughfare or right of way a distance greater than four (4) inches from
the wall to which it is attached, and shall not be placed or project over any wall
opening capable of ingress and egress. No temporary sign shall be erected so as
to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor
shall any such sign be attached to any standpipe.
7. Temporary signs shall not be attached to fences, trees, utility poles or permanent
signs (except temporary signs may be attached to permanent signs when there is
a change of ownership or occupancy).
8. Temporary signs shall not be placed in a position that will obstruct or impair
vision or traffic or in any way or manner create a hazard or disturbance to the
health and welfare of the general public.
9. Multiple temporary signs located on the same frontage and the same zoning
parcel in the Commercial Sign District must be separated by 50 feet.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 2
10. All temporary signs shall be removed within five (5) business days following the
earlier to occur between (a) the expiration of the applicable display limitation, or
(b) the subject of the sign being complete, expired, terminated or abandoned.
11. Any violation of the conditions and restrictions of this section shall result in the
loss of forty-five (45) days from the annual maximum duration for the display of a
temporary sign. Such penalty shall roll over to the next calendar year if less than
45 days remain in the applicable limitation.
B. Regulations by Sign District
1. Temporary freestanding signs, other than banners, are permitted in compliance with the
regulations of Tables 1 and 2 of this Section. For signs in the Residential Sign District, the
regulations are divided between signs placed on private property in a yard which does or
does not have frontage on an arterial road, including Riverwoods Road and Half Day Road
(Illinois Route 22). For properties located in the Residential Sign District with frontage on an
arterial road, temporary freestanding signs may be placed on either the front yard or corner
side yard, but not both.
TABLE 1
TEMPORARY FREESTANDING NON-BANNER SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Area Height Duration
Residential
(arterial) 16 sq. ft. 6 ft. 91 Days per display period;
Minimum gap of 14 days
Residential
(non-arterial) 2 sq. ft. 4 ft. 91 Days per display period;
Minimum gap of 14 days
Commercial 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
120 days per year in total; Not
more than 6 separate times;
Minimum gap of 7 days
Office/Industrial 20 sq. ft. 6 ft. 91 days per year in total
TABLE 2
TEMPORARY FREESTANDING NON-BANNER SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Materials # of Signs per
Zoning Lot Permit?
Residential
(arterial)
Corrugated Plastic, Wood
or Metal 1 No
Residential
(non-arterial)
Corrugated Plastic, Wood
or Metal 1 No
Commercial Vinyl, Balloons, Corrugated
Plastic, Wood or Metal 2 per frontage Yes
Office/Industrial Vinyl, Balloons, Corrugated
Plastic, Wood or Metal 1 per frontage Yes
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 3
2. Temporary signs affixed to the inside of windows are permitted, without a permit, in compliance
with the regulations of Tables 3 and 4 of this Section.
TABLE 3
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Area Height Duration
Commercial
No greater than
25% of the
window area
Limited to
Only the
First Floor
91 days per year in total; Not
more than 6 separate times;
Minimum gap of 14 days
a “Window area” is defined as a continuous surface comprised of one (1) or more window panes until
divided by an architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element that divides a
window area. A “window pane” is each discrete piece of glass which is mounted in its own frame.
TABLE 4
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Placement Materials Copy Area
Commercial Interior Plastic Decals, Corrugated
Plastic, Wood or Metal
2” from the edge of any
window pane
3. Temporary signs attached to Village-owned poles and parking lot light poles are permitted to
be erected by the owner of such pole in compliance with the regulations of Tables 5 and 6 of
this Section.
TABLE 5
TEMPORARY POLE SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Area Height Duration
Commercial 8 sq. ft.
The face of the sign may not
exceed15 feet nor be lower
than 8 feet
91 days per year in total; Not
more than 6 separate times;
Minimum gap of 14 days
TABLE 6
TEMPORARY POLE SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Materials Copy Area Permit?
Commercial Plastic Canvas 2” from the edge of any
window pane Yes
4. Temporary freestanding banner signs are permitted in compliance with the regulations of
Tables 7 and 8 of this Section. Banners may not be affixed or attached to a wall.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 6/10/19 Page 4
TABLE 7
TEMPORARY FREESTANDING BANNER SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Area Height Duration
Residential
(arterial) 16 sq. ft. 6 ft. 14 Days per display period;
Minimum gap of 14 days
Residential
(non-arterial) 2 sq. ft. 4 ft. 14 Days per display period;
Minimum gap of 14 days
Commercial 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
91 days per year in total;
Not more than 14 days for
each display period;
Minimum gap of 14 days
Office/Industrial 20 sq. ft. 6 ft. 91 days per year in total
TABLE 8
TEMPORARY FREESTANDING BANNER SIGNS
SIGN DISTRICT Materials # of Signs per
Zoning Lot Permit?
Residential Vinyl 1 Yes
Commercial Vinyl 1 per frontage Yes
Office/Industrial Vinyl 1 per frontage Yes
5. The duration for the display period for temporary freestanding signs and temporary banner
signs shall not be cumulative, but shall be measured concurrently.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 14
CLASSIC SIGNS
SECTION:
12-14-1 CLASSIC SIGNS
A. Eligibility
1. Any person may apply for designation of an existing sign, as of the date of adoption of
this Code, as a classic sign. Classic signs are exempt from all requirements of this Title
except those regulating unsafe signs.
2. To qualify for designation as a classic sign, the sign must:
a. Be at least twenty-five (25) years old or an exact duplicate of an original sign where
the combined age of the exact duplicate and original sign is at least twenty-five (25)
years.
b. Possess unique physical design characteristics, such as size, configuration,
message, color, texture, etc.
c. Be of extraordinary significance to the Village, regardless of the use identified by the
sign.
B. Application
1. An application for classic sign status must include plans for sign maintenance, renovation
or possible reconstruction, acceptable to the Department of Community and Economic
Development.
2. Application for classic sign status must be made to the Department of Community and
Economic Development, or his/her designee, who schedules a public hearing of the
Architectural Review Board and presents his/her recommendations to the Architectural
Review Board at a public hearing.
3. The Architectural Review Board must make its recommendation to the Village Board. The
Village Board may approve or deny the application.
C. Maintenance
The owner of a classic sign must ensure that the sign is not structurally dangerous, a fire
hazard, an electrical shock hazard, or any other kind of hazard. If a classic sign is damaged
or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the sign may not be
replaced unless it is in conformance with all of the provisions of this Title.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 15
NONCONFORMING SIGNS
SECTION:
12-15-1 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Nonconforming signs may be maintained subject to the following regulations:
A. No nonconforming sign shall be expanded or altered to prolong the life of the sign.
B. No nonconforming sign structure shall be changed to another nonconforming sign structure
except that the copy, message or graphic of a nonconforming sign may be changed.
C. The nonstructural component of a multi-tenant sign on which the copy, message or graphic is
displayed, such as a plastic or metal panel or insert, may be replaced to accommodate a
change in tenant.
D. If the copy, message or graphic of a nonconforming sign cannot be changed without altering
a structural component, then such change is not permitted. Structural components include
any part of a sign attached directly to the ground or to a building or structure, any part of the
supporting structure of a sign without which the sign fails to maintain its structural integrity,
and any part of a sign’s electrical or lighting equipment.
E. No nonconforming sign shall be relocated in whole or in part unless, when relocated, it
conforms to all of the provisions of this Title.
F. If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement value, the sign may not be replaced unless it is in conformance with all of the
provisions of this Title.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 16
AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS
SECTION:
12-16-1 AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. All signs which become nonconforming by the provisions of this Title, shall be removed,
altered or repaired to conform to the provisions of this Title, within an amortization period of
ten (10) years after the effective date of the amendments to this Title, April 11, 2011.
B. Approved signs in properties formally designated as Areas of Special Sign Control are now
designated as Master Sign Plans and are exempt from amortization as of the effective date of
this Title, July 1, 2009.
C. Any existing Institutional Sign, Residential Development Sign located in the Residential Sign
District, or sign which has been granted a variance from the Village Sign Control prior to the
effective date of this Title, July 1, 2009, shall be exempt from amortization unless a change in
occupancy, tenant, and/or signage occurs that results in the removal of the existing sign.
Upon removal of any existing sign, the installation of any new sign shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title. Repair and maintenance may be permitted to ensure signage is
maintained in a safe, neat and orderly condition and appearance as per Section 12-8-1-I.
D. The owner of any sign made nonconforming by this Title may apply for a variance from the
amortization schedule as per Section 12-17-1, Sign Variance, upon showing that the
schedule does not permit a reasonable depreciation of the investment in the sign.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12
Village Code Title 12 - Page 1 Sign Control
CHAPTER 17
SIGN VARIANCE
SECTION:
12-17-1 SIGN VARIANCE
The Architectural Review Board shall hear and recommend requests for variances from the
Village Sign Code.
A. Determination of Need for a Variance
It shall be the duty of the Department of Community and Economic Development, after an
application for any sign permit, to determine and advise the applicant whether a sign variance
is required for the application to be eligible for the issuance of a sign permit.
B. Conditions for Granting a Variance
A variance may be granted only when special circumstances involving size, shape,
topography, location or surroundings affecting the property requiring a deviation from
conformance with the provisions of this Title would not cause substantial injury to the value of
other property in the vicinity or be detrimental to the public safety or welfare and the
neighborhood in which it is located.
C. Procedure
1. Prior to filing a formal application for a Sign Variance, the applicant shall request a
preliminary conference with the Community and Economic Development Department. At
the pre-application conference, the applicant shall present all items as required in
Paragraph E below.
2. An applicant for any sign permit that requires a variance shall apply to the Architectural
Review Board for such variance through the Department of Community and Economic
Development. The submittal shall include all items as required in Paragraph E below.
3. The Architectural Review Board shall schedule a public hearing for the request for a
variance. Notice of public hearings on requests for variances shall be given no more than
thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Such notice shall include the time and
place of the hearing, a general description of the contents of the request to be heard, and
the address or location of the property to which the request applies.
4. The applicant shall provide written notice to all persons to whom the current real estate
tax bills are sent, as shown on the records of the Vernon Township Assessor's office, for
all lots any part of which lie within two hundred and fifty feet (250') of the property line of
the lot for which an application has been filed.
a. Such written notice shall give the number, if any, assigned to the application, legal
description, and common address of the parcel or parcels involved in the application,
the place, and purpose (requested action) of the public hearing, and the date and
time thereof. All such notices must be sent no more than thirty (30) days nor less
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 2
than fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing. One (1) copy of the notice
must be filed with the Department of Community and Economic Development.
b. Notices shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The
applicant shall file a sworn affidavit containing a complete list of the names and last
known addresses of all property owners entitled to notice and served, and attach
thereto all United States Post Office receipts as documentation of compliance with
this provision. Such affidavit shall be filed with the Department of Community and
Economic Development not less than four (4) days in advance of the public hearing,
exclusive of the date of the hearing itself.
5. Based upon the findings of fact in Paragraph D below, the Architectural Review Board
shall render its recommendation within sixty (60) days of the conclusion of the hearing
and shall notify the applicant of its recommendation. The Architectural Review Board may
recommend approval, denial or approval with conditions the variance. The
recommendation of the Architectural Review Board shall be in writing, may be comprised
of one (1) or more parts, shall contain its findings of fact and be forwarded to the Village
Board for a final decision.
6. Upon receipt of the Architectural Review Board’s recommendation, the Village Board
shall consider the application for a variance and, within sixty (60) days following the first
regular meeting following its receipt of the recommendation, either approve, deny,
approve with conditions or refer the application back to the Architectural Review Board
for further deliberation consistent with directions from the Village Board. If the Village
Board fails to act on an Architectural Review Board recommendation within the time
prescribed herein, unless another time is mutually agreed to, the application shall be
deemed denied.
7. Upon the granting of a variance, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site
plans, renderings and materials upon which the variance was granted shall be turned
over to the Department of Community and Economic Development whose responsibility it
shall be to determine, upon completion, that there have been no deviations from the
approval. Such deviations shall constitute a violation of this Title, in which event the
Department of Community and Economic Development may stop work on the project in
the same manner as for a violation of the Village Code. Work may not be resumed until
such deviations are corrected.
8. It shall be the duty of the person to whom a variance has been granted to comply with the
requirements of the variance and to obtain such inspections as necessary to assure
compliance. The Village’s Building Official shall give notice to said person of any
deficiencies found to exist. Failure to correct any deficiencies within twenty (20) days
after receipt of notification of such deficiency shall constitute a violation of this Title.
D. Findings of Fact
After hearing and considering the evidence and the testimony presented, the Architectural
Review Board shall grant a variance if it finds that all of the following requirements are met:
1. The applicant's plans are substantially consistent with the design criteria of this Title.
2. The proposed exterior design features of the sign are suitable and compatible with the
character of neighboring buildings and structures existing or under construction and with
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 3
the character of the neighborhood and the applicable zoning district, and enhance the
environment of the Village.
3. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
4. The exterior design features of the sign will not cause a substantial depreciation in the
property values in the neighborhood.
5. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this Title and has not been created by any
persons presently having an interest in the property.
6. The conditions upon which an application for a variation is based are unique to the
property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other
property within the same zoning classification.
E. Submittal Requirements
A uniform filing fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk upon filing of each application for
variance as prescribed in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule as set forth in Chapter 15 of Title
1 of this Code. Additionally, all expenses incurred by the Village as a result of a request for a
variance to the requirements contained herein shall be fully paid by the applicant for said
variance.
At the time of the filing the application, the applicant shall provide copies as directed by the
Department of Community and Economic Development of the following documents depicting
exterior design features:
1. Fully dimensioned drawings which shall include the site plan, with the proposed location
of the sign, and elevation site plans with.
2. Landscaping and screening plans, when appropriate.
3. Architectural renderings, in color, and specifications/dimensions for signs.
4. A statement as to kind, color, type and texture of materials.
All documents shall be drawn to scale.
F. Validity and Extension of Time
1. No order granting a variance shall be valid for longer than one (1) year from the date the
approval was granted unless an application for building permit is filed with the Village’s
Building Official within such period or the use is commenced within such period.
2. The Village Board may grant one (1) extension of time not exceeding one (1) year, upon
written application made within the initial one (1) year period, without further notice or
hearing. The right to so extend said time shall not include the right to grant additional
relief by expanding the scope of the variance.
G. Amendments to Approved Variances
Amendments to a variance may be obtained by application in the same manner as provided
for an original variance.
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 1
CHAPTER 18
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
12-18-1 AMENDMENTS
A. Authority Declaration of Public Policy
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare, protecting the
aesthetic value of the Village, conserving the value of property throughout the community,
and lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways, the Village Board
may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations of this Title
or amend district boundary lines.
B. Initiation of Amendments
Text Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, Architectural Review Board, other
Village officials or any interested person or organization.
C. Application Procedure for Amendment
An application for an amendment to this Title shall be filed with the Department of Community
and Economic Development in such form and accompanied by such information as required
by the Department. The Department, upon receiving an application for amendment, shall
transmit the application along with all pertinent data, to the Architectural Review Board for
review, public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board.
D. Hearing on Application and Public Notice
The Architectural Review Board shall schedule a public hearing and give the applicable
notice for on any proposed amendment in accordance with procedures set forth for
Amendments in the Zoning Code.
E. Recommendation of the Architectural Review Board
The Architectural Review Board shall submit written recommendations to the Village Board at
the conclusion of the public hearing. The Architectural Review Board shall not recommend
the adoption of a proposed amendment if it finds that the adoption of such amendment is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
F. Action by the Village Board:
1. The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this Title until it shall
have received a written report and recommendation from the Architectural Review Board
on the proposed amendment.
2. The Village Board shall grant or deny any application for an amendment, or refer it back
to the Architectural Review Board for further consideration, provided that the Village
Board may only approve an application which has failed to receive a favorable
recommendation from the Architectural Review Board by the favorable vote of two-thirds
Village of Lincolnshire Title 12: Sign Control
Revised 4/27/15 Page 2
(2/3) of all elected members of the Corporate Authorities. The Village Board may deny
any application by a simple majority vote.
G. Effect of Denial of Amendment
No application for a text amendment which has been denied by the Village Board shall be
resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the denial.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 1
TITLE: 13
CHAPTER 1: Tree Preservation
Sections:
13-1-1: Purpose; Findings
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: Tree Protection
13-1-4: General Requirements
13-1-5: Application Procedure
13-1-6: Tree Removal
13-1-7: Cash Deposits
13-1-8: Tree Replacement
13-1-9: Conservancy Areas
13-1-10: Appeals
13-1-11: Penalties
13-1-12: Enforcement
13-1-13: Civil Remedies
13-1-14: Tree Planting Credit
13-1-15: Appendices
13-1-1: Purpose; Findings:
The purpose of this Chapter is to preserve, protect, replace and properly maintain trees
within the Village and protect the public from trees which pose a threat or danger because
A. Trees are an important public resource.
B. Trees preserve and enhance the Village's physical and aesthetic environment, especially
its natural and unique atmosphere;
C. Trees enhance the air quality by absorbing carbon dioxide, filter out air pollutants and
providing oxygen;
D. Trees reduce topsoil erosion by the holding effect of their roots;
E. Trees reduce storm water runoff and replenish ground water supplies;
F. Trees provide a buffer and screen against noise pollution;
G. Trees reduce energy consumption by acting as a wind break and producing shade;
H. Trees preserve and enhance nesting areas for birds and other wildlife which, in turn,
assist in the control of insects;
I. Trees protect and enhance property values;
J. Trees protect and enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the Village.
13-1-2: Definitions:
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 2
6" GROUPING OF TREES Any grouping of two or more adjacent Appendix A
trees, growing in close proximity that have a combined
DBH of 6" or greater. Every six inches of such a
grouping shall be the equivalent of a 6" tree.
APPENDIX A TREE
ARBORIST
A desirable and/or significant species of tree which is
listed on Appendix “A” to this Chapter 1.
An individual trained and experienced in the profession
of forestry or other similarly degreed and/or licensed
tree professional.
CONIFEROUS TREE A tree mostly needle-leaved or scale-leaved, typically
evergreen and/or cone-bearing such as pines, spruces,
and firs.
CALIPER INCH(ES) Units used to describe a tree’s diameter as measured
by calipers or a diameter tape.
CONSERVANCY AREA Any area designated by the Village, state agency, or by
Village approved subdivision or restriction, to be kept in
a particular natural state or for special environmental
preservation or control.
DECIDUOUS TREE A deciduous tree is one that loses most or all of its
leaves for part of the year. Deciduous trees are also
considered to be broad-leaf or hardwood trees.
DEVELOPMENT
Any proposed change in the use or character of land,
including, but not limited to, the replacement of any
structure or site improvements. When appropriate to
the context, development may refer to any conduct
which requires the receipt of a building, or site work
permit.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 3
DIAMETER BREAST
HEIGHT(DBH)
The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in
caliper inches at a point 4.5 feet above ground line.
This point of measurement is used for established and
mature trees and is referred to as DBH. All references
to diameter size shall be to the DBH.
EVERGREEN TREE A tree that retains most of its leaves for most of the
year.
HAZARD
HERITAGE TREE
IMPACTED TREE
A declining tree which, as determined by the Village,
would cause damage or injury to a target such as a
structure or person.
Large mature trees requiring special consideration
including all trees in the Genus Quercus (oak), Carya
(hickory), or Juglans (walnut) species which have a
DBH of twenty inches (20”) or greater.
A tree which has been negatively affected by proximity
to development, vehicle or equipment traffic, material
storage, excavation or other damages as determined
by the Village
INVASIVE Non-native species of tree, shrub or plant which
reproduce rapidly and threaten to cause economic or
environmental harm to native vegetation and/or human
health.
MULTI-STEM TREE A single tree made up of three or more main stems
originating below the height used for measuring DBH.
NATURAL AMENITY EXCEPTION A landscape and preservation plan intended as a
substitute for the replacement requirements of this
Chapter.
NON-APPENDIX “A” TREE A tree not on the appendix “A” list, with a single or
double trunk at ground level to near DBH.
NUISANCE A tree, shrub or plant material which is dead, dying,
diseased, or otherwise no longer viable and poses a
threat to persons, property, or other viable trees. Also
includes invasives and certain species tree, shrub or
plant harboring pests or species undesirable to native
landscapes; e.g. Partially fallen tree, Acer negundo
(box elder), Maclura pomifera (Osage orange).
OPEN SPACE AREA An open space on the same lot or parcel with a
building, that, with the exception of trees and other
vegetation, is to be unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward.
PARCEL A lot of record, zoning lot or any grouping of adjacent
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 4
lots under single ownership, serving a principal
structure or use.
REAR YARD Rear yard as used in this Chapter 1 shall have that
meaning ascribed to it in the Lincolnshire Zoning Code.
(Title 6)
SIGNIFICANT Trees which are desirable for the landscape, including
Appendix “A”, non- Appendix “A”, and native species
which are greater than 10” DBH, viable and in good
form.
SITE That parcel of land for which a permit for landscaping
or tree removal is sought.
TRANSPLANTING The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
TREE
TREE BANK
Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root
system, growing upon the earth usually with one trunk,
or a multi-stemmed trunk system, supporting a
definitely formed crown. For regulatory purposes of
this Chapter 1, the plant commonly referred to as
“buckthorn” shall not be considered as a tree.
An account containing defaulted funds as a result of the
inability to meet tree accountability requirements.
These funds are to be utilized by the Village for
planting and re-planting of trees and hazardous or
nuisance tree removals throughout the community.
TREE REMOVAL The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of
any tree.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 5
TREE SURVEY A document which identifies, by common name and/or
scientific name, certain species of trees of a specified
DBH within a particular site. The survey shall list, as
required by the Village, all existing and proposed trees
and shall specifically state whether each tree is
proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced,
preserved at its present location, or introduced into the
development from an off-site source. The Village may
provide that the tree survey exclude those portions of
the site which it determines will not be affected by the
development activity. Any tree survey required by this
Chapter 1 must be dated within thirty-six months of the
tree removal permit application.
UNATTACHED AMENITY Any swimming pool, gazebo, garage, patio, play
apparatus, basketball court, tennis court, tent or
similar structure or installation which is not attached to
the principal building on the lot.
VIABLE A tree, which in the judgment of the Village is capable
of sustaining its own life processes, unaided by man,
for a reasonable period of time.
13-1-3: Tree Protection
Tree protection may be required wherever development activity will occur within 25’ of the
base of any tree.
A. Tree protection fencing shall be six feet (6’) high chain-link, with steel posts driven into
the ground at not more than ten foot (10’) intervals. {see Figure 1 below} Fencing shall
be placed a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of any tree to be protected.
B. Tree protection shall remain in place, upright, and in good condition for the duration of
the development activity. No machinery, equipment, or material storage is permitted
outside of paved areas once tree protection is removed.
C. Any tree not separated from development activity by an approved tree protection fence
at least 15’ from the base of the tree shall be considered “impacted”, and subject to a
cash deposit as detailed in Section 7 of this chapter.
D. Root zone protection shall consist of a minimum six inch (6”) thickness of wood mulch
and two layers of ¾” plywood. Root zone protection shall extend to the limits of
development activity or a minimum of fifteen feet (15’) from the base of the tree.
D. Trees which the Village designates as an impacted tree may require mitigation by a
Certified Arborist including, but not limited to; Vertical Mulching (to reduce soil
compaction), Mycorrhizal Fungal and Rhizosphere Bacterial Inoculation (to promote
root re-growth and improved nutrient uptake efficiency) or growth regulator
(Cambistat™) treatment, as directed by the Village.
Figure 1
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 6
Example of construction fence separating “Construction Zone” from protected tree
13-1-4: General Requirements
A. Permit Required: Approval from the Village is required for the removal of any tree six
inches (6”) DBH or greater, or any 6” grouping of trees and prior to the start of any
improvements which involve excavation, trenching, or placement of additional soil
and/or hardscape materials within the root zone of trees, or which affect drainage
patterns on the premises or adjacent properties.
B. Approval: Approval from the Village shall consist of a written order, permit, or other
documentation signed by an authorized representative of the Village. In the event of an
emergency, verbal authorization from the Village may be given, with written approval
and/or documentation provided after the fact.
C. Valuation: Each tree in the Village shall be assigned a replacement value in accordance
with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The Village shall, from time to time, evaluate the
actual cost of purchasing and planting replacement trees and modify the replacement
value if necessary.
D. Tree Inventory: When the number of trees included on a tree survey cannot be clearly
labeled, a detailed table of all trees shall be provided indicating tree tag number, size,
species, condition and removal/protection status. Coordinating tree tags shall be
weather resistant metallic, and securely affixed to trees at approximately eye level.
E. Equivalent Value: Differing species and sizes of trees shall have a valuation based upon
the Appendix “A” tree replacement fee.
1. Appendix “A” trees are calculated at 100% value.
2. Heritage Trees are calculated at 200% value.
3. Non-appendix “A” trees are valued at 1/3, or 33.3% of appendix “A” values.
4. Multi-stem and coniferous trees are valued according to the tree conversion
chart, Appendix “C” of this Chapter.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 7
13-1-5: Application Procedure
A. Application Submission: An applicant seeking a tree removal permit shall submit to the
Village three (3) copies of a legible plan (a “Tree Preservation Plan”) indicating the
following information for the entire site:
1. Property address.
2. Scale: 1 inch equals 20 feet or 1 inch equals 30 feet depending on the lot
size.
3. Plan Title: Tree Preservation Plan or Tree Preservation and Grading Plan.
4. Property line boundaries and easements.
5. Front, side and rear yard setbacks.
6. Existing and proposed driveways, walkways, patios and other impervious
surfaces/structures.
7. Existing and proposed building footprint.
8. Existing and proposed grades and drainage ways.
9. If required, a Tree Inventory as outlined previously in this chapter.
10. Location, size and species of all trees on abutting properties and/or rightsof-
way within fifteen (15) feet of development activity.
11. All trees to be removed marked with an “X” or other notation.
12. Location of chain link tree protection fencing.
13. Location of silt fencing (required to run parallel to the tree protection
fencing on the development activity side).
14. Location of all new utility lines (gas, electric, water, cable, phone, etc.).
15. Location of all utility-related excavation pits.
16. Location and description of any additional Tree Preservation requirements
(root pruning, plywood access routes, mulching, etc.).
17. Location of equipment/supply storage and staging.
18. Identification of uses on adjacent properties.
19. Existing and proposed elevations with contour lines at one foot (1')
intervals.
EXCEPTION: Removal of dead trees or invasive species may be approved at the Village’s
discretion with a sketch of the general location in lieu of the details above.
B. Application Review: The Village shall review the application. This review may include an
inspection of the site and referral of the application for recommendation to other
appropriate administrative departments or agencies. The Village shall render a decision
on the application within fifteen (15) business days of its receipt of a properly completed
application.
13-1-6: Tree Removal (Section suspended for Non-Residentially
Zoned Properties from 01/01/19 – 12/31/20 per Ordinance #18-
3787-218, dated 11/12/2018)
The Village may allow for the removal of a tree based on one or more of the following
criteria:
A. Tree is determined by the Village to be dead, dying, diseased, or otherwise non-viable.
Tree replacement is not required unless part of a required landscape plan, e.g.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 8
Commercial building site, PUD, or subdivision.
B. Tree is determined by the Village to be a hazard or a nuisance. This includes a tree
which creates an unsafe vision clearance or a tree interfering with utility services. Tree
replacement is not required unless the hazardous condition was created or permitted by
the owner of the Parcel.
1. Falling limbs due to improper pruning, care, or maintenance do not
necessarily constitute a hazardous condition.
C. Tree removal is determined by the Village to constitute good forestry management.
Thinning of an overcrowded canopy, reduction of less significant species, or removal to
allow more significant species to thrive, are all examples of good forestry management.
Tree replacement is not required.
D. Tree removal related to development. Property development and improvements shall be
designed in a manner which maintains existing significant trees wherever possible. The
Village shall encourage roads, utilities, driveways, principle structures, and detached
amenities to be placed as to reduce impact to viable mature trees. Development-related
tree removals may be permitted only in compliance with the following conditions:
1. Cash deposits shall be provided to the Village in accordance with the
calculations provided in this chapter.
2. Tree replacement plan shall be provided to the Village for review and
approval. Replacement plan shall indicate the proposed location, species, and
size of all proposed and existing trees. Replacement plan may be
superimposed over approved tree preservation plan.
3. Unattached amenities – No tree may be removed for the purpose of installing
or erecting an unattached amenity if the total area of existing and proposed
unattached amenities exceeds 10% of the entire rear yard. No Heritage Tree
may be removed for the purpose of installing or erecting an unattached
amenity.
4. Rear Yard – A single open space area in the rear yard may be created for
each Single Family Residential home site, provided the area to be cleared
does not exceed 10% of the entire rear yard. No Heritage Tree may be
removed solely for creation of an open space area.
5. Non-Single Family Residential sites with an approved landscape plan may be
required to revise their entire plan if the proposed development causes tree
removal exceeding 25% of the existing trees.
6. Any proposed removal of four or more Heritage Trees from a single parcel will
require prior approval from the Village.
13-1-7: Cash Deposits (Section suspended until 12/31/20 per Ordinance
#18-3787-215, dated 11/12/18)
Cash deposits, when required by this Code, shall be provided to the Village prior to issuance
of any tree removal. Deposit will be held in a Village account and accounted for until such
time as it eligible for return or forfeiture.
A. Cash deposits for tree removals shall be calculated at 100% of Equivalent Value.
1. Cash deposits shall be held until replacement trees are planted and
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 9
subsequently inspected and approved by the Village.
2. Replacement trees shall be installed, inspected, and approved prior to
issuance of Final Certificate of Occupancy, or expiration of building permit.
B. Cash deposits for impacted trees shall be calculated at 50% of Equivalent Value.
1. Cash deposits shall be held for a period of five years after completion of
associated construction or date of impact.
2. Village shall inspect impacted trees at the end of the five year period, and
return deposit if it is determined by Staff the tree remains viable.
3. If at any time during the five year period the tree becomes non-viable, as
determined by the Village, for reasons caused by the development impact,
the remaining 50% of the Equivalent Value shall be deposited with the Village
within 30 days of notification from the Village.
4. If at any time during the five year period the subject property is sold, the
remaining 50% of the Equivalent Value shall be deposited with the Village
prior to sale of the property transfer stamp.
C. Deposits which are determined to be ineligible for return after the prescribed period of
time will be forfeited to the Village’s Tree Bank.
D. Village Use of Tree Bank Funds: When the total amount of required replacements cannot
be installed, or are not installed and approved before the Code prescribed completion
date, Equivalent Value of trees not planted will be forfeited to the Village Tree Bank. The
Village may use the forfeited funds to perform unrelated removals and replacements
throughout the community.
E. Cash deposits for removals requiring replacement on non-Single Family Residential sites
shall be calculated at the equivalent value of the proposed replacement.
13-1-8: Tree Replacement (Section suspended for Non-Residentially
Zoned Properties from 1/1/19 – 12/31/20 per Ordinance
#18-3787-215, dated 11/12/2018)
Where required, replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with this section.
A. Trees removed from Single Family Residential (SFR) home sites shall be replaced on an
inch-per-inch DBH basis, as adjusted for Equivalent Value.
B. Trees removed from non-SFR sites (multi-family, commercial, subdivisions, etc.) shall be
replaced on a tree-per-tree basis, as adjusted for Equivalent Value.
C. When appendix “A” trees are removed, they shall be replaced with appendix “A” trees,
unless otherwise specified in the Code.
D. When non-appendix “A” trees are removed, they may be replaced with appendix “A” or
non-appendix “A” trees.
1. Equivalent value shall be used to determine required replacements when
inch-per-inch replacement is required.
E. Minimum size for single-stem replacement trees is 2.5” (two and one-half inches) DBH.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 10
Multi-stem and coniferous replacements shall be a minimum 8’ (eight feet) in height
from top of root ball to highest point of tree.
F. Replacement trees shall be suitable for the proposed location and approved by the
Village.
1. Proposed planting locations shall allow for trees to survive and thrive.
Considerations shall be made regarding sun exposure, overhead wires,
underground utilities, proximity to existing buildings and roadways, and soil
condition.
2. The Village may request the proposed replacement trees be evaluated by a
Certified Arborist, prior to approval.
G. Diversity: Due to devastating losses to Elm and Ash tree populations, the Village strives
to provide a diverse tree canopy which is resistant to pests, pathogens, and natural
disaster. The Village may require substitution of proposed replacement trees in order to
achieve desired diversity of species, genus, or family.
H. Tree replacement plan shall be provided to the Village for review and approval.
Replacement plan shall indicate the proposed location, species, and size of all proposed
and existing trees.
I. Tree replacements on property other than Single Family Residential lots shall comply
with Title 13, Chapter 2 of this Code.
J. Off-site replacements: The Village may allow for replacement trees to be installed
outside of the Parcel from which trees were removed under specific conditions:
1. Off-site location is owned by the same party from which trees were removed.
2. Off-site location is part of a development or subdivision inclusive of the Parcel
from which trees were removed.
3. Off-site location is Village owned property and replacement plan is approved by
Village Manager or Public Works Director.
13-1-9: Conservancy Areas
If a Conservancy Area is, or may be, affected by any development, as determined by the
Village, the following shall apply:
A. Restoration of designated “Conservancy Areas” damaged, whether during development
or after occupancy, shall comply with the minimum requirements outlined in Appendix
“B” of this Chapter.
B. Deposit: A cash deposit (in addition to any Tree Removal cash deposit) is required for
every one thousand (1000) square feet, or part thereof, of Conservancy Area impacted
by development, as defined in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule Chapter 15 Title 1 of
the Village Code.
C. Purpose of Deposit: The purpose of the deposit is to pay for:
a. A guarantee of the restoration of Conservancy Areas damaged directly or
indirectly as a result of development, in accordance with the “Conservancy Area
Restoration Requirements” contained in Appendix B of this Chapter.
b. Any maintenance made necessary as a result of development or restoration,
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 11
including but not limited to the removal of dead trees or preventative measures
such as root pruning or crown reduction of existing trees.
c. Any expenses incurred by the Village, as a result of the development or
restoration, in administering or enforcing the provisions of this Code.
F. Refunding of Deposit: Any remaining amount in the cash deposit will be refunded one
year after the Certificate of Occupancy is issued or one year after the public
improvements are accepted by the Village Board in cases where a Certificate of
Occupancy is not to be issued as outlined in Section 13-1-3-D.
G. Maintenance Restrictions: No sodding, or grading, either excavation or filling shall take
place within a designated conservancy area. Fences, building or structures, either
permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within a conservancy area. It shall be
unlawful for any persons to store yard waste in a conservancy area, including but not
limited to grass clippings, compost piles, landscape brush or firewood. The removal or
addition of any trees, brush or plant materials within a designated conservancy is
prohibited unless prior approval is granted by the Village. Buckthorn is permitted to be
removed from a conservancy area on a case by case basis at the discretion of Village
Staff.
13-1-10: Appeals
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village staff in the enforcement of any terms or
provisions of this Chapter may, within ten (10) days after the date of the decision, appeal to
the Mayor and Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk.
The notice shall set forth concisely the decision and the reasons or grounds for the appeal.
Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be provided by the Village Clerk to all affected
parties. The Board may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision. The decision of the Board
shall be final, and no petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be available. The rules
of evidence shall not apply to an appeal hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in a
manner which affords reasonable due process.
13-1-11: Penalties
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be assessed a fine as
prescribed in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this
Code. Each tree cut down, destroyed, damaged, removed or moved in violation of this
Chapter shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to these penalties, if a tree is
removed in violation of this Chapter 1, all replacement requirements of this Chapter shall be
applied.
In lieu of, or in addition to, the payment of fines, the Village may require that violators of
this Chapter take actions such as, but not limited to, soil aeration, vertical mulching,
pruning, fertilizing, grade alteration, and/or tree replacement, to reduce and/or minimize
tree damage.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 12
13-1-12: Enforcement
A. Enforcement: Right of Entry of Village Officers
To carry out the purposes of this Chapter and to implement its enforcement, the Village
is authorized and empowered to enter upon any parcel in the Village at all reasonable
hours to inspect any tree or wood and to remove specimens from any such tree to
determine their condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a Village
Officer carrying out the duties authorized in this Section.
B. Duty of Owner to Abate Nuisance or Hazard
If it is determined that there exists a public nuisance or hazard as declared in this
Chapter, the Village may serve or cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of
parcel on which such nuisance or hazard is located, a written notice identifying the
nuisance or hazard and requiring the owner or occupant to comply with the provisions of
this Section. If the person upon whom such notice is served, fails, neglects or refuses to
remove and dispose of the tree or dead wood within thirty (30) days after service of
such notice, the Village may proceed to remove and dispose of such nuisance tree or
dead wood.
C. Service of Notice to Owner or Occupant
Service of notice provided for in this Chapter, shall be affected by personal service or by
certified mail addressed to: (i) the occupant, or (ii) the person to whom the tax bill was
sent for the general taxes for the last preceding year on parcel on which the nuisance is
located.
D. Village Abatement and Assessment of Costs
Any costs incurred by the Village in the abatement of a public nuisance or hazard as
declared in this Chapter shall be assessed against the record owner of the land involved
and the Village shall place a lien upon such property for those costs in the manner
provided by law (65 ILCS 5/11-20-15).
13-1-13: Civil Remedies
In addition to any other remedies provided by this Chapter the Village shall have the
following judicial remedies available for violations of this Chapter or any permit condition
promulgated under this Chapter:
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 13
A. The Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish
liability and to recover damages for any injury caused by the removal of trees in
contravention of the terms of this Chapter.
B. The Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek
injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this Chapter to enjoin any violation, and to
seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable injury to the trees or properties
encompassed by the terms of this Chapter.
13-1-14: Tree Planting Credit
A. The Village will award tree credits to property owners who proactively plant
trees on their property. This tree credit may be used to off-set future tree
replacements when trees are removed on the same parcel. Trees planted for
credit will only be credited for future replacements and only those trees
appropriately recorded by the Village may be used for credit.
Following is the tree credit criteria:
1. Trees shall have a replacement value equal to the Equivalent Value
described in Section 13-1-4-E.
2. Trees to be planted on the property must be a minimum of 2.5” in DBH or
if clump or coniferous variety shall be a minimum planting height of 8 feet
at the time of planting.
3. Tree species must be selected for appropriate locations to support their
growth and development.
4. Trees planted for credit shall be verified by the Village.
5. Credit will only be given for tree planting if:
a. The tree is tagged and verified on the property within the year it was
planted.
b. The tree is the minimum required size at time of verification.
c. The tree species is appropriate for its location.
d. The tree is of good form and health at the time of tree removal for
which the owner applies for replacement credit.
6. Village Staff shall tag the tree and record the date, tree planting location
and tree number on the property survey. A property tree credit record
shall be maintained in the property file for future reference.
7. When a tree replacement is required, the property owner shall request
that the Village verify credit plantings from the property file and on the
property.
8. Trees, planted for credit, must be in good form and health at the time of
replacement credit. Trees in poor condition or form will not be credited.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 14
9. The Village shall field verify for growth and the size. The DBH at time of
replacement shall be the credit applied.
10. A tree credit will only be given once for each individual tree planted
regardless of its size. For example: Two Appendix A credit trees are
planted at 3” DBH. Within a year’s time the trees are 5” in DBH each.
That same year the property owner wishes to remove another Appendix A
tree that is 8” in DBH. The two credit trees are valued at 10” and the tree
to be removed is valued at 8”. The two credit trees will be used as
replacement for the 8” removal. No further credit will be given for the two
credit trees.
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 15
13-1-15: Appendices
Appendix A: Significant Trees of Lincolnshire
Appendix B: Conservancy Area Restoration Requirements
Appendix C: Tree Conversion Chart
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 16
APPENDIX “A”
SIGNIFICANT TREES OF LINCOLNSHIRE
Common Name Scientific Name
Black Maple Acer nigrum
Red Maple Acer rubrum
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum
Ohio Buckeye Aesculus glabra
Common Horsechestnut Aesculus hippocastanum
Red Buckeye Aesculus pavia
River Birch Betula nigra
American Hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana
Bitternut Hickory Carya cordiformis
Shagbark Hickory Carya ovata
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
Yellowwood Cladrastis kentukea
American Beech Fagus grandifolia
Thornless Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos
Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus dioica
Butternut Juglans cenera
Black Walnut Juglans nigra
Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua
Tulip Tree Liriodendron tulipifera
Black Tupelo Nyssa sylvatica
American Hophornbeam Ostrya virginiana
White Oak Quercus alba
Swamp White Oak Quercus bicolor
Scarlet Oak Quercus coccinea
Hill’s Oak Quercus ellipsoidalis
Shingle Oak Quercus imbricaria
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa
Chinkapin Oak Quercus muehlenbergii
Chestnut Oak Quercus prinus
Red Oak Quercus rubra
Schumard Oak Quercus shumardii
Black Oak Quercus velutina
Linen Tilia americana
*All trees on the Appendix A list denoted in RED that are measured at 20” or greater are
designated as heritage trees.
Other species that the Village deems acceptable for this area consistent with appropriate
Arborist standards.(Amd. Ord. 95-1595-57, eff. 9/14/98)(Amd. Ord. 02-1803-
13,eff.5/13/02)(Amd. Ord. 11-3194-16, eff. 3/14/11)
APPENDIX “B”
CONSERVANCY AREA RESTORATION
REQUIREMENTS
(Amd. Ord. 15-3370-97)
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 17
The following are the minimum requirements for the restoration of designated
“Conservancy Areas” that are damaged, whether during construction or after occupancy.
Prior to restoration, the Village will review the damaged site and approve the proposed
restoration plan.
The entire disturbed area shall be cleared of all debris and unsuitable soil, and graded if
necessary. The distributed area shall be covered with two inches (2") of approved topsoil, if
necessary, and two inches (2") of leaf compost. This action shall be taken immediately and
protective fencing replaced if construction is in progress. Plantings on the approved
restoration plan shall be planted in accordance with the approved plan specifications during
the first appropriate planting season. All plant material shall be guaranteed for a minimum
of one year.
The listed material is per 150 Sq. Ft. of damaged area.
CANOPY TREES – DRY SITES: One 2 ½ inch caliper and four (4) seedlings
Scientific Name Common Name
Quercus alba White Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Gymnocladus dioicus caroliniana Kentucky Coffee Tree
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Carya Ovata Shagbark Hickory
CANOPY TREES – WET SITES: One 2 ½ inch caliper and four (4) seedlings
Scientific Name Common Name
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Carpinus American Hornbeam
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Gleditsia triacanthos Honey Locust
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
INTERMEDIATE TREES – DRY SITES: One 4 ft. – 5 ft. and Three 2 ft. – 3 ft.
Scientific Name Common Name
Ostraya virginiana American Hophornbeam
Crataegus spp. Hawthorn
Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood
Cercis Canadensis Redbud
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum
Amelanchier laevis Allegheny Serviceberry
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Rhus typhina Staghorn sumac
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 18
INTERMEDIATE TREES – WET SITES: One 4 ft. – 5 ft. and Three 2 ft. – 3 ft.
Scientific Name Common Name
Alnus glutinosa Alder
Betula nigra River Birch
Mamamelis virginiana Witch hazel
Crataegus spp. Hawthorn
SHRUBS – DRY SITES: Five 2 ft. – 3 ft.
Scientific Name Common Name
Viburnum trilobum High-Bush Cranberry
Corylus Americana American Hazelnut
Locinera spp. Honeysuckle
Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac
SHRUBS – WET SITES: Five 2 ft. – 3 ft.
Scientific Name Common Name
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry
Cornus sericea Redtwig Dogwood
Cornus racemosa Grey Dogwood
Viburnum lentago Nannyberry
GROUNDCOVER/WILDFLOWERS: Twenty (20)
Care shall be taken to select plants which are site specific, i.e. soils and moisture
requirements, sun and shade requirements.
May Apple Virginia Blue Bells
False Solomon Seal Hepatica
Solomon Seal Monarda
Wild Columbine Woodland Sunflower
Blood Root Native Iris
Trillium Sp. Woodland Phlox
Twin Leaf Wild Ginger (Asarum caudatum)
Wild Geranium Goldenrod
Yellow Trout-Lily Jack in the Pulpit
Jacobs Ladder Alum Root
Butter Cup Rue
Aster spp. Turtlehead
Penstemon Golden Alexander
Agastache Milkweed
Butterfly Weed Coreopsis
Eupatorium Gentian
Liatris Monkey Flower
Prairie Clover Echinacea
Sneezeweed Heliopsis
Obedient Plant Ratibida
Silphium Verbena
Culver’s Root Rudbeckia
TITLE 13-1
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TREE PRESERVATION
TITLE 13-1: Tree Preservation
Revised 08/28/2017 Page 19
Native Violets Native Ferns
*The Village shall have the authority to assign equivalent values different from the guidelines
above, in the case of species or specimens which are more or less desirable than average.
4844-4991-2647, v. 1
APPENDIX "C"
TREE CONVERSION CHART
Single stem
inches dbh feet height feet height
2 7 6 7.5
2.5 8 - 8.5 8 - 9
3 8.5 - 9 9 - 10
4 9 - 9.5 10 - 11
5 9.5 - 10 11 - 12
6 10 - 10.5 12 - 13
7 10.5 - 11 13 - 14
8 11 - 11.5 14 - 15
9 11.5 - 12 15 - 16
10 12 - 12.5 16 - 17
11 12.5 - 13 17 - 18
12 13 - 13.5 18 - 19
13 13.5 - 14 19 - 20
14 14 - 14.5 20 - 21
15 14.5 - 15 21 - 22
16 15 - 15.5 22 - 23
17 15.5 - 16 23 - 24
18 16 - 16.5 24 - 25
19 16.5 - 17 25 - 26
20 17 - 17.5 26 - 27
21 17.5 - 18 27 - 28
22 18 - 18.5 28 - 29
23 18.5 - 19 29 - 30
24 19 - 19.5 30 - 31
25 19.5 - 20 31 - 32
26 20 - 20.5 32 - 33
27 20.5 - 21 33 - 34
Multi-stem Evergreen
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2: LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 1
TITLE: 13
CHAPTER 2: Landscaping
Sections:
13-2-1: Purpose
13-2-2: General Requirements
13-2-3: Replacement Requirements
13-2-4: Landscape Screening Requirements
13-2-5: Single-Family Residential Requirements
13-2-6: All Other Property Requirements
13-2-7: Public Right-Of-Way Requirements
13-2-8: Stormwater Facilities Requirements
13-2-9: Penalties
13-2-10: Appendices
13-2-1: Purpose
This Landscaping Code is adopted for the following purposes:
A. Promote and maintain the high quality visual appearance and environmental benefits
throughout the year through landscaping and preservation of native vegetation.
B. Encourage and promote the implementation of best management practices to minimize
erosion and stormwater runoff in a manner which provides functionality and visual appeal.
C. Enhance the visual and environmental character of the Village’s built environment through
the utilization of conscientious landscape design.
13-2-2: General Requirements
A. Installation: Installation methods of landscape plantings shall conform to the specifications
of the approved landscape plan and industry standard installation practices appropriate for
each type of planting.
B. Maintenance: To ensure the health and vitality of landscape plantings, maintenance of
insect and disease control, mulching, pruning, fertilization, weed control, and watering
consistent with good forestry practices shall be performed, as needed, by the property
owner.
C. Inspections: Landscape plantings required by this Chapter will be inspected periodically by
the Village to ensure compliance. For any plantings which require replacement, the property
owner shall be notified of the requirement for replacement to be completed within sixty (60)
days from receipt of notice or during the next available planting season, as determined by
the Village. If the property owner fails to replace required plantings within the established
time frame, a fine shall be rendered in accordance with the Comprehensive Fine Schedule,
Chapter 17, of Title 1 of this Code.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 2
13-2-3: Replacement
A. Region Wide Infestation: Landscape planting replacements due to region wide infestation or
disease shall be replaced with an appropriate species in recognition of shape, form, and
seasonal interest of the infested or diseased planting to which it’s replacing, subject to the
requirements of Chapter 1 of this Title.
B. Non-Single-Family Residential Property: Replacement of existing landscape plantings for all
non-single-family residentially zoned lots shall be subject to the following:
1. Landscape Replacement Plan: Prior to the removal of any existing landscape
plantings, authorization from the Village must be obtained, which shall be subject to
the requirements of Chapter 1 of this Title. A Landscape Replacement Plan shall be
submitted identifying the following:
a. Location, species, existing condition, and size for each planting to be removed.
b. Location, species, quantity, and size for each replacement planting to be installed.
2. Replacement Criteria: Landscaping replacements shall be subject to the following:
a. Replacement plantings shall be not less than the size specified on the approved
landscape plan. If no approved landscape plan is available, single stem trees shall
be not less than 2.5” DBH, clump and evergreen varieties shall be not less than 8
feet in height.
b. Evergreen trees shall be replaced with evergreen trees and deciduous trees shall
be replaced with deciduous trees.
c. The replacement plan may be implemented over a period of time not to exceed
three (3) years.
d. Any tree identified on an approved landscaping plan which existed on the property
prior to development and has been preserved, as determined by the Village, may
be removed to observe good forestry practices subject to Section 13-1-3(D) and
13-1-3(K) of this Title, except any tree which is dead or irreversibly declining due to
natural circumstances does not require replacement.
e. If the plantings to be removed are considered to be a hazard to life and/or
property, the specific plantings shall be flagged and verbal authorization by the
Village Arborist for removal may be granted, which shall be conditioned upon the
submittal of a Tree Removal Permit, if applicable, and Landscape Replacement
Plan identified in 13-2-3(B)(1) submitted within thirty (30) days of the authorization
for removal.
13-2-4: Landscape Screening
The intent of landscaping as screening is to provide a visual barrier to certain elements of a site
which may be considered unattractive or monotonous including the following:
A. Building Walls: Plantings of deciduous and evergreen species shall be planted to interrupt
the view of large expanses of building walls which do not contain a primary architectural
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 3
element. A natural planting arrangement should be used whenever possible.
B. Ground-Mounted Equipment: Screening of ground-mounted equipment and utilities shall be
screened in accordance with Section 6-15-3(B) of Title 6 of this Code.
C. Parking Lots:
1. Landscaping installed within the visibility triangle (see Figure 1) shall maintain proper
sight lines and not obstruct light fixtures. Shrubs shall not exceed a maximum mature
height of thirty inches (30") above existing grade.
2. Accommodations shall be made for the storage of snow from all parking and loading
facilities. Snow storage within landscaped areas should be avoided to prevent damage
to plant material.
3. Hardy, salt tolerant plantings within parking lot facilities and parking lot islands should
be used, see Salt Tolerant Landscape Plants in Appendix 1.
4. Residential Zoning Districts: Parking lots containing more than three (3) parking
spaces shall be screened for each side visible from the public way by densely planted
shrubs or small trees not less than four (4) feet in height covering at least (75%) of the
linear length of the lot. Plantings shall incorporate diverse mixture of plant types,
including evergreen species. No plantings shall be permitted at any street intersection
which obstructs the visibility triangle.
5. Non-Residential Zoning Districts:
a. A minimum of 50% of linear length of parking facilities visible from the public way
shall be screened by a diversity of shrubs and trees as follows:
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
30” max height of shrubs
within visibility triangle.
EDGE OF
STREET
Figure 1
Visibility Triangle
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 4
Type
Min. Number of
Species
Size at
Planting
Shrubs 1 deciduous + 1
evergreen 3 ft. in height
Trees 2 2.5” DBH
b. A minimum eight (8) foot landscape planting area shall be required between all
building façades and any parking area or circulation drive (See Figure 2), which
shall include a mixture of trees, shrubs and grasses (native and non-native) at a
minimum of three (3) species. The screening requirement identified in 13-2-4(A)
above shall be applied towards the minimum planting species requirement.
6. Parking Lot Islands (all Districts):
a. A minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree at two and a half (2.5) inch DBH shall
be planted in every parking lot island. This requirement shall not apply if bioretention
areas are used in parking lot islands for the implementation of
stormwater best management practice (BMP) techniques, which shall require
native and non-native species suitable for use in bio-retention areas.
b. Under story shrubs, perennials, and other plant materials, including native species,
shall be planted to supplement the tree plantings.
D. Non-Residential Fencing: Fences taller than four (4) feet in height shall be screened with
landscaping plant material to reduce the visual appearance from the public way with densely
planted shrubs or small trees not less than four (4) feet in height and shall incorporate
diverse mixture of plant types, including evergreen species..
13-2-5: Single-Family Residential Requirements
A. Required Landscaping: Single-family residential lots constructed after the adoption of this
Title shall include the following plantings prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
Figure 2
Landscape Strip
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 5
Single-family residential lots constructed prior to the adoption of this Title including
structural additions and tear-downs shall be exempt from this requirement:
Yard Minimum Number of Trees* Size at Planting
Front &
Corner Side 2 2.5” DBH deciduous tree or 8’
tall evergreen tree
Side 1 2.5” DBH deciduous tree or 8’
tall evergreen tree
Rear 2 2.5” DBH deciduous tree + 8’
tall evergreen tree
* Unless the location, size, and vegetation coverage is deemed by the Village to achieve the
above requirements, vegetation located within dedicated Conservancy Easements/Areas
shall not be used to achieve compliance with the above requirements.
B. Permit: A Village permit must be obtained prior to the start of any landscape improvements
which involve excavation, trenching, or placement of additional soil and/or hardscape
materials within the rooting zone of trees, or which affect drainage patterns on the premises
or adjacent properties.
C. Single-Family Residential Subdivisions
1. Tree Inventory Survey: All trees measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater existing on a
property prior to construction shall be identified. The Tree Inventory Survey shall
include the following information:
a. Existing property line boundaries of each parcel to be included in the subdivision
and the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision.
b. All trees measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater to be removed shall be identified
with an “X” or similar notation.
c. Tree inventory data chart containing the inventory/identification number of each
existing tree measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater, common and scientific name,
DBH (in inches), condition, and save/removal status of each inventoried tree.
d. Proposed subdivision improvements, including but not limited to, roadways,
walks, building footprints, parking facilities, and driveways shall be illustrated.
e. Location of all proposed utility lines.
2. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan for the subdivision improvements must be
submitted which contains the following information:
a. Parkway Trees: One (1) two and a half inch (2 ½") deciduous shade tree or
ornamental tree must be planted for every 40 lineal feet of the street. Trees shall
provide a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet separation. All remaining open areas
of the right-of-way shall be seeded or sodded in accordance with the Village of
Lincolnshire Open Space Landscaping Standards, pursuant to Section 7-5-7 of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 6
Title 7 of this Code (Appendix 3).
b. Ground-Mounted Equipment Screening: All ground-mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened in accordance with Section 6-15-3(B) of Title 6 of
this Code.
c. Stormwater Facilities Landscaping: Landscaping for stormwater facilities, if
required, shall be provided in accordance with Section 13-2-8 herein.
d. Cul-de-Sac Landscaping: Planting of trees and shrubs are permissible in cul-desacs,
provided traffic sight lines are not obstructed. Prior to installation, a
landscape plan shall be submitted and approved by the Department of Public
Works and include identification and quantity of plant material, the location of the
curb or edge of pavement, and any easements within the cul-de-sac.
e. Location of all proposed utility facilities.
3. To ensure compliance with this Section, the Landscape Improvement Deposit in
accordance with Section 7-1-6 of this Code shall be held for maintaining the landscape
improvements for a period of three (3) years after acceptance. At the conclusion of the
three (3) year maintenance period, any items not conducted in accordance with this
Section, the Village shall draw from the Deposit to employ the services of a qualified
consultant to ensure compliance, and for the time and labor required to achieve
compliance.
13-2-6: All Other Property Requirements:
For all property other than single-family residential, the following shall apply:
A. Plant Material and Density: Each landscape plan shall include a mixture of evergreen and
deciduous trees, shrubs (native and non-native), grasses, and perennials plantings at a
minimum of two to three (2-3) species each. The proper selection and placement of plant
material is important for function as well as aesthetics, including variation in plant species
and size.
1. Spacing of tree species shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet on center (O.C.).
2. Shrubs with a mature height less than three (3) feet shall be planted four (4) feet O.C.
Shrubs with a mature height greater than three (3) feet shall be planted six (6) feet
O.C.
3. All planting areas are to be mulched with organic hardwood mulch or equivalent.
Colored mulches and stone shall not be permitted.
4. Areas which abut a public right-of-way must be sodded or established as native prairie
areas, exclusive of parking lots, building pads, water features, or landscape beds.
5. The minimum number of trees per acre of remaining green space (parcel of land
excluding parking lots, building pads, water features and other hard surfaces) shall be
planted in accordance with the following table. The distribution of tree species may be
altered to achieve the desired landscaping effect based on site conditions and
surrounding land uses, provided that the total number of trees shall not be reduced.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 7
Type
Size
(at planting) Trees/Acre
Deciduous Shade Trees
2 ½" – 4” (DBH) 6
4 ½" + (DBH) 6
Ornamental Trees
6' - 8' (height) 4
8 ½' + (height) 4
Evergreen Trees
8' (height) 5
10’ + (height) 5
6. All landscape plantings installed within any easement(s) shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to maintain and replace any plantings damaged or destroyed as a
result of activity associated with such easement(s).
B. Landscape Plan Requirements:
1. Tree Inventory Survey: All trees measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater existing on a
property prior to construction shall be identified. The Tree Inventory Survey shall
include the following information:
a. Existing property line boundaries of each parcel to be included in the subdivision
and the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision.
b. All trees measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater to be removed shall be identified
with an “X” or similar notation.
c. Tree inventory data chart containing the inventory/identification number of each
existing tree measuring six (6) inch DBH or greater, common and scientific name,
DBH (in inches), condition, and save/removal status of each inventoried tree.
d. Proposed site improvements, including but not limited to, roadways, walks,
building footprints, parking facilities, and driveways shall be illustrated.
e. Location of all proposed utility lines.
2. Landscape plans must be prepared and sealed by a licensed landscape architect in
the State of Illinois. This requirement may be waived upon the demonstration the
designer/landscaper has expertise equaling that of a licensed professional.
3. A site data chart must be included on every Landscape Plan submitted and shall
contain the following information:
a. Total area (square feet) of entire site.
b. Total area (square feet) of impervious surfaces by category (drives, walks,
buildings, water features) for the overall site.
c. Total area (square feet) of open (pervious) space for the overall site.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 8
d. A landscape planting chart containing the following information:
i. Common and Scientific name of each plant material.
ii. Size of each plant material at time of planting.
iii. Quantity of each plant material.
iv. Period of flowering for all applicable annuals, perennials and ornamental
trees.
4. An installation specification detail illustrating the method(s) for installation for woody
plants, herbaceous plants, and seeding shall be included.
5. Stormwater Facilities Landscaping: Landscaping for stormwater detention facilities, if
required, shall be provided in accordance with Section 13-2-6(A) herein.
C. Transitional Yards: Where a side and/or rear yard abuts any residential zoning district,
excluding the R5 District, transitional yard landscaping or fence screening a minimum of
seventy-five percent (75%) opacity shall be provided along such transitional yards.
13-2-7: Public Right-of-Ways Requirements
Landscape material planted in the right-of-way dedicated to the Village of Lincolnshire shall
conform to the following standards:
A. Shrubs must provide a maximum mature height of thirty inches (30") above existing grade.
B. Trees must provide a minimum mature height of twenty feet (20') and located so that any
branches over the street are a minimum fourteen feet (14') above the ground. Tree species
used must be taken from the following list:
Scientific Name Common Name
Acer Nigrum Black maple
Acer rubrum Red maple (non freemanii species)
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Acer triflorum Three-flowered maple
Carpinus caroliniana American hornbeam, Ironwood, Musclewood
Carya cordiformis Bitternut hickory
Carya ovata Shagbark hickory
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Cladrastis lutea Yellowwood
Corylus colurna Turkish filbert
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos var. Inermis Thornless honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioecus Kentucky coffeetree
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip tree
Nyssa sylvatica Black tupelo
Ostraya virginiana American Hophornbeam
Platanus x acerifolia London planetree
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
Quercus alba White oak
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 9
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak
Quercus robur English oak
Quercus rubra Red oak
Tilia Americana Linden
Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden
C. No tree shall be planted under or within ten lateral feet (10') of any overhead utility line at
their mature size. Trees and shrubs planted over or within five lateral feet (5') of any
underground water, sewer, or main transmission utility line should be avoided (see Figure
3). Prior to installation, a landscape plan shall be submitted and approved by the
Department of Public Works, which shall include identification of the location and quantity of
plant material and the location of all underground utilities.
D. At time of planting, all trees and shrubs shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from the
back of curb or edge of pavement to the center line of the tree/shrub.
E. Planting of trees and shrubs are permissible in cul-de-sacs, provided traffic sight lines are
not obstructed. Prior to installation, a landscape plan shall be submitted and approved by
the Department of Public Works and include identification and quantity of plant material, the
location of the curb or edge of pavement, easements, and utilities within the cul-de-sac.
F. The maintenance of the trees, shrubs, and lawn planted in the right-of-way contiguous with
the adjacent property is the responsibility of the property owner.
G. To ensure compliance with this Section, the Landscape Improvement Deposit in accordance
with Section 7-1-6 of this Code shall be held for maintaining the landscape improvements
for a period of three (3) years after acceptance. At the conclusion of the three (3) year
maintenance period, any items not conducted in accordance with this Section, the Village
shall draw from the Deposit to employ the services of a qualified consultant to ensure
NO TREES PLANTED UNDER
OR WITHIN 10 LATERAL FEET
OF OVERHEAD UTILITY LINE
Figure 3
Planting in Right-of-Way
TREES & SHRUBS PLANTED
OVER OR WITHIN 5 LATERAL FEET
OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY
SHOULD BE AVOIDED
10’
5’
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 10
compliance, and for the time and labor required to achieve compliance.
13-2-8: Landscape Requirements for Stormwater Facilities
The purpose of this section is to ensure stormwater facilities within the Village are designed,
constructed, and maintained in a manner which provides the highest level functionality as well
as visual appeal. Any development which requires stormwater facilities, as determined by the
Lake County Stormwater Management Commission (SMC), shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. General Requirements:
1. Shape: Stormwater facilities shall be designed to reflect a non-uniform, organic shape.
2. Shoreline Slopes: The shoreline banks of stormwater facilities shall be no steeper than
5:1 (from approximately 1 foot above to 1 foot below normal waterline) to prevent
erosion and facilitate native plant establishment. Basins and other natural drainage
facilities shall be required to have native dry-mesic and wet-mesic plants planted along
the entire expanse of a detention pond’s side slope.
3. Safety Shelf: For wet-bottom detention basins, a flat (or significantly flat) safety shelf
must be constructed approximately eighteen (18) inches below normal water level,
around the full perimeter of the basin. The safety shelf shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet in width, and shall be planted with native emergent plant plugs.
4. Bank Erosion Protection: The shoreline of stormwater facilities shall be protected from
erosion through establishment of deep-rooted, prairie and wetland perennial plants
native to the Great Lakes region. Native prairie and wetland plants shall cover the
complete shorelines, extending around the full perimeter of the stormwater facility. The
native plant slope for basins shall have a minimum width from waterline of fifteen (15)
feet.
5. Seed Mixes and Planting Lists: The landscape plan shall identify each species
proposed, which shall consist entirely of native plants for all seed mixes and plant
plugs to be used. Separate seed mixes shall be provided for planting on the upper
(dry-mesic) and lower (wet-mesic) portions of the shoreline slope. The plant plug list
shall be divided into three categories: dry-mesic, wet-mesic, and emergent plants.
Each category shall contain a minimum of ten (10) species of native plants suited to
the given environment.
6. Guarantees: All seeded and planted areas shall be guaranteed through the
Maintenance Period and all performance criteria have been satisfied.
B. Plan Requirements:
1. Installation Plan: The installation plan shall provide detailed information regarding the
specific locations and timing of native landscaping installation.
a. Installation: The installation of all native prairie and wetland plants shall be
performed by a qualified natural environmental professional consultant. A site
plan shall illustrate the following elements of the native landscaping installation:
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 11
i. Specific planting zones.
ii. Plant and seed lists for each planting zone including quantities, seeding
rates per species, and spacing of plants.
iii. Location and specification of erosion control measures.
b. Site Access: Access to the site for installation of native plantings shall be
identified on the Plan, which shall include necessary access for installation
equipment. Additional or alternate access areas not identified must be approved
by the Village prior to the start of installation.
c. Installation Schedule: The schedule shall outline the proposed start and ending
for site access preparation, planting area preparation and stabilization, and
planting and seeding for each planting zone. Installation shall occur in the first
available growing season after the grading of the pond is substantially completed
and the pond is operational. Installation shall take place between May 1 and June
15 or after October 1 until the ground is frozen. Seeding shall not be performed
from June 16 through September 30, unless authorized by the Village.
d. Erosion Control: Clean, seed-free hay or threshed straw of wheat, oats or barley
shall be used for slopes less than 6:1. Straw mat or other appropriate erosion
control blanket shall be used on all areas seeded or plugged for slopes steeper
than 6:1. Synthetic net blankets shall not be used. The mat shall be affixed to the
ground surface by mechanical crimping or other method approved by the Village.
e. Establishment: The installation plan shall provide specific information regarding
activities to be performed to ensure establishment of the native prairie and
wetland plants, including but not limited to, cover crops/erosion blankets, watering
schedule, herbicide schedule, controlled burn/mowing frequency, and seed/plant
depredation (wildlife grazing) control.
f. Criteria for Successful Installation and Establishment: Prior to the Village’s
acceptance of any stormwater detention facility, a status report shall be prepared
by a qualified natural environment professional demonstrating the criteria for
establishment of native plant landscaping conforms with requirements of this
Section 13-2-8 herein.
g. Installation Conditions: All grades, soils, and water levels shall be examined and
observed conditions shall comply with the specifications of the Installation Plan
prior to the start of any work. If unsatisfactory conditions exist, the Village shall be
notified and a written report of corrective action of unsatisfactory conditions shall
be submitted to the Village. Work shall not proceed until authorization is provided
by the Village.
2. Maintenance and Monitoring Plan: A Maintenance and Monitoring Plan shall be
prepared by a qualified natural environment professional to provide the timing and/or
frequency of all activities necessary to maintain native plant landscapes. Elements of
the Maintenance and Monitoring Plan include but not limited to, controlled
burn/mowing, spot herbicide applications/invasive species control, and monthly
monitoring reports during the growing season.
a. Responsibility: The maintenance and monitoring of native plant landscapes shall
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 12
be the sole responsibility of the property owner, its successors and assigns.
b. Monitoring Period: Vegetation monitoring shall be conducted monthly during the
first three (3) growing periods for the months of April, May, June, July, August,
September, October and November using the meander search method.
c. Status Report: Monitoring Status Reports shall be submitted within two (2) weeks
following the monthly monitoring session for each month of the Monitoring Period.
The Status Reports shall include the following:
i. Percent of vegetation cover throughout the site.
ii. Inventory and estimated percent cover of the predominant species present.
iii. Inventory and estimated percent cover of the non-native invasive species
present.
iv. Detailed description(s) of work undertaken during the previous month and
recommended management measures for subsequent months.
v. Any other site conditions observed, including but not limited to, drainage
problems, erosion, wildlife damage, extreme water level fluctuations,
damage to the site by equipment, etc. and any remediation required.
C. Native Plant Specifications
1. Native Plants:
a. Plants, freshly dug tubers and plants shall be provided. Materials which have
been in cold storage shall not be used.
b. All live herbaceous plants shall be potted, two year old nursery grown stock.
c. All preparations shall be made for the planting of tubers prior to their arrival.
Tubers shall be planted immediately once received. If planting is delayed more
than four (4) hours after delivery, plants shall be set in shade, protected from
weather and mechanical damage, and kept moist.
d. Container grown stock shall not be removed from containers until time of planting.
e. Plants shall be free from insects and diseases and must show appearance of
normal health and vigor.
f. Plants species shall be certified to be true to their name and originate within a
150-mile radius of the project location, with species and subspecies native to
Lake County, Illinois.
g. All plant material and collected stock shall comply with State and Federal laws for
inspection of plant diseases and insect infestations.
h. Plants shall be packed to ensure adequate protection against damage while in
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 13
transit, including being protected with wet material to ensure plants are delivered,
stored, and planted in a moist and cool condition.
i. Planting should not be conducted when conditions are not appropriate.
j. All emergent herbaceous perennial plants, tubers, bulbs and dormant rootstock
shall be installed at a water depth of 0” to 6”.
k. Plants shall be planted to adequate depth to prevent against desiccation.
l. Plants shall be planted at a minimum density of 3,000 plants per acre. Unless an
alternative Installation Plan is submitted and approved by the Village, plants shall
be planted in pods or groupings to provide sections of color.
m. All plants shall be protected from geese and other predators on all sides by 24"
high fencing with nylon lines crosshatched across the top of the planting zones.
Said fencing shall be maintained at all times and removal may be permitted at
least one full growing season after installation.
n. In areas where herbicide has been applied at least 14 days prior to planting, no
planting shall occur. All herbicides shall be applied by a licensed operator under
the direction of a licensed applicator.
o. Any plant or seed species substitutions must be approved the by the Village prior
to their planting.
2. Seed Mixtures:
a. All seed shall have the proper stratification and/or scarification to break seed
dormancy other than for fall planting.
b. Prior to planting, all legumes shall be inoculated with the proper rhizobia at the
appropriate time.
c. All seed shall be packed and covered in a manner to ensure adequate protection
against damage and maintain dormancy while in transit, storage or during
planting operations.
d. All seed shall be certified to be true to their name and originate within a 150 mile
radius of the project location.
e. All seed grass species shall be supplied as pure live seed.
f. All seeded areas shall be protected from geese and other predators on all sides
by 24" high fencing with nylon lines crosshatched across the top of the planting
zones. Said fencing shall be maintained at all times and removal may be
permitted at least one full growing season after installation.
g. Seeding in zones where water levels exist shall not occur. All seeded areas shall
be protected from water by erosion control mulch or straw mat.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 14
h. Any seed species substitutions must be approved the by the Village prior to their
planting.
i. The use and species of a cover crop must be approved by the Village prior to
their planting, and shall not be annual rye.
D. Installation: Installation of native plantings shall be subject to the following specifications:
1. Qualifications: A qualified superintendent capable of reading and understanding
approved plans and specifications, and a thorough knowledge of installation,
maintenance practices and management needs shall be on-site during installation.
2. Site Preparation: Prior to installation, the planting area shall include preparing and
amending existing soils; furnishing, transporting and installing all seeds plant and
other materials; and protecting said materials as required for the repair and restoration
of the site.
3. Soil Preparation:
a. Top soil shall be fertile, friable, loam surface soil without admixture of subsoil and
free of stones, stumps, roots, trash, debris and other materials which might inhibit
successful plant growth. Soil aggregates shall not exceed one (1) inch maximum
diameter.
b. Subsoil should not have a compaction greater than 350 pounds per square inch
based on soil penetrometer measurements.
c. The pH range shall be 6.5 to 8.4. Topsoil not within this pH range shall be
amended through the addition of pH adjusters.
d. Organic content shall not be less than 3% and no greater than 10% determined
by loss through ignition.
e. Soil nutrient content shall be as follows, as determined by appropriate laboratory
analysis:
Phosphorus Min. 75 lb./Ac
Potassium Min. 300lb./Ac
Calcium Min. 1,500 ppm
Magnesium Min. 100 ppm
Cation Exchange Capacity Min. 20 mea/100g
Soluble Salt Max. 1,000 ppm
f. Gradation shall meet the following specification:
Sieve Designation Percent Passing
1" screen 100
1/4" screen 97 - 100
No. 10 U.S.S. 95 - 100
No. 140 U.S.S. 60 - 90
No. 270 U.S.S. 25 - 50
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 15
Clay content determined by Bouyoucous Hydrometer Test shall range between
5% and 20%. Percentages shall be based on dry weight of the sample.
g. Topsoil shall be uniformly distributed to provide a minimum 8 inch depth after
compaction and finishing grade. Top soil shall be spread cultivated, lightly
compacted to prevent future settlement, dragged, and graded to finished grade.
4. Equipment:
a. Equipment shall be suited for the installation of native plants and seeds.
Equipment causing damage to soils or site (example: rutting, compaction, or
prepared soils) shall not be used. Equipment shall be calibrated and adjusted to
sow seeds at the proper seeding rate and operated in a manner to ensure
complete coverage of the entire native zones.
b. Seeding equipment shall be designed to accommodate a wide variety of seed
types, sizes and shapes.
c. If a rangeland type grass drill or no-till planter is used, rolling of the seed bed shall
not be permitted.
E. Maintenance: The maintenance period shall begin immediately following planting and
continue annually, subject to the following criteria:
1. All planted and seeded areas shall be maintained by prescribed burning (if permitted),
high mow management, replanting or reseeding, and invasive control management as
necessary to establish vegetation free of bare or eroded areas and areas that are
infested with invasive plants.
a. In the first two (2) growing seasons, the planted area shall be mowed every four
to six (4 – 6) weeks throughout the growing season to a height not less than eight
(8) inches. Mowing is to be conducted frequently enough to cut weeds before they
form seed heads. If seed heads form on weeds they shall be removed from the
site.
b. Prescribed burning shall also be conducted at the conclusion of the third growing
season. All licenses and permits required to conduct prescribed burning from
state and local authorities shall be completed before initiating any burning.
Prescribed burns shall continue annually.
2. Dead or declining plant material shall be reseeded and replaced as necessary to meet
the performance standard in the year the damage is observed. All replacement plants
must be of the same size as the plants thriving in the planted area.
3. Plant replacements shall be completed according to the installation instructions.
4. Native plant landscape areas shall be managed for invasive plant species as outlined
on the Invasive Plant Management Schedule (Appendix 2).
5. When the Monitoring Status Report findings indicate performance of the native plant
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 16
landscape has fallen below the criteria for establishment of native plant landscapes of
this Section, remedial action to restore and replace dead or declining plant material
shall occur. Native plant landscapes requiring remedial action shall be considered
non-compliant with this Section until necessary corrective actions are completed.
F. Performance Standards
1. At the end of the first growing season, seeded and planted areas shall meet or exceed
75% plant cover, seedlings of six planted grass/sedge species found and seedlings of
six planted forb species found within any given one meter transect . No invasive
species shall be present.
2. At the end of the second growing season, seeded and planted areas shall meet or
exceed 80% plant cover, 5% cover by planted native grass/sedge species, 15% cover
by planted forb species, and 20% of planted species found within any given one meter
transect.
Sites less than two acres where planting or restoration has taken place, no invasive
species shall be present.
Sites greater than two acres where planting or restoration work has taken place,
invasive species shall comprise no more than 10% of the plant cover.
3. At the end of the third growing season, seeded and planted areas shall meet or
exceed 95% plant cover, 20% cover by planted native grass/sedge species, 40%
cover by planted forb species, and 60% of planted species found within any given one
meter transect.
Sites less than two acres where planting or restoration has taken place, no invasive
species shall be present.
Sites greater than two acres where planting or restoration work has taken place,
invasive species shall comprise no more than 5% of the plant cover.
4. At the conclusion of the three year maintenance period, if the planted areas do not
meet the performance specification, the Village shall draw on the letter of credit to
achieve the performance specifications.
G. Enforcement
1. In the event the property owner, its successors or assigns, do not perform the necessary
actions to restore a non-compliant native plant landscape within two (2) weeks of
identification of the non-conformity, provided environmental conditions permit immediate
action, a fine in accordance with the Comprehensive Fine Schedule set forth in Chapter
17 of Title 1 of this Code shall be assessed. In addition the native plant landscape will
be restored to a state of compliance and/or a status assessment will be conducted by a
Village consultant at the expense of the responsible party.
2. To ensure compliance with this Section, the Landscape Improvement Deposit in
accordance with Section 7-1-6 of this Code shall be held for maintaining the landscape
improvements for a period of three (3) years after acceptance. At the conclusion of the
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 17
three (3) year maintenance period, any items not conducted in accordance with this
Section, the Village shall draw from the Deposit to employ the services of a qualified
consultant to ensure compliance, and for the time and labor required to achieve
compliance.
13-2-9: Penalties
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be assessed at a cost as
prescribed in the Comprehensive Fine Schedule set forth in Chapter 17 of Title 1 of this Code.
Where a continued violation persists, after notification by the Village, the fine shall be assessed
weekly until the violation is corrected. (Ord. No. 03-1840-17, eff. 4/14/03)
13-2-10: APPENDICES
Appendix 1: Salt Tolerant Landscape Plants
Appendix 2: Invasive Plant Management Schedule
Appendix 3: Open Space Landscaping Standards
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 18
Appendix 1:
Salt Tolerant Landscape Plants*
T = Plans with highest degree of salt tolerance. Use in most exposed areas.
M = Plant with moderate degree of salt tolerance. Use in low salt areas.
DECIDUOUS TREES
Scientific Name Common Name Zone
Aerial Salt
Tolerance
Soil Salt
Tolerance
Acer campestre Hedge maple 5-8 M
Acer ginnala Amur maple 2-8 M
Acer nigrum Black maple 4-9 M
Acer pseudoplatanus Sycamore maple 5-7 T
Aesculus hippocastanum Horse-chestnut 4-7 T Y
Aesculus octandra Yellow buckeye 4-8 M
Amelanchier x grandiflora Apple serviceberry 4-9 T
Betula nigra River birch 3-7 M
Carya cordiformis Bitternut hickory 4-9 T Y
Carya ovata Shagbark hickory 4-8 T
Catalpa speciosa Northern catalpa 4-8 T Y
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry 2-9 M Y
Diospyros virginiana Persimmon 4-9 M
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo 3-8 M Y
Gleditsia triacanthos Honey locust 3-9 T Y
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky coffeetree 3-8 T Y
Juglans cinerea Butternut 3-7 T
Juglans nigra Black walnut 4-9 T Y
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden rain tree 5-8 M
Larix decidua European larch 2-6 T
Larix laricina American larch 2-5 T
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweet gum 5-9 T Y
Malus (some cultivars)
(x zumi ‘Calocarpa’, ‘Adams’, ‘Donald Crabapple 5-7 M
Wyman’, ‘Prairifire’)
Nyssa sylvatica Tupelo 4-9 M Y
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood 3-9 M
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore 4-9 M Y
Quercus alba White oak 3-9 T
Quercus bicolor* Swamp white oak 4-8 M Y
Quercus ellipsoidalis Northern pin oak 4-6 M Y
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak 4-8 M
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak 2-8 M Y
Quercus robur English oak 4-8 T
Sassafras albidum Sassafras 4-9 M
Syringa amurensis Japanese tree lilac 3-7 T Y
Syringa pekinensis Peking lilac 4-7 T Y
Taxodium distichum Bald-cypress 4-9 T Y
Ulmus ‘Regal’ Regal elm 4-6 Y
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 19
EVERGREEN TREES
Scientific Name Common Name Zone
Aerial Salt
Tolerance
Soil Salt
Tolerance
Juniperus chinensis Chinese juniper 2-8 T Y
Juniperus horizontalis Creeping juniper 4-9 T Y
Juniperus virginiana Eastern red-cedar 3-9 T
Picea pungens Blue spruce 2-7 T Y
Pinus mugo Mugo pine 2-7 T Y
Thuja occidentalis Eastern arborvitae 2-8 M Y
SHRUBS
Scientific Name Common Name Zone
Aerial Salt
Tolerance
Soil Salt
Tolerance
lnus rugosa Speckled alder 3-6 M
Amelanchier canadensis Serviceberry 3-7 T
Amorpha fruticosa Indigo-bush 4-9 T Y
Aronia arbutifolia Red chokeberry 4-8 M
Aronia melanocarpa Black chokeberry 3-8 M
Buxus microphylla
var. koreana Korean boxwood 4-9 M
Caragana arborescens Siberian pea-shrub 2-7 T Y
Caragana fruticosa Russian pea-shrub 2-6 T
Clethra alnifolia Summersweet clethra 3-8 T
Comptonia peregrina Sweet-fern 2-5 T
Cotoneaster species Cotoneaster 4-8 T Y
Forsythia spp. Forsythia 6-8 T Y
Hamamelis virginiana Witch-hazel 3-8 T
Hibiscus syriacus Rose-of-Sharon 5-8 M
Hippophae rhamnoides Sea-buckthorn 3-7 T` Y
Hydrangea spp. Hydrangea 3-9 T
Hypericum spp. St. John’s wort 3-8 T
Ilex verticillata Winterberry 3-9 M
Lespedeza bicolor Shrub bush-clover 4-8 T
Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry 3-6 M Y
Perovskia atriplicifolia Russian-sage 5-8 T
Philadelphus coronarius Mock-orange 5-8 M
Potentilla fruticosa Shrubby cinquefoil 2-7 T
Prunus x cistena Purpleleaf sand
cherry 2-8 M
Pyracantha coccinea Firethorn 6-9 T
Rhodotypos scandens Black jetbead 4-8 T
Rhus aromatica Fragrant sumac 3-9 T Y
Rhus glabra Smooth sumac 3-9 T Y
Rhus typhina Staghorn sumac 4-8 T Y
Ribes alpinum Alpine currant 2-7 M Y
Robinia hispida Bristly locust 5-8 T Y
Rosa rugosa Rugosa rose 2-7 T Y
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 20
Sambucus canadensis Elderberry 3-9 T
Shepherdia canadensis Buffaloberry 2-6 M
Spiraea spp. (most) Spirea 3-8 T
Symphoricarpos albus Snowberry 3-7 T
Syringa meyeri ‘Palibin’ Palibin lilac 3-7 M Y
Syringa patula ‘Miss Kim’ Miss Kim lilac 3-7 T Y
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood viburnum 5-9 M
Viburnum lentago Nannyberry 2-8 M
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw viburnum 3-9 M Y
Viburnum trilobum American cranberrybush
2-7 M
* Source: The Morton Arboretum, www.mortanarb.org
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 21
Appendix 2:
Invasive Plant Management Schedule
Plant Name Specific Management Month(s) Comments
Common and Glossy
Buckthorn
(Rhamnus cathartica and
fragula)
Cut and immediately wick
apply herbicide.
Jan, Feb,
March, June,
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct, Nov,
Dec
Foliar application of herbicide should
not be considered unless the site is to
be completely reseeded with the
understanding that all plants will be
killed.
Honeysuckle
(Lonicera tatarica,
maackii, japonica)
Cut and immediately wick
apply herbicide.
Jan, Feb,
March, June,
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct, Nov,
Dec
Foliar application of herbicide should
not be considered.
Multiflora Rose
(Rosa multiflora)
Cut and immediately wick
apply herbicide.
Jan, Feb,
March, June,
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct, Nov,
Dec
Foliar application of herbicide should
not be considered.
Teasel
(Dipsacus sylvestris,
laciniatus)
Herbicide rosettes. Mar, April,
May, June,
Nov
Biennial, important to catch rosettes
in first year. Care needs to be taken
to remove all seed heads from site.
Do not mow. Manually remove heads.
Teasel
(Dipsacus sylvestris,
laciniatus)
Cut seed heads, remove
from site. Herbicide cut
stock close to ground. July, Aug, Sept
Biennial, important to catch rosettes
in first year. Care needs to be taken
to remove all seed heads from site.
Do not mow. Manually remove heads.
Reed Canary Grass
(Phalaris arundinacea)
Herbicide stands of grass. April, May,
June
Reed Canary Grass
(Phalaris arundinacea)
Cut seed heads, remove
from site. Herbicide cut
stock close to ground.
July, Aug, Sept
Reed Canary Grass (Phalaris
arundinacea)
Garlic Mustard
(Allaria petiolata)
Herbicide rosettes.
March, April,
Oct, Nov
Biennial, important to catch rosettes
in first year. Care needs to be taken
to remove all seed heads from site.
Do not mow. Manually remove heads.
Garlic Mustard
(Allaria petiolata)
Hand pull plants. Remove
from site. May, June,
July, Aug, Sept
Biennial, important to catch rosettes
in first year. Care needs to be taken
to remove all seed heads from site.
Do not mow. Manually remove heads.
Crown Vetch
(Coronilla varia)
Cut and herbicide plant
close to the ground. Remove
cut plants from site.
April, May,
June, July,
Aug, Sept, Oct
Bird’S Foot Trefoil (Lotus
corniculatus)
Cut and herbicide plant
close to the ground.
Remove cut plants from the
site.
April, May,
June, July,
Aug, Sept, Oct
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 22
Canada and Bull Thistle
(Cirsium arvense, vulgare)
Herbicide small plants or
rosettes.
March, April,
May, June,
Oct, Nov
Bull thistle is a biennial. It is
important to catch rosettes in first
year. Care needs to be taken to
remove all seed heads from site. Do
not mow. Manually remove heads.
Canada thistle is a perennial.
Remove all seed heads from the site.
Canada and Bull Thistle
(Cirsium arvense, vulgare)
Cut seed heads and remove
from site. Herbicide cut
stalks close to the ground.
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct
Bull thistle is a biennial. It is
important to catch rosettes in first
year. Care needs to be taken to
remove all seed heads from site. Do
not mow. Manually remove heads.
Canada thistle is a perennial.
Remove all seed heads from the site.
Purple Loosestrife
(Lythrum salicaria)
Herbicide young plants.
May, June
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
Purple Loosestrife
(Lythrum salicaria)
Cut seed heads and remove
from site. Herbicide cut
stems close to the ground.
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
Phragmites (Phragmites
australis)
Herbicide young stands. April, May,
June, July
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
Phragmites (Phragmites
australis)
Cut seed heads and remove
from site. Herbicide cut
stems close to the ground.
June, July,
Aug, Sept, Oct
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
White and Yellow Sweet
Clover (Melilotus alba and
officinalis)
Cut and remove plant from
site. Herbicide cut stems
close to the ground.
May, June,
July, Aug,
Sept, Oct
Willow (Salix) Cut plant and herbicide cut
stems close to the ground.
April, May,
June, July,
Aug, Sept, Oct
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
Cattails (Typha) Cut plant and herbicide cut
stems close to the ground or
water. Remove any seed
heads from the site.
April, May,
June, July,
Aug, Sept, Oct
This plant grows in wet conditions.
An aquatic herbicide must be used if
it is in the water or close to the water.
NOTE: All herbicides and their application must be specific to the type of plant controlled.
Manufacturers’ instructions must be carefully followed. With few exceptions spot or wick
applications must be utilized to protect surrounding plants.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 23
Appendix 3:
Open Space Landscaping Standards
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE
OPEN SPACE LANDSCAPING
STANDARDS
CONTENTS
A. Seeding
B. Mulch and Excelsior Blanket
C. Sodding
D. Planting
E. Period of Establishment and Guarantee
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 24
A. SEEDING:
Description: This section describes the seed bed preparation and furnishing, transporting
and placing the seed and other materials required in seeding operations.
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Seed Bed Preparation: Seed bed preparation shall not be started until all stones. Boulders
debris and similar material larger than 3 inches in diameter have been removed. The area
to be seeded shall be worked to a minimum depth of 3 inches with a disk or other equipment
approved by the Village Engineer, reducing all soil particles to a size not larger than 2
inches in the largest dimension. The prepared surface shall be relatively free from all weeds,
clods, stones, roots, sticks, rivulets, gullies, crusting and caking. No seeds shall be sown
until the seed bed has been approved by the Village Engineer.
Seed bed preparation will not be required for Erosion Control Seeding if the soil is in a loose
and pliable condition. Light discing shall be done if the soil is hard or caked.
Seeding Methods: No seed shall be sown during high winds or when the ground is not in a
proper condition for seeding, nor shall any seed be sown until the purity test has been
completed for the seeds to be used, and shows that the seed meets the noxious weed seed
requirements. The Village Engineer will examine and then approve any equipment to be
used. Prior to starting work, seeders shall be calibrated and adjusted to sow seeds at the
proper seeding rate. Equipment shall be operated in a manner to ensure complete coverage
of the entire area to be seeded. The Village Engineer shall be notified 48 hours prior to
beginning the seeding operations so that the Village Engineer may determine by trial runs
that a calibration of the seeder will provide uniform distribution at the specified rate per acre.
When seed or fertilizer is applied with a hydraulic seeder, the rate of application shall be not
less than 1000 gallons of slurry per acre. This slurry shall contain the proper quantity of
seed or fertilizer specified per acre. When using a hydraulic seeder, the fertilizer nutrients
and seed shall be applied in two separate operations.
Within 12 hours, all seeded areas, including slopes 3 to 1 or flatter, shall be rolled at right
angles to the run off with an approved type roller or cultipacker to compact the seed bed and
place the seed in contact with the soil. Slopes steeper than 3 to 1 need not be rolled. Rolling
will not be required in the following conditions:
On slopes steeper than 3 to 1.
When a mulch stabilizer is used to anchor the mulch.
When a hydraulic seeder is used to apply the seed.
When a rangeland type grass drill is used.
When the seeding equipment is equipped with a roller that achieves the desires
compaction.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 25
When Erosion Control Seeding is called for on the plans, a harrow, approved by
the Village Engineer, maybe substituted for the roller.
The optimum depth for seeding shall be 1/4 inch.
All legumes (clover, vetch, birdsfoot trefoil, lespedeza and alfalfa) shall be inoculated with the
proper bacteria in the amounts and manner recommended by the manufacturer of the
inoculant before sowing or being mixed with other seeds for sowing. The inoculant shall be
furnished by the Contractor and shall be approved by the Village Engineer. The seed shall
be sown as soon as possible after inoculation and seed that has been standing more
than 24 hours after inoculation shall be re-inoculated before sowing. If legumes are applied
by hydro seeder, 3 times the normal amount of inoculant shall be used.
a. Native Grass and Native Forb Seed Mixtures: Native Grass and Native Forb
Seed Mixtures shall be done by hydraulic seeders or with a rangeland type grass drill
meeting the approval of the Village Engineer.
If a hydraulic seeder is used, the water application rate shall be not less than 500
gallons per acre.
Seeding operations for new construction (bare earth) shall be May 15 to June 30 or
October 15 to December 1. Seeding operations on existing turf shall be between
October 15 and December 1. All areas of existing turf to be seeded except as listed
below shall be mowed one or more times to a height of not more than three inches.
The equipment used shall be capable of completely severing all growth at the cutting
height and distributing it evenly over the mowed area. The cut material shall not be
windrowed or left in a lumpy or bunched condition. Subsequent mowing may be
required on certain areas in order to disperse the mowed material and allow
penetration of the seed.
Debris encountered during the mowing and seeding operations which may hamper
the operations shall be removed and disposed of. Damage to the turf, such as ruts or
wheel tracks more than two inches in depth, shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
Village Engineer prior to the time of seeding.
b. Erosion Control Mixture
This method shall be considered a temporary erosion control method and shall be
used as a temporary cover when permanent seeding cannot be accomplished. All
areas that are to be left bare for more than one month will be consider for Erosion
Control Seeding. Any areas that cannot receive permanent seeding before winter shut
down shall be seeded with Erosion Control Seeding.
Seeding Mixtures: The classes of seeding mixtures will be designated by the Village
Engineer and will consist of one or more of the types listed in Table 1.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 26
Table 1 - SEEDING MIXTURES
TYPE SEEDS LBS./ACRE
Park & Lawn Mixture Ky Bluegrass
Perennial Ryegrass
Creeping Red Fescue
50
30
20
Salt Tolerant
Lawn Mixture
Ky Bluegrass
Perennial Ryegrass
Dawsons Red Fescue
Scaldis Hard Fescue
Fults Salt Grass*
30
10
10
10
30
Roadside Mixture Ky 31 or Alta Fescue
Perennial Ryegrass
Creeping Red Fescue
Oats, Spring
50
30
20
48
Salt Tolerant
Roadside Mixture
Ky 31 or Alta Fescue
Perennial Ryegrass
Dawsons Red Fescue
Scaldis Hard Fescue
Fults Salt Grass*
30
10
10
10
30
Slope Mixture Ry 31 or Alta Fescue
Perennial Ryegrass
Alsike Clover**
Birdsfoot Trefoil**
Little Bluestem
Side Oats Grama
40
20
5
10
5
10
Native Grass
Mixture Big Blue Stem
Little Blue Stem
Prairie Switchgrass
Indian Grass
Prairie Dropseed
June Grass
Side Oats Grama
Perennial Ryegrass
(delete when seeding over existing turf)
4
5
2
2
1
1
5
20
Native Forb
Mixture
Amorpha canescens ·Lead Plarn (6)**
Asciepias tuberosa – Butterfly Milkweek ( 1)
Aster laevis – Smooth Aster (2)
Aster novae·angliae - New England Aster (2)
CeanothuS americanus - New Jersey Tea (3)
Coreopsis paimata - Prairie Coreopsis ( 6)
Dodecatheon Meadii - Shooting Star (4)
Echinacea pallida - Pale Purple Coneflower (8)
Eryngium yuccifolium - Ratttesnake Master (8)
Liatris asoera - Button Blazing Star (8)
Liatris pyscostachya - Prairie Blazing Star (6)
Monarda fistulosa - Prairie Bergamot (6)
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 27
Parthenium integrifolium - Prairie Quinine (3)
Petalostemum candidum - White Prairie Clover (1)**
Petalostemum purpureum - Purple Prairie Clover (6)**
Rudbeckia hirta - Black-eyed Susan (9)
Ratbida pinnata - Yellow Coneflower (8)
Silphium 1aciniatum - Compass Plant (1)
Silphium tereointhinaceum – Prairie Dock (1)
Solidago rigida - Rigid Goldenrod (6)
Veromcastrurn virginicum - Culvert's Root (5)
(The number in the ( ) indicates the suggested percentage by weight of each item in the
mixture. The total weight of the mixture shall be 2 lbs/acre. The mixture shall contain at
lease 1% and not more than 10%by weight of each variety listed.)
Variation in the Native Forb seed quantities or varieties will be allowed in the event of a
crop failure or other unforeseen conditions. The contractor shall provide for the approval of
the Village Engineer a written description of the changed Mixture, the reasons for the
change, and the name of the seed supplier.
Conservation Mixture Smooth Brome Grass
Vernal Alfalfa**
Oats. Spring
40
15
48
Detention Area Mixture Buffalo Grass 100
Erosion Control Mixture Perennial Ryegrass
Oats, Spring
50
64
*Fults pucinnellia distans
**Legumes - inoculation required
Method of Measurement: The quantities and application rates of fertilizer nutrients and
agricultural ground limestone are subject to adjustment and will be determined on the basis
of the analysis of soil samples taken by the Developer.
Fertilizer will be measured by weight in pounds of actual nutrients. The following formula
will be used to determine the pounds of fertilizer nutrients applied:
(Total weight of mixed fertilizer in pounds) X (Percentage of each nutrient in the
fertilizer applied) = pounds of each fertilizer nutrient.
B. MULCH AND EXCELSIOR BLANKET
Description: This section describes the furnishing, transporting and placing mulch or
excelsior blanket.
Materials: Materials shall meet the following requirements:
Mulching Seeded or Planted Areas: Within 24 hours from the time seeding, or planting of
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 28
seedling trees, shrubs or vines has been performed, the seeded or planted area shall be
given a covering of mulch by one of the following methods. On slopes steeper than 3:1
mulch shall be applied the same day as seeded or planted. Mulch shall be applied
uniformly at the rate specified.
Method 1: This method shall consist of hand or machine application of straw mulch.
The mulch shall be loose enough to permit air to circulate but compact enough to reduce
erosion. If baled mulch material is used, care shall be taken that the material is in a
loosened condition and contains no lumps or knots of compacted material.
Method 2: This method shall consist of applying a layer of asphalt-coated straw mulch
on seeded areas or planted areas.
This mulch shall have a partial coating of EmulsifiedAsphalt.
The coated mulch shall be placed by equipment which will blow or eject, by means of a
constant air stream, controlled quantities of the mulch and asphalt in a uniform pattern
over the specified area. If the mulch is excessively cut or broken, the Contractor shall
take measures to reduce the cutting or breakage to a limit approved by the Village
Engineer.
The asphalt shall be introduced into the air stream by means of a spray arranged in
such a manner that it will partially coat the mulch with a spotty asphalt tack prior to the
depositing of the mulch covering. The rate of application will be determined by the
Village Engineer; however, the rate of application shall be not less than 75 gallons per ton
of mulch.
Method 3: The straw shall be applied in accordance with all of the requirements of Method
1, except a mulch stabilizer shall be used to anchor mulch into the soil by means of dull
blades or disks. These blades or disks shall be without camber, be approximately 20
inches in diameter.
The disks shall be notched and shall be spaced at approximately 3-inch intervals and shall
be equipped with scrapers. The stabilizer shall weigh approximately 1000 pounds and shall
have a working width nor to exceed 72 inches and shall be equipped with a ballast
compartment, so that when directed, weight can be increased.
Method 4: This method shall consist of a hand or machine application of an approved
shredded tree bark mulch material. The processed bark mulch shall be uniformly applied
over the seeded area at a rate determined by the Village Engineer. Care shall be taken
that the material is in a loosened condition and contains no lumps or knots of compacted
material.
Method 5: This method shall consist of machine application of straw mulch at the
specified rate using an approved mulch blower followed immediately by an overspray
application of hydraulic mulch. The hydraulic mulch shall be applied as a slurry of 750
pounds of mulch and 1000 gallons of water per acre by an approved hydraulic mulch
applicator. The hydraulic mulch slurry shalt be agitated a minimum of 5 minutes before
application and shall be agitated during application.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 29
Method 6: This method shall consist of machine application of straw mulch at the
specified rate using an approved mulch blower with chemical mulch binder applied
simultaneously with the hay or straw as in Mulch Method 2 or with chemical mulch binder
applied as an overspray in accordance with Mulch Method 5. Chemical mulch binder shall
be applied at the rate and manner recommenced by the supplier and approved by the
Village Engineer.
Method 7: This method shall consist of machine application of wood or paper fiber
hydraulic mulch at the specified rate using an approved hydraulic seeder. The hydraulic
mulch shall be applied as a slurry of 2000 pounds of mulch and not less than 2000 gallons
of water per acre. The hydraulic mulch slurry shall be agitated a minimum of 5 minutes
before application and shall be in continuous agitation during application. The seeding
will not be applied concurrently with this operation.
Following the mulching operation, every precaution shall be taken to prohibit foot or
vehicular traffic, or the movement of mulching has been displaced by any Contractor's
equipment or personnel, the seeding or other work damaged as a result of that
displacement shall immediately be replaced and the mulch covering replaced, at the
Contractor's expense, in a manner satisfactory to the Village Engineer.
Excelsior Blanket: The excelsior blanket shall be placed within 24 hours after seeding
operations have been completed on the areas specified by the Village Engineer. Prior to
placing the mat, the areas to be covered shall be relatively free of all rocks or clods over 1
1/2 inches in diameter, and all sticks or other foreign material which will prevent the close
contact of the blanket with the seed bed. If as a result of a rain, the prepared seed bed
becomes crusted or eroded, or if eroded places, ruts or depressions exist for any reason,
the Contractor will be required to rework the soil until it is smooth and to reseed such
areas which are reworked. After the area has been properly shaped, fertilized and seeded,
the blanket shall be laid out flat, evenly and smoothly, without stretching the material.
Jute or paper mat used as a ditch lining shall be applied with the lengths running parallel to
the flow of water. When the blanket is unrolled, the netting shall be on top and the fibers
in contact with the soil.
In ditches, the blankets shall be applied in the direction of the flow of the water and
butted snugly against each other. Use 4 staples across at the start of each roll and
continue to staple each side and the center on 4-foot intervals. Use a common row of
staples on adjoining blankets.
On slopes, the blanket shall be applied either horizontally or vertically to the contour.
Staple similar to ditch applications except the space interval shall be 6 feet.
C. SODDING
Description: This section shall describe the preparation of the ground surface and
furnishing, transporting and placing sod and other materials required in the sodding
operations.
Ground Preparation: Immediately prior, but not in excess of 24 hours before the sod is
placed, the soil surface shall be worked until it is relatively free from debris, washes,
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 30
gullies, clods and stones, and is in a satisfactory condition. The surface shall be worked to
a depth of not less than 3 inches with a disk, tiller or other equipment approved by the
Village Engineer. Prepared surfaces that become crusted shall be reworked to an
acceptable condition for sodding.
All soil surfaces shall be moist when the sod is placed. When directed by the Village
Engineer, the Contractor shall be required to apply water to dry soil surfaces at a minimum
rate of one gallon per square yard immediately prior to placing the sod.
When specified, agricultural ground limestone and fertilizer nutrients shall be applied at the
designated rates over the areas to be sodded.
Sodding Time: Sod shall be placed when the ground is in a workable condition and
temperatures are less than 90 degrees F. Sod shall not be placed when the sod or ground
surface is frozen or during and extended drought.
Transportation: All sod shall be properly covered when transported to prevent it from
drying out. Adequate shading and ventilation must be provided for the sod to prevent it
from decomposing while it is transported.
Sod cut for more than 48 hours shall only be used with the approval of the Village
Engineer. Any sod that has dried out, has heated to over 100 degrees F. or is frozen prior
to placing will be rejected and shall be immediately removed from the job site by the
Contractor.
Placing Sod: The sod shall be placed on the prepared surface with the edges in close
contact and alternate courses staggered.
In ditches, the sod shall be placed with the longer dimension perpendicular to the flow of
water in the ditch. On slopes, starting at the bottom of the slope, the sod shall be placed
with the longer dimension parallel to the contours of the ground. The exposed edges of
sod shall be buried flush with the adjacent soil.
On slopes where the sod may be displaced during sodding operations, the workmen shall
work from ladders or treaded planks.
Staking Sod: The sod shall be staked on all slopes of 2:1 or steeper. Sod shall be staked
with not less than 4 stakes per square yard with at least one stake for each piece of sod.
Stakes shall be a minimum of 6" long. Stakes shall be installed so that they hold the sod
firmly in place yet present no danger to pedestrians or mowing crews. The type of stake
and the method of installation shall meet the approval of the Village Engineer.
Sod Watering: Within 6 hours after the sod has been placed. 5 gallons of water per
square yard shall be applied. Thereafter, on days designated by the Village Engineer,
additional water shall be applied at the rate of 3 gallons per square yard. The sod must be
adequately watered during the period of establishment, defined as the period of time
between sod placement and when the sod becomes knitted to the soil and growing in
place.
The Contractor shall have on hand enough equipment to completely water all sodded
areas in 2 days at watering rates specified during the period of establishment. The Village
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 31
Engineer will make periodic checks of the Contractor’s equipment to determine its adequacy
and operating condition.
All watering described herein shall be done with a spray application. An open end hose
will not be acceptable. The method of watering shall meet the approval of the Village
Engineer.
Supplemental Watering: During periods of intense heat or subnormal rainfall,
supplemental watering may be required prior to acceptance of the work. Supplemental
watering shall be performed when directed by the Village Engineer. Water shall be
applied at the rate specified by the Village Engineer within 24 hours of notice.
Supplemental watering may be performed during the period of establishment or any time
prior to final acceptance of the project.
Disposal of Surplus Material: Surplus and waste materials resulting from sodding
operations shall be disposed of by the Contractor, at his/her own expense.
D. PLANTING
Description: This work shall consist of digging and preparing plant holes, and of furnishing,
transporting and planting trees, shrubs, vines, seedlings and other materials.
It shall also include all incidental operations such as mulching, bracing, wrapping, care of
living plants and replacements of unsatisfactory plants.
Planting Time: Except for container grown items, plants must be dormant when delivered
to the storage site or project.
Bare root plant material shall be planted only when the air temperatures exceed 35
degrees F. The Contractor shall begin this work not later than September 1, following the
award date of the contract.
a. Spring Planting: This work shall be performed from the time the soil can be
worked until the plant, under field conditions, is not dormant except that:
1. Evergreen planting shall end April 30.
2. Seedlings shall be planted only during the spring planting season.
3. The planting time may be extended for container grown plants if the Village
Engineer determines that the weather conditions are favorable.
b. Fall Planting: This work shall be performed from the time the plant becomes
dormant until the ground cannot be satisfactorily worked except that evergreen
planting shall be performed between August 15 and October 15.
Digging of Plants: Plants shall not be dug until the Contractor is ready to transport them
from their original locations to the site of the work or approved storage. The maximum
time lapse between digging and being property loaded tor delivery to the site of the
work or being placed in approved storage, shall be 4 days for balled or burlapped
plants and one day for bare root plants. They shall be dug with care, avoiding injury to
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 32
the plants or loss or damage of the roots, particular attention being given to fibrous roots.
Immediately after digging, roots shall be protected against drying out and freezing. Bare
root plants shall be dug only when air temperatures exceed 35 degrees F.
Transportation: During transportation, the Contractor shall exercise care to prevent injury
and drying out of the plants. Upon arrival at the temporary storage location of the site of
the work, plants will be inspected tor proper shipping procedures. Should the roots be dried
out, large branches be broken, balls of earth be broken or loosened, or areas of bark be
torn, the Village Engineer may reject the injured tree. When a tree has been so rejected,
the Contractor shall at once remove it from the area of the work and replace it.
Temporary Storage: No plant shall remain in temporary storage over the summer. Plants
delivered to the project that are not to be planted immediately shall be protected in the
following manner:
a. Bare Root Plants: Plants may remain on the site of the work only 24 hours prior to
being planted or placed in storage. During this 24 hour period, the Contractor shall
continue to exercise care to prevent injury and drying out of the plants. The roots
of plants to be placed in storage shall first be puddled in a paste solution of the
prepared backfill used in planting and water. The plants shall then be protected and
kept moist by “heeling-in” the roots or by placing the plant in a cool moist storage
building. The “heeling-in” procedure shall require the plants to be separated and the
roots heeled in a suitable moist soil. If plants are stored in a building, the roots shall
be covered with a suitable moist mulch. Winter storage of bare rooted plants will be
allowed only in temperature and humidity controlled buildings. The Village Engineer
shall approve the storage methods. The duration of storage, the method of storage
and the materials used for mulch and “heeling-in” shall meet with the approval of the
Village Engineer.
b. Balled and Burlapped Plants and Container Grown Plants: Plants may remain on the
site of the work only 72 hours prior to being planted or placed in storage.
Balled and burlapped plants shall be kept moist and their solidity carefully
preserved. To prevent drying out or freezing, they shall be stored either in a cool
moist storage building or placed in a compact group with a suitable mulch material
placed around and between the balls so they are completely covered.
Container grown plant material shall be kept moist by watering as directed by the
Village Engineer. To prevent freezing, they shall be stored either in a cool moist
storage building or placed in a compact group with a suitable mulch material placed
around and between the balls so they are completely covered.
The duration of storage, method of storage and mulch material for balled and
burlap material and container grown plant material shall meet the approval of the
Village Engineer.
Layout of Planting: The area to be planted shall be finished to line and grade before
planting operations are begun. The Contractor shall furnish all marking flags for locating
plants and shall mark thereon the key number and size of plants. The Village Engineer
will place the marking flags and outline each area for mass or solid planting.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 33
Excavation of Plant Holes: The sides of all plant holes shall be vertical and the bottoms
horizontal. On slopes, the depth of excavation will be measured at the center of the hole.
Unless otherwise specified, the excess material excavated from the holes shall be spread
in the immediate area as directed by the Village Engineer. The excavated material shall
not be stockpiled on turf or in ditches. The sides of holes shall not be glazed or smooth.
a. Excavation for Trees: Holes tor trees shall be dug at the location indicated by the
marking flags. The diameter of the hole shall be at least 24” wider than the diameter
of the ball and the depth of the hole shall be 2” less than the depth of the ball.
b. Excavation for Shrubs, Vines and Seedlings: Holes for shrubs, vines and seedlings
shall be dug within the marked outline of the planting bed. The interval of planting
will be designated on the plans. Spacing shall be measured from center to center
and alternate rows shall be staggered.
Prior to digging shrub and vine holes, existing vegetation on the area shall be
mowed or treated with a non-selective, post emergent non-residual herbicide
approved by the Village Engineer. The area shall then be tilled to a minimum depth
of 2 inches until free of debris, gullies, clods, weeds, stones and roots.
Holes for shrubs shall be dug to a minimum diameter of 18 inches greater than the
diameter of the ball or container. Holes for vines shall be dug to a minimum
diameter and depth of 8 inches.
Immediately prior to planting seedlings, the existing grass and weed growth within
the planting area shall be cut to a maximum height of 2 inches. On slopes flatter
than 3:1, the soil adjacent to the plant row parallel to the contour shall be prepared
by cultivating or scalping to remove all grass and weed growth, in a continuous strip
not less than 18 inches wide. The seedlings shall be planted in the center of this
strip.
Holes for seedlings shall be made large enough to accommodate the root system
with a spade, planting bar or an approved mechanical tree planting machine.
Individual holes for container grown plants shall be excavated to the same
dimensions for comparable size balled and burlapped maternal.
Pruning: Pruning shall be done in such a manner as to preserve the natural growth habit
or each plant. The method and location of pruning and the percentage of growth to be
removed shall beet the approval of the Village Engineer, all pruning shall be done with
sharp tools in accordance with the best horticultural practices.
The ends of all broken and damaged roots of 1/4 inch or larger shall be pruned with a
clean cut, removing only the injured portion. All broken branches, stubs and improper
cuts of former pruning shall be removed.
a. Deciduous Trees: Pruning shall consist of thinning the twigs or branches as
dictated by the habit of growth of the various types of the trees to be pruned, and
as directed by the Village Engineer. The leader and terminal buds shall not be
cut unless directed by the Village Engineer.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 34
b. Deciduous Shrubs: In general, shrubs shall be cut back to 1/2 of their height.
Shrubs that are slow growing o r do not sucker readily shall be pruned in the
same manner as deciduous shade trees.
c. Evergreens: Evergreens shall not be pruned except to remove broken branches.
Planting Procedures: The prepared backfill shall consist of a mixture of topsoil, peat
moss and fertilizer. To each cubic yard of topsoil, add 3 cubic feet of loose peat moss, 3
pounds of phosphorus nutrients and 1 pound of potassium nutrients. The method of
mixing the components of the prepared backfill shall meet the approval of the Village
Engineer. The compressed ratio of the baled peat moss will determine the number of
loose cubic feet contained therein. Topsoil shall be stockpiled at locations approved by
the Village Engineer.
At the end of the establishment period, nitrogen nutrients shall be uniformly applied to the
surface of all backfilled areas where trees, shrubs and vines were planted at the rate of 6
pounds or nutrients per 1000 square feet on inorganic mulch, and 10 pounds of nutrients
per 1000 square feet on organic mulch.
The prepared backfill soil shall, at the time of planting, be in a loose, friable condition. At
no time shall the prepared backfill or other topsoil used on the job be stockpiled on turf or
in ditches.
All plants shall be placed in a plumb position and set 2 inches higher than the depth they
grew in the nursery. Prepared backfill shall be placed around the root system. Tamping
or watering shall accompany the backfilling operation to eliminate air pockets.
Thorough watering of trees, shrubs and vines, with a method approved by the Village
Engineer, shall follow the backfilling operation. This watering shall completely saturate
the backfill and be performed during the same day of planting. After the ground settles,
as a result of the watering, additional backfill shall be placed to match the level of the
finished grade. Approved watering equipment shall be at the site of the work and in
operational condition prior to starting the planting operation.
a. Balled and Burlapped Plants: After the plant is placed in the hole, all cords and
burlap shall be cur away from the trunk.
b. Container Grown Plants: Prior to placing the plant in the hole, the container shall be
removed with care so as not to disturb the ball of soil that contains the root system.
During the planting operation, care shall be taken not to destroy the solidity of the
ball of soil. Pots of material that will decompose in one growing season need not be
removed.
c. Bare Root Plants: The roots shall be carefully spread in a natural position and
prepared backfill shall be worked in around the roots so each root is individually
packed to eliminate air pockets. The plant shall be gently raised and lowered to
assure contact of the roots with the soil.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 35
d. Seedling Plants: When seedlings are removed from storage tor planting, they shall
be transported to the planting site in containers of water and the roots shall be
continuously immersed until planted. The roots shall be placed in the center of the
hole and prepared backfill shall be compacted around the roots to eliminate air
pockets. The prepared backfill shall be saturated with water after the plant is placed.
Any unplanted seedlings left at the end of each day shall be removed from the
water, the roots wrapped in moist materials and the seedlings placed in storage.
Mulch Cover: A mulch cover shall be provided for all plants except seedlings. A 4-inch
deep circular water saucer of soil shall be constructed around single plants and shall be
filled with mulch material to a depth of not less than three inches (3”). When the plant is
in a bed in which spacing is less than 6 feet on centers, the entire bed shall be
mulched to a depth of not less than three inches (3”) and with a mulch material. The
mulch shall extend 3 feet beyond the peripheral plants of the bed.
Wrapping: Within 7 days after planting, all shade trees of 2 1 / 2 inches diameter or
larger shall be wrapped from the ground to the lowest major branch. Unless
otherwise specified, a double layer of commercial screen wire mesh shall be wrapped
around the trunk of the tree. The screen wire shall be secured to itself with staples or
single wire strand tied to the mesh.
E. PERIOD OF ESTABLISHMENTAND GUARANTEE
Final inspection of all work will be made during the month of September each year. To be
acceptable, the plant must be in a live healthy condition, representative of its species,
and shall have been growing in place for not less than one year prior to inspection. No
portion of this work will be inspected until all items of work are completed.
Plants that do not meet the requirements tor acceptance shall be replaced by the
Contractor at his/her own expense following the date of inspection and prior to November
15 or in the case of items specified for spring planting only, prior to the following May 15,
at which time another final inspection will be made for replacements only. Should
replacements include both spring and fall items, the Contractor may elect to plant all
replacements in the spring, prior to May 15.
The Contractor shall remove immediately from the site of the work any dead plant
material. During spring or fall planting, the Contractor will not be permitted to terminate
the operation until all plant material is in a live, healthy condition. All plant material which
dies within 15 days after being planted shall be replaced at the time and shall be
considered as part of the original planting and be subject to the requirement of the period
of establishment.
Plant Care: During the period of establishment, the Contractor shall properly care for all
plants doing such weeding, watering, adjusting of braces, repair of water saucers or
other work which is necessary to maintain the health and satisfactory appearance of the
plantings. All requirements for proper care during the period of establishment shall be
considered as incidental to the cost of the contract and shall be performed within 5 days
following notification by the Village Engineer.
a. During the period of establishment, additional watering shall be performed at
least once within every 30 days during the months of May through December.
VILLAGE OF LINCOLNSHIRE TITLE 13-2
LANDSCAPING
Revised 06/22/2015 Page 36
The schedule for watering within the 30 day increment will be determined by the
Village Engineer. Should excessive moisture conditions prevail, the Village
Engineer may delete any of all of the additional watering cycles or any part of
said cycles.
The water shall be applied to individual plants in such a manner that the plant hole will
be saturated without allowing the water to overflow beyond the earthen saucer.
Watering of plants in beds shall be applied in such a manner that all plant holes are
uniformly saturated without allowing the water to flow beyond the periphery of the
bed. The plants to be watered and the method of application shall be approved by the
Village Engineer. The Contractor shall not be relieved in any way from the
responsibility for unsatisfactory plants due to the amount of supplemental watering.
b. During the period of establishment, weeds and grass growth shall be removed
from within the earthen saucer of individual trees and from the area within the
periphery of the mulched plant beds. This weeding shall be performed at least
twice during the months of May through September. The weeding schedule will be
determined by the Village Engineer.
The weeding may be performed in any manner approved by the Village Engineer
provided the weed and grass growth, including their roots and stems, are removed
from the area specified therein. Mulch disturbed by the weeding operation shall be
replaced to its original condition. All debris that results from this operation must be
removed from the right of way at the end of each day.
The plants weeded will be determined by the Village Engineer. The Contractor shall
not be relived in any way from the responsibility for unsatisfactory plants due to the
extent of weeding.