ORDINANCE 66-12
(as amended)
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING, ENACTING, ESTABLISHING, AND
DESIGNATING THE REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF MT. VERNON, ILLINOIS, REPEALING
CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN
AND PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDMENT
THEREOF AND FOR PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATION OF THE TERM THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois that a Revised Code of
Ordinances for the City of Mt. Vernon shall be hereby adopted, enacted and established by the terms of
this Ordinance and shall be designated and hereafter cited by the title, AREVISED CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MT. VERNON@, all as follows:
REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF MT. VERNON
(September 10, 2018)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 CITY OFFICIALS
Section 1.1 Qualifications
Section 1.2 Mayor
Section 1.3 City Council
Section 1.4 City Clerk
Section 1.5 Dept. of Finance
Section 1.6 City Treasurer
ARTICLE 2 ADMINISTRATION
Section 2.1 City Manager
Section 2.1A Assistant City Manager
Section 2.2 Legal Department
Section 2.3 City Engineer
Section 2.4 Dept. Of Public Works
Section 2.5 City Emergency Management
Section 2.6 Health
Section 2.7 Park and Public Facility Department
Section 2.8 Human Resources Department
Section 2.9 Fair Housing Regulations and Board
Section 2.10 Commission for Advancement of Programs for Handicapped
Section 2.11 Department of Tourism
Section 2.12 Budget Officer
Section 2.13 Department of Economic Development
Section 2.14 Tree Board
ARTICLE 3 REPEALED
ARTICLE 4 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES (TAX)
ARTICLE 5 BUILDINGS
Section 5.1 Adoption of Building Code
Section 5.2 Establishment of Office of Building Official
Section 5.3 Qualifications of Building Official
Section 5.3A Conflicts of Interest
Section 5.4 Duties of Building Official
Section 5.5 Cooperation of Other Officials
Section 5.6 Right of Entry - Violation
Section 5.7 Definitions
Section 5.8 Right of Entry-Administrative Inspection Warrant (Note: Section 5.8 Fire Limits
Established - Repealed 2005)
Section 5.9 Fees
Section 5.10 Dangerous and Dilapidated Buildings
Section 5.11 Unsafe Equipment
Section 5.12 Accessibility of Buildings to Physically Handicapped and Elderly Persons
Section 5.13 Parking Lots B Storm Water Detention
ARTICLE 6 ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
Section 6.1 Construction
Section 6.2 Definitions
Section 6.3 Application/Licensing
Section 6.4 Payment of License and Permit Fees
Section 6.5 License Classifications, Permits, and Fees
Section 6.6 Posting of License or Permit
Section 6.7 License of Each Specific Premises, Transfer to Other
Premises Owned by Licensee
Section 6.8 Surrender of License
Section 6.9 Number of Licenses
Section 6.10 Renewal
Section 6.11 Location Restrictions
Section 6.12 Health and Safety Laws
Section 6.13 Cessation of Business
Section 6.14 Hours of Operation
Section 6.15 Drive-In Windows
Section 6.16 Books and Business Records
Section 6.17 Additional Restrictions and Regulations
Section 6.18 Gifts of Alcohol for Commercial Purposes
Section 6.19 Liability of Licensee for Acts of Manager, Employees
and Other Named Persons
Section 6.20 Liquor Advisory Board-Deleted
Section 6.21 Liquor Control Commissioner
Section 6.22 House Rules
Section 6.23 Status of Annexed Territory
Section 6.24 Effective Date
Section 6.25 Severability
ARTICLE 7 ELECTRICAL CODE
Section 7.1 Definitions
Section 7.2 Adoption of National Electrical Code
Section 7.3 Electrical Inspector
Section 7.4 Electrical Inspector Duties
Section 7.5 Fees Paid to General Corporate Fund
Section 7.6 Permit Requirement
Section 7.7 Electrical Commission
Section 7.8 Registration Requirement
Section 7.9 Special Provisions
Section 7.10 Permit/Inspection Fees
Section 7.11 Annual Inspection
Section 7.12 Revocation of Permits
Section 7.13 Responsibility/Liability for Damages
ARTICLE 8 FIRE & POLICE COMMISSION, FIRE DEPARTMENT
AND POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section 8.1 Fire & Police Commission
Section 8.2 Police Department
Section 8.3 Fire Department
Section 8.4 Police Pension Fund
Section 8.5 Fire Pension Fund
Section 8.6 Community Services Personnel
ARTICLE 9 FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
Section 9.1 Adoption of Fire Codes
Section 9.2 Definitions
Section 9.3 Prohibition of Storage of Flammable Liquids in Outside, Above-Ground Tanks
Section 9.4 Permits
Section 9.5 Amendments Made in the Fire Prevention Code
Section 9.6 Adoption of Further Regulations
Section 9.7 Appeals
Section 9.8 Regulation of Sale and Possession of Fireworks
Section 9.9 Deleted
Section 9.10 Fire Alarm Systems and Components
Section 9.11 Auxiliary Protection Signaling Systems for Fire Alarm Service
Section 9.12 Alarm Systems in General, Including Fire Alarm
Section 9.13 Fire Apparatus Access Road
Section 9.14 Manual Shut-off Requirements for Gas Service
Section 9.15 Hazardous Materials
ARTICLE 10 HOUSING CODE
Section 10.1 Definitions
Section 10.2 Inspections
Section 10.3 Enforcement
Section 10.4 Minimum Basic Standards
Section 10.5 Minimum Light, Ventilation and Heating Standards
Section10.6 Minimum Safety and Sanitary Requirements
Section 10.7 Minimum Space and Use Requirements
Section 10.8 Responsibilities of Owners
Section 10.9 Rooming Houses
Section 10.10 Unfit Dwelling
Section 10.11 Violations
Section 10.12 Appeals
ARTICLE 10A HOUSING CODE FOR NON-OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLINGS
Section 10-1 Legislative Findings of Fact
Section 10-2 Purpose of Housing Code
Section 10-3 Applicability to All Dwellings
Section 10-4 Conflict With Other Ordinances
Section 10-5 Conflicts of Permits and Licenses
Section 10-6 Definitions
Section 10-7 Standards for Exterior Property Areas
Section 10-8 Standards for Maintenance of Dwellings and Dwelling Units
Section 10-9 Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
Section 10-10 Standards for Light, Ventilation and Heating
Section 10-11 Standards for Space, Use and Location
Section 10-12 Standards for Rooming Houses
Section 10-13 Standards for Security
Section 10-14 Primary Responsibilities
Section 10-15 Enforcement
Section 10-16 Mandatory Rental Dwelling Inspection Program
Section 10-17 Unlawful Interruption of Tenant Occupancy
Section 10-18 Nonliability of City Officials
Section 10-19 Penalty
Section 10-20 Effective Date
ARTICLE 10-A BUREAU OF INSPECTION
ARTICLE 11 LICENSES
Section 11.1 License Issuance and Duration
Section 11.2 Auctions/Auctioneers
Section 11.3 Barbers/Barber Shops
Section 11.4 Billboards/posting
Section 11.5 Dancing/Dance Halls
Section 11.6 House Movers
Section 11.7 Transient Merchants/Peddlers
Section 11.8 Jukeboxes
Section 11.9 Pawn Brokers
Section 11.10 Pool, Pinball, Bowling Alleys, Coin Operated Devices (Except Video Gaming)
Section 11.11 Theatrical and Amusements
Section 11.12 Pest Control/Contractors
Section 11.14 Massage Establishments
Section 11.15 Sexually Oriented Businesses
Section 11.16 Video Gaming Terminals
Section 11.17 Raffles and Poker Runs
ARTICLE 12 MISDEMEANORS
Section 12.1, 12.2 Disturbances
Section 12.3 Unlawful Assembly
Section 12.4 Intoxication
Section 12.5 Begging
Section 12.6 Public Nudity
Section 12.7 Destruction of Property
Section 12.8 Fireworks/Firearm Discharges; Bow/Deer Hunting
Section 12.9 Fortune Telling
Section 12.10 Failure to Register Guest
Section 12.11 False Fire Alarm
Section 12.12 APeeping Tom@; Trespass
Section 12.13 Sunday Blue Law (Repealed)
Section 12.14 Prostitution or Gambling House
Section 12.15 Trespass on Park or Recreation Area
Section 12.16 Prostitution, Gambling
Section 12.17 Dog Running at Large, Animal Offenses
Section 12.18 Interference with Law Enforcement Dog
Section 12.19 Parental Responsibility
Section 12.20 City and Truancy Curfew
Section 12.21 Drive Through Food Orders
Section 12.22 Littering
Section12.23 Loud Sound (Stereo) Amplification
Section 12.24 Refuse Containers and Collection
ARTICLE 13 NUISANCES
Section 13.1 General Nuisance
Section 13.2 Trash, Debris
Section 13.3 Combustibles
Section 13.4 Dead Animals
Section 13.5 Animals, Dogs, Cats
Section 13.6 Spitting
Section 13.7 Sale of Spoiled Food
Section 13.8 Open Burning
Section 13.9 Loud Noises
Section 13.10 Refrigerators
Section 13.11 Complaints, Fines, Liens
Section 13.12 Inoperable or junked vehicles
Section 13.13 Smoke, Dust or Fumes Emission
Section 13.14 Weeds
Section 13.15 Animals Running at Large
Section 13.16 Fines
ARTICLE 14 PLAN COMMISSION
ARTICLE 15 PLUMBING CODE
Section 15.1 Compliance With State Law
Section 15.2 Office of Inspector
Section 15.3 Plumbing Permits
Section 15.4 Fees for Permits
Section 15.5 Notification to Building Inspector
Section 15.6 Prohibition
Section 15.7 Cross-Connection Control
Section 15.8 Prohibition on Use of Groundwater as Potable Water Supply
Section 15.9 Penalty
ARTICLE 16 PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT
Section 16.1 Combined Water-Sewer System
Section 16.2 Supt. Public Utilities
Section 16.3 Superintendents of Water System
Section 16.4 Superintendents of Sewer System
Section 16.5 Board of Public Utility Comm
Section 16.6 Regulations - Water System
Section 16.7 Regulations - Sewer System
Section 16.8 Regulations - Jaycee Lake and Miller Lake
ARTICLE 16 A FATS, OILS, GREASES AND OTHER SUBSTANCES SEWER CONTROL
ORDINANCE (GREASE TRAP ORDINANCE)
Section I General Provisions
Section II Fats, Oils, Greases and Food Wastes
Section III Sand, Soil and Oil
Section IV Gasoline, Oil and Flammable Liquids
Section V Laundries
Section VI Bottle Establishments, Slaughterhouses and Other Commercial Establishments
Section VII Enforcement and Remedies
Appendix A Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance Record Verification Form
Appendix B Waste Hauler Manifest Form
ARTICLE 16 B MOUNT VERNON PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE
Section 1 General Provisions
Section 2 General Sewer Use Requirements
Section 3 Pretreatment of Wastewater
Section 4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Section 5 Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
Section 6 Reporting Requirements
Section 7 Compliance Monitoring
Section 8 Confidential Information
Section 9 Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
Section 10 Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Section 11 Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Section 12 Supplemental Enforcement Action
Section 13 Affirmative Defenses to Charge Violations
Section 14 Wastewater Treatment Rates
Section 15 Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 16 Effective Date
Section 17 Falsification
ARTICLE 17 SUBDIVISIONS
Section 17.1 Purpose, scope
Section 17.2 General Regulations
Section 17.3 Definitions
Section 17.4 Procedure
Section 17.5 Requirements
Section 17.6 Minimum Design and Development Standards
Section 17.7 Improvements
Section 17.8 Special Minimum Design & Development Standards
Section 17.9 Inspection
Section 17.10 Variations and Exceptions
Section 17.11 Platting Authority
Section 17.12 Bldg. Permit - Zoning Certificate
Section 17.13 Enforcement
Section 17.14 Plats
ARTICLE 18 TRAFFIC, STREETS, PARKING, PARKING METERS
Section 18.1 Definitions
Section 18.2 Police Administration
Section 18.3 Office of Traffic Engineer
Section 18.4 Authority of Police and Fire Departments
Section 18.5 Traffic Control Devices
Section 18.6 Speed Laws
Section 18.7 One-Way Streets
Section 18.8 One Way Street Signs
Section 18.9 Through Streets
Section 18.10 Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Section 18.11 Right-of-Way
Section 18.12 Trains
Section 18.13 Pedestrians
Section 18.14 Bicycle Regulations
Section 18.14 A Regulations for Skateboards, Roller Skates and Play Vehicles
Section 18.15 Parking
Section 18.16 Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited
Section 18.17 Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
Section 18.18 Equipment
Section 18.19 Driving Regulations
Section 18.20 Street Parking
Section 18.20A Parking Lots
Section 18.20B Parking Exception for a Handicapped Person
Section 18.21 Excavations (Street)
Section 18.22 Use of Public Grounds
Section 18.23 Solicitation Within Public Highways
Section 18.24 Tow Trucks
Section 18.25 Suspension of Drivers License
ARTICLE 19 MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
Section 19.1 Definitions
Section 19.2 Standards
Section 19.3 Building Permit and Inspection
Section 19.4 Mobile Home Use
Section 19.5 Enforcement
Section 19.6 Penalty
ARTICLE 19 A MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT
Section 19 A.1 Definitions
Section 19 A.2 License Required for Manufactured Home Development
Section 19 A.3 Building Permit, Inspection and Certificate of Occupancy for Manufactured
Home
Section 19 A.4 Restricted Use and Restricted Age
Section 19 A.5 Zoning
Section 19 A.6 License Fee
Section 19 A.7 Application for License
Section 19 A.8 Supervision
Section 19 A.9 Sites (Spaces)
Section 19A.10 Restrictions and Requirements
Section 19 A.11 Accessory or Auxiliary Buildings
Section 19 A.12 Water Supply
Section 19 A.13 Drainage
Section 19 A. 14 Sewer Facilities
Section 19 A. 15 Garbage
Section 19 A. 16 Vermin and Other Nusiances
Section 19 A.17 Lights
Section 19 A. 18 Dust Control
Section 19 A.19 Tie Down Requirements
Section 19 A.20 Utility Hookup
Section 19 A. 21 Register
Section 19 A. 22 Enforcement, Abatement and Lien
Section 19 A. 23 Penalty
ARTICLE 19 B TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Section 19 B.1 Definitions
Section 19 B. 2 Restricted Use
Section 19 B. 3 License and Regulations
Section 19 B. 4 Enforcement
Section 19 B. 5 Penalty
ARTICLE 20 STORM DRAINAGE & SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section 20-1 Purpose
Section 20-2 Conflicting Ordinances
Section 20-3 Compliance With Other Ordinances
Section 20-4 Definitions
Section 20-5 Storm Water Control Policy
Section 20-6 Permits for Construction in the Floodway
Section 20-7 Information Requirements
Section 20-8 Determination of Runoff Quantities
Section 20-9 Amount of Runoff to be Accommodated by Various Parts of Drainage Facility
Section 20-10 Level of Protection for Urban Areas
Section 20-11 Storm Sewer Design Standards
Section 20-12 Workmanship and Materials
Section 20-13 Open Channel Design Standards
Section 20-14 Construction and Materials
Section 20-15 Storm Water Detention
Section 20-16 Certifications Required
Section 20-17 Changes in Plan
Section 20-18 Determination of Impact Drainage Areas
Section 20-19 Other Requirements
Section 20-20 Regional Drainage Plans
Section 20-21 Disclaimer of Liability
Section 20-22 Corrective Action
Section 20-23 Exempt Projects
Section 20-24 Appendix - Tables and Figures
ARTICLE 21 ZONING
Section 21-100 General Provisions
Section 21-101 Statement Legislative Intent
Section 21-102 Short Title
Section 21-103 Territorial Limits of Ordinance
Section 21-104 Establishments of Districts: Provision for Official Zoning Map
Section 21-105 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
Section 21-106 Schedule of District Regulations
Section 21-107 Application of Regulations
Section 21-108 Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land, Non-Conforming
Structures, Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises, Non-
Conforming Characteristics of Use and Non-Conforming Signs
Section 21-109 Supplementary District Regulations
Section 21-110 Administration and Enforcement - Building Permits and Certificates
Of Zoning Compliance
Section 21-111 Board of Appeals: Establishment and Procedure
Section 21-112 Board of Appeals: Powers & Duties
Section 21-113 Planning Commission: Power and Duties for Conditional Use
Section 21-114 Amendments
Section 21-115 Appeals from Board of Appeals, Planning Commission and
City Council
Section 21-116 Duties of the City Manager, Board of Appeals, Planning Commission
and City Council
Section 21-117 Schedule of Fees, Charges, Expenses
Section 21-118 Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements
Section 21-119 Complaints Regarding Violations
Section 21-121 Airport Height Regulations
Section 21-122 Separability Clause
Section 21-123 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances: Effective Date
Section 21-124 Definitions & Illustrations
Section 21-125 Permits for Signs and Fees
Section 21-126 Sign Regulations
Section 21-127 Conditional Sign Permit
Section 21-200 Performance Standards
Section 21-201 Low and Medium Density Planned Unit
Developments (R-1) and (R-2)
Section 21-202 High Density Planned Unit Developments (R-3)
Section 21-203 Planed Manufactured Home Developments (R-MH)
Section 21-204 Light Industrial uses (I-I)
Section 21-205 General Industrial uses (I-2)
Section 21-300 Schedule of District Regulations:
General Statement of Intent
Land Use Districts:
A-G General Agriculture
F-P Flood Plain
R-I Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-M2 Medium Density Residential and Mobile Home
R-3 High Density Residential
R-MH Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home
B-1 Primary Business
B-2 Secondary Business
B-3 Interchange Business
B-PL Planned Business
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 General Industrial
I-A Industrial - Agriculture Land
IPCA -PUD Industrial Park Conservation Area - Planned Unit Development
(Commercial Design Standards for IPCA-PUD)
Section 21-400 Development in Flood Plain (Special Flood Hazard) Areas
Section 21-500 Zoning, Siting Location and Design Regulations for
Wireless Communication Facilities
Section 21-500A Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Ordinance Providing for the Regulation
of and Application for Small Wireless Facilities
Section 21-600 Zoning Regulations for Bed and Breakfast Establishments
ARTICLE 22 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 22.1 Citation
Section 22.2 Definitions
Section 22.3 Construction
Section 22.4 Separability
Section 22.5 Repeal of Prior Ordinance
Section 22.6 Penalty
ARTICLE 23 MT. VERNON MUNICIPAL AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Section 1: Title
Section 2: Tax Imposed
Section 3: Illinois Department of Revenue, State of Illinois to Collection Tax
ARTICLE 24 USE TAX - REPEALED (1/6/97)
ARTICLE 24 MOTOR FUEL TAX (EXPIRED)
ARTICLE 24 A MOTOR FUEL TAX - DIESEL
Section 1. Definitions
Section 2. Tax Imposed
Section 3 Tax and Report Transmittal
Section 4 Records Inspection
Section 5 Liability of Corporate Officer or Employee
Section 6 Disposition of Proceeds
Section 7 Penalty, Interest, Fines and Costs of Collection
Section 8 Effective Date
ARTICLE 25 REGULATION OF THE PLANNING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL
OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS
Section 25.1 Definitions
Section 25.2 Tree Species to Be Planted
Section 25.3 Unsuitable Trees
Section 25.4 Spacing
Section 25.5 Distance from Curb or Sidewalk
Section 25.6 Distance from Street Corners and Fireplugs
Section 25.7 Utilities
Section 25.8 Public Tree Care
Section 25.9 Tree Topping
Section 25.10 Pruning, Corner Clearance
Section 25.11 Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on Private Property
Section 25.12 Interference with City Tree Board
Section 25.13 Arborist, License and Bond
Section 25.14 Review by City Manager
Section 25.15 Violation and Penalty
Section 25.16 Severability
ARTICLE 26 TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
Ordinance 2008-27 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Section 26.1 Definitions
Section 26.2 Registration of Telecommunications Providers
Section 26.3 Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Section 26.4 Collection, Enforcement, and Administration of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees
Section 26.5 Compliance With Other Laws
Section 26.6 Existing Franchises and Licenses
Section 26.7 Penalties
Section 26.8 Enforcement
Section 26.9 Severability
Section 26.10 Conflict
ARTICLE 27 RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE
Section 27.1 Title
Section 27.2 Scope
Section 27.3 Definitions
Section 27.4 Notices
Section 27.5 Late Payment
Section 27.6 Payment
Section 27.7 Certain Credits and Refunds
Section 27.8 Audit Procedure
Section 27.9 Appeal
Section 27.10 Hearing
Section 27.11 Interest and Penalties
Section 27.12 Abatement
Section 27.13 Installment Contracts
Section 27.14 Statute of Limitations
Section 27.15 Voluntary Disclosure
Section 27.16 Publication of Tax Ordinances
Section 27.17 Liens
Section 27.18 Applications
Section 27.19 Severability
Section 27.20 Effective Date
ARTICLE 28 MOTEL AND HOTEL TAXES
PART I MOTEL / HOTEL TAX
Section 28.1 Definitions
Section 28.2 Tax
Section 28.3 Records to be Kept
Section 28.4 Returns
Section 28.5 Officer Liability
Section 28.6 Collection
Section 28.7 Proceeds of Taxes
Section 28.8 Use of Funds
Section 28.9 Certificate of Registration
Section 28.10 Violation
PART II MUNICIPAL SERVICE TAX
Section 1 Definitions
Section 2 Tax
Section 3 Certificate of Registration
Section 4 Books and Records
Section 5 Tax Returns
Section 6 Officer Liability
Section 7 Proceeds of Tax
Section 8 Fine and Cost of Collection
ARTICLE 29 OFFICIALS= AND EMPLOYEES= ETHICS ACT
Section 1 Definitions
Section 5 Prohibited Political Activities
Section 10 Gift Ban
Section 25 Penalties
ARTICLE 30 REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section 1 Legislative Findings, Declaration, and Purpose
Section 2 Definitions
Section 3 License Required
Section 4 License Fee
Section 5 Non-transferability of License
Section 6 Prohibited Sales/Distribution
Section 7 Warning Signs
Section 8 Identification Required
Section 9 Minimum Age to Purchase or Accept Tobacco Products
Section 10 Minimum Age to Sell Tobacco Products
Section 11 Vending Machines Prohibited
Section 12 Proximity to Certain Institutions
Section 13 Tobacco Samples and Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
Section 14 Out - of - Package Sales Prohibited
Section 15 Vendor - Assisted Sales
Section 16 Responsibility for Agents and Employees
Section 17 Use or Possession by Minors Prohibited
Section 18 Inspection
Section 19 Sales/Distribution Violation
Section 20 Purchase/Possession Violations
Section 21 Suspension and Revocation of License
Section 22 Non - Retaliation
Section 23 Severability
Section 24 Enforcement
Section 25 Conflict
Section 26 Effective Date
ARTICLE 31 FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
Section 31.1 Definitions
Section 31.2 Imposition of Tax
Section 31.3 Collection of Tax by Retailer
Section 31.4 Books and Records
Section 31.5 Transmittal of Tax Collection
Section 31.6 Transmittal of Excess Tax Collection
Section 31.7 Liability of Corporate Officer or Employee
Section 31.8 Disposition of Proceeds
Section 31.9 Penalty, Interest, Fines, and Costs of Collection
Section 31.10 Effective Date
ARTICLE 32 DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING
Section 32 A Purpose
Section 32 B Permitted Areas
Section 32 C Alcoholic Liquor
Section 32 D Application/Permit
Section 32 E Permit Fee and Term
Section 32 F Standards for Downtown Sidewalk Dining
Section 32 G Additional Regulations of Sidewalk Dining Areas
Section 32 H Additional Conditions of Downtown Sidewalk Dining License
Section 32 I Revocation of Permit
Section 32 J Penalty
ARTICLE 1
CITY OFFICIALS
SECTION 1.1
(a) The elective officers of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be a Mayor, four (4)
Councilmen, a City Clerk, and a City Treasurer. At the general election for City officers to be held in
January 1969 and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall be elected a Mayor, City Clerk, City
Treasurer, and two (2) Councilmen. At the general election held in 1967 and every two (2) years
thereafter, two (2) Councilmen shall be elected.
(b) The appointive officers of the City shall be the Director of Finance, City Attorney,
City Engineer, Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Health Officer and such other appointive
officers as may be authorized from time to time by ordinance. Each such appointive officer shall be
appointed and hold office for the term upon the conditions set forth in this Ordinance.
(c) No person shall be eligible for any City office who is not a qualified elector of this
City and who has not resided therein at least one (1) year preceding his election or appointment. All
officers of this City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and
subscribe the oath of office which may be prescribed by law therefore, which oath shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk. All such officers shall furthermore execute such bond as may be required
by ordinance, payable to the City, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their
offices.
(d) Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall, upon the expiration of
his office, immediately deliver to his successor in office, all books, property, and effects in his
possession which belong to the City of Mt. Vernon and appertaining to his office.
SECTION 1.2 MAYOR
The Mayor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office
prescribed by law and shall execute a bond in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00),
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, and file same with the City
Clerk. The Mayor shall possess only such powers and have such duties as are imposed upon him as
obligations under the statutes of the State of Illinois, together with such powers and duties vested in
him as a member of the City Council.
The Mayor shall have the power to appoint such officers as may be provided by this
ordinance or any ordinance of the City, with the advice and consent to the City Council. The Mayor
shall have the power to remove for good cause any officer appointed by him, but such removal shall
be effective only upon the concurrence of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council. The Mayor
shall be paid an annual salary of seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00), payable in equal
monthly installments.
SECTION 1.3 CITY COUNCIL
(a) The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and four (4) Councilmen elected at large;
which shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members and in case any
vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or Councilmen by death, resignation, removal, or otherwise,
such vacancy shall be filled by the remaining members of the Council by appointment of some
person to such office for the unexpired term thereof.
(b) No person shall be eligible to the office of Councilman unless he shall be a qualified
elector and reside within the City, nor shall he be eligible if he is in arrears in payment of any tax or
other liability due the City. No Councilman shall be interested either directly or indirectly in any
contract to which the City is a party. No person shall be eligible to the office of Councilman if he
shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery, or other corrupt practices or crimes. No
Councilman shall be eligible to any office, the salary of which is paid out of the City Treasury,
during his term as Councilman, nor shall he be engaged in any business transaction, either directly or
indirectly, or individually, or as a member of a firm or corporation with the City whereby any money
is to be paid directly or indirectly by the City to such member, firm or corporation.
(c) Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each
month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.; provided that when any such meeting date shall fall upon a legal
holiday, then such meeting date shall be the Tuesday following at the same hour and place.
Regular meetings shall be held at the Roland W. Lewis Building at Veteran’s Park or at such
other locations that shall be fixed from time to time by vote of the City Council. Adjourned and
special meetings shall be held at such times and places as determined by the Council. An Agenda
for each meeting shall be prepared by the City Manager. The City Manager shall place such items
upon the Agenda as the City Manager deems necessary for the operation of the City. In addition,
the City Manager shall place upon the Agenda, upon request by the Mayor or by a Council
Member, a Motion authorizing and directing the City Manager to prepare an ordinance,
resolution, or other matter of concern to the requestor for placement upon the Agenda for
Council’s consideration.
(d) Special meetings of the City Council may be held on the call of the Mayor or any
of two Councilmen to consider any ordinance, resolution, motion, discussion, or other item by
giving at least twenty-four hour notice thereof, by written notice to be delivered to members of
the Council thereof, or by leaving copies at the residence of each member, which notice may be
served by any police officer of the City and shall specifically state the business to be transacted at
such meeting.
(e) A majority of all Councilmen elected, including the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum
to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel any absent
Councilman to attend any regular, special, or adjourned meeting by written citation to that effect,
stating the day and hour of such meeting, which citation shall be signed by at least two (2)
Councilmen and served by any police officer of the City upon the absent Councilman in person.
(f) The City Council shall sit with open doors. It shall control the finances and property
of the City, shall appropriate money for corporate purposes and shall provide for the expenses and
debts of the City. The City Council shall have and shall exercise all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed by the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of this City.
(g) The following shall be the order of business of the Council at each meeting:
A. The reading and approval of the journal for the meeting next
preceded.
B. Reports from the City Manager.
C. Unfinished business.
D. New business.
E. Ordinances or resolutions.
F. The order of business for a specific purpose by a majority vote of the Council. No
action shall be taken on any matter not on the agenda without consent of the members
present.
(h) All ordinances enacted by the City Council imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment
or forfeiture or making any appropriation shall (1) be printed in book or pamphlet form published by
authority of the corporate authorities, or (2) published at least once, within ten days after passage, in
one or more newspapers published in the City. No such ordinances shall take effect until ten days
after it is so published, except that an ordinance imposing a municipal retailer's occupation tax or a
municipal leasing occupation tax as provided by the Illinois Municipal Code or affecting a change in
the rate thereof, shall take effect on the first day of the month next following the expiration of the ten
day publication period. All other ordinances, resolutions and motions shall take effect upon their
passage unless they otherwise provide. All ordinances and the date of publication thereof may be
proved by the Certificate of the City Clerk under the seal of the City. Ordinances printed in book or
pamphlet form as provided herein need not be otherwise published, and such book or pamphlet shall
be received as evidence of the passage and publication thereof without further proof.
(i) The yeas and nays of the City Council shall be taken on passage of all ordinances,
resolutions, motions and all propositions presented to the Council which shall be recorded in the
Journal of its proceedings by the City Clerk. A concurrence of a majority of all members of the
Council will be necessary to passage of any ordinance or propositions creating any liability against
the City or providing for expenditures or appropriations of its fund. The concurrence of four-fifths
(4/5) of all members of the Council shall be required to sell City property or vacate any street or
alley. All other matters require only a majority vote of members present.
(j) There shall be allowed and paid to each Councilman, other than the Mayor, a salary of
two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per year, payable in equal monthly installments.
(k) The City Council, in its proceedings, shall be governed by the following rules:
First: The Mayor, as presiding officer of the Council (or, in his absence, a temporary
chairman selected by the Council) shall call the Council to order promptly at the time fixed for the
meeting, and on the appearance of a quorum, shall cause the journal of the previous meeting to be
read.
Second: The presiding officer shall in addition:
a. Announce the business before the Council in the order appearing on
the agenda.
b. Recognize members entitled to the floor.
c. Put to a vote all questions regularly moved or which necessarily arise
in the course of the proceedings and announce the result of the vote.
d. Conduct the meetings in an orderly manner so as to expedite the
efficient and responsible processing of municipal affairs.
Third: All questions relative to the priority of business shall be decided by the Council
without debate subject, however, to the provisions of this ordinance.
Fourth: Every member present, when a question is put, shall vote, unless excused for cause
by the Council; provided, however, that no member shall vote upon a question in which he shall have
a personal interest.
Fifth: Every motion or proposition shall, if requested by any member, be reduced to writing
before a vote be taken.
Sixth: A member desiring to address the Council shall rise, say, AMr. Mayor@, or
AMr. Chairman@, and, on being recognized, shall speak no longer than ten minutes at any one time,
nor more than once on the same question, except by leave of the Council.
Seventh: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order except when the Council is actually
engaged in voting, and as well as the motion to table, shall be decided without debate.
Eighth: All motions, resolutions, petitions, orders, and communications, and any
ordinance relating to matters referred from or subject to a recommendation of the Zoning and
Planning Commission or the TIF Advisory Committee may be acted upon by the Council at the
meeting at which first presented or received, but no ordinance, except the ordinances specifically
identified above, shall be voted upon at the meeting at which it is first presented unless the rules
shall first be suspended. All resolutions and ordinances presented to the Council in writing need
not be read verbatim unless any member of the Council shall so request; otherwise any such
resolution or ordinance may be introduced by title only.
Ninth: No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting
unless there be present as large a number of Councilmen as were present when such a vote was
taken.
Tenth: A motion to reconsider may be made by any member of the City Council.
Eleventh: These rules may be temporarily suspended by a vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the
elected Councilmen, but shall not be repealed, altered, or amended except by concurrence of
four-fifths (4/5) of all Councilmen elected.
Twelfth: The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in ARoberts' Rules of Order@ shall
govern in all cases where applicable and where they do not conflict with the rules and ordinances of
this City or the laws of the State of Illinois.
Thirteenth: Upon a consistent or willful violation of these rules, a member may be expelled
from the meeting by a majority of all the members of the Council.
(1) The fiscal and municipal year of the City of Mt. Vernon shall commence on the first
day of May of each year and end on the thirtieth day of April of the following year.
Fourteenth: In order to secure the right and opportunity of each citizen of the City of
Mt. Vernon to address the City Council and to guarantee order at all public meetings of the
City of Mt. Vernon rules for public participation during public meetings of the City of Mt.
Vernon are hereby established.
(a) Public Participation. Public Participation shall be permitted during the following
portions of an open meeting of the City Council:
(1) Public Forum
(2) Public Hearing
(3) Invited Speakers
(b) Public Forum. Any person who seeks to address the members of the City Council at
any Regular Monthly Meeting of the City Council will be permitted to speak on any matter
listed on the Agenda or on any other matter directly relevant to the business of the City of
Mt. Vernon. Comment, promotion, or advocacy regarding any matter not subject to a
decision within the authority of the City Council is not a matter relevant to the business of the
City. Any person who seeks to address the members of the City Council at any Special
Meeting or Workshop Meeting of the City Council will be permitted to speak only on the
specific matter listed on the Agenda for the meeting.
(c) Public Forum Rules for Public Participation. Persons desiring to address the City
Council during a Public Forum shall do so in compliance with the following requirements:
A. Persons desiring to speak during a Public Forum of a Regular Council Meeting,
Special Meeting, or Workshop shall be permitted to speak during the Public
Participation portions of the meeting appearing upon the Agenda for the meeting.
Public Participation shall appear upon the Agenda for each meeting and shall be
conducted immediately after “Approval of the Journal for the Preceding Meeting” and
also immediately prior to the “Mayor”, unless the City Council, by majority vote of
the members in attendance, direct that Public Participation shall be conducted at
another time during the same meeting. The Public Participation portions of a meeting
shall appear upon a meeting’s Agenda as “Visitors/Citizens Requests/Addresses from
the Audience.” Persons who do not address the Council during the Public
Participation Items upon the Agenda shall address the Council only as an Invited
Speaker.
B. Each person wishing to speak during the Public Participation portion of a meeting
immediately after the “Approval of the Journal for the Preceding Meeting” shall sign a
Speaker’s List at the meeting prior the start of the meeting and shall provide his or her
name and the topic(s) to be discussed. No sign-in on a Speaker’s List shall be required
for persons wishing to speak during the second Public Participation portion of a
meeting. No person appearing before the Council as the Petitioner or Requesting Party
for an Item upon the Agenda for the meeting shall be required to sign the Speaker’s
List, unless said person also desires to speak during the Public Participation portion of
the meeting, as said person shall be considered an “Invited Speaker”.
C. Prior to speaking, each person must be recognized by the Mayor or by the
designee of the Mayor. Speakers desiring to speak on permitted topics will be called
to speak in the order that the speaker’s name appears upon the Speaker’s List, if
applicable.
D. Prior to speaking, each speaker, if physically able, shall stand at the designated
podium and shall state his or her name for the record. The speaker shall not be
required to state an address. Reasonable accommodations shall be made for any
speaker who is physically unable to appear at the podium.
E. Public comments during the Public Participation portion of a meeting shall be
limited to five (5) minutes per person, unless extended by consent of a majority of the
City Council members present at the meeting. The City Clerk, or such other person as
may be designated by the Mayor, shall monitor each speaker’s use of time and shall
notify the speaker when the time allotted has expired. A speaker cannot give his or her
allotted minutes to another speaker to increase that person’s allotted time. No speaker
shall be entitled to speak but one time on the same topic during any meeting, although
a majority of the City Council members may permit a speaker to speak more than
once if deemed necessary to permit a reasonable full and fair opportunity for public
participation
F. In order to expedite Council business and to avoid repetitious presentations,
whenever any group of persons wishes to address the Council on the same subject
matter, it shall be in order for the Mayor to encourage that a spokesperson be chosen
from the group to address the Council. If additional matters are to be presented by any
other members of the group, the Mayor may limit the number of such persons and
limit the presentation to information not already presented by the group spokesperson.
G. Speakers shall address their comments only to the entire City Council and not to an
individual Council Member or the Mayor, nor to the City Manager or a staff member,
nor to the audience. Speakers are requested to be well-mannered in their language and
presentation. No speaker shall use obscene language, fighting words, or defamatory
statements. Any person who engages in threatening, disruptive, or disorderly conduct
when addressing the City Council or who otherwise fails to comply with the
provisions of the Ordinance shall be deemed out-of-order by the Mayor and their time
to address the City Council at said meeting shall be terminated.
H. The Mayor, a Council Member, City Manager, or other City Official shall respond
as each deems appropriate to any comment or question of any speaker. The Mayor,
Council Member, City Manager, or other City Official may interrupt a speaker and
ask questions or make statements during any comment made by a speaker; in the event
of such questions or statements, the Mayor may extend a speaker’s allotted time to
compensate for the time which elapsed during statements or questions by City
Officials.
I. After a verbal warning, a person who refuses to comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance regarding public participation may be directed to cease speaking and to
leave the podium, and may also be asked to leave the meeting room; a person may be
physically removed if the person fails to comply with a request if such failure
interrupts, disturbs, or disrupts the orderly conduct of business during the meeting. In
addition, any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be subject to issuance of a citation and fine for violation of this Ordinance.
(d) Closed Sessions. Public participation shall not be permitted during any meeting or
portions of a meeting which is deemed to be a closed session under the Illinois Open
Meetings Act.
(e) Audience. Members of the audience shall refrain from applauding, cheering, or
booing during or at the conclusion of remarks made by any speaker, staff member, presiding
officer, or Council Member.
(f) Public Hearing. The rules applicable to the Public Forum shall generally apply to
public hearings, except that public comments shall be limited to the matter subject of the
Agenda for the public hearing and public participation shall be for such periods of time as
determined necessary by the City Council to permit a reasonable full and fair opportunity for
public participation; during the public hearing, the time limitation of each individual speaker
shall be as provided within this Ordinance or shall be as announced at the public hearing, but
in no event shall the limitation be less than five (5) minutes per speaker. Invited Speakers
may also speak at a public hearing.
(g) Subordinate Public Bodies. The rules applicable to a Public Forum and to Invited
Speakers shall generally apply to public meetings and hearings of City Commissions, Boards,
Committees, and similar subordinate bodies created by the City Council, except that public
comments shall be limited to the specific matters subject of items appearing upon the Agenda
for the meeting or hearing.
(h) Invited Speakers. Any citizen may address the City Council by invitation of the
Mayor or a Council Member, unless a majority of the City Council present at the meeting
denies the invitation; provided however that the Petitioner or Requesting Party for an item
upon the Agenda shall be entitled to speak as an Invited Speaker. Participation as an Invited
Speaker by non-Petitioners or non-Requesting Parties shall be within the sole discretion of
the City Council. Persons speaking as Invited Speakers shall be subject to such limitations as
the Mayor or a majority of the City Council shall prescribe during the meeting. In the
absence of other restrictions, speakers shall be governed by the same rules which govern
speaking during a Public Forum. Nothing herein shall prohibit someone who participated
during the Public Participation Item on the Agenda from being an Invited Speaker at the
same meeting.
(i) Alternative Channels of Communication. In addition to speaking at City Council
meetings and other meetings subject of this Ordinance, members of the public may
communicate any concern or make comment regarding the City of Mt. Vernon to the Mayor
and/or to individual Council Members or to the City Council as a group in writing by mail
addressed to the Mayor or Council Member at City Hall, 1100 Main, Mt. Vernon, Illinois
62864, or by email to the published email addresses on the City of Mt. Vernon’s website.
Also, written comments may be provided to the Mayor or Council Members by delivery of
written comments to the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 1.4 CITY CLERK
(a) The City Clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the oath
prescribed by law and execute a bond payable to the City of Mt. Vernon in the penal sum of Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office,
which said bond shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
(b) The City Clerk shall keep his office open in the City Hall from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
of each day of the week, except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays.
(c) The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and shall keep a record of
its proceedings in a suitable book styled the AJournal of the City Council.@ The Clerk shall record and
properly index in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances passed by the City Council, showing
date of passage and publication thereof. He shall also record all official bonds.
(d) The City Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits, and other documents
required to be issued by him under the laws and statutes of the State of Illinois and ordinances of this
City and attest same with the corporate seal of the City, of which seal he shall be the custodian.
(e) The City Clerk shall be the Registrar of Vital Statistics of the City of Mt. Vernon. A
report of all births, still births, and deaths shall be made to such Registrar of Vital Statistics, which
report shall contain all information required by AAn Act to Provide For Registration of all Births,
Still Births, and Deaths in the State of Illinois and to Repeal an Act Approved June 15, 1922, as
Amended.@ The City Clerk, as such Local Registrar, shall keep a record of all births, still births, and
deaths occurring within the municipality.
(f) The City Clerk shall perform all duties imposed by law or ordinance. There shall be
paid to the City Clerk an annual salary of $32,500.00, payable in equal monthly installments.
SECTION 1.5 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
(a) There is hereby created the Department of Finance of the City. The Department shall
consist of a Finance Director and such other employees as may be provided for by the City Council.
All City employees who perform services and obligations in all of the areas described in Section 1.5
and all subparagraphs thereof shall report to the Director of Finance insofar as the services and duties
of these employees relate to those areas.
(b) The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall receive a
salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by
the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
(c) Upon the effective date of appointment of the first Director of Finance, the City Clerk
shall cease to act as ex-officio Director of Finance and no further salary shall be
payable by reason thereof.
(d) The Finance Director shall:
! Assist in preparing, under the direction of the City Manager the annual budget which
shall, upon the approval of the City Manager, constitute his report of estimates
required by law to be submitted to the Council.
! Prepare and submit to the City Manager such financial statements and reports as the
City Manager may require.
! Prepare the Annual Appropriation and Levy Ordinances as required by law.
! Sell such personal property of the City as will not be needed for further public use,
subject to the approval of the City Manager and City Council.
! Have charge of the storage and supplies and materials purchased by. the City and not
delivered directly to the various departments and agencies and keep proper records
thereof.
(e) The Finance Executive shall establish, organize and keep all accounts of the City
Government, assist in preparing, under the direction of the City Manager and Finance
Director, the Annual Budget which shall, upon approval of the City Manager,
constitute his report of estimates required by law to be submitted to the Council.
Prepare and submit to the City Manager such financial statements and reports as the
City Manager may require.
Establish procedures to assure the receipt and deposit of all sums due the City.
Establish procedures to prevent expenditures in excess of budget appropriations and
in order to prevent illegal or irregular expenditures.
Conduct special studies and investigations into the fiscal affairs of the City
Departments whenever he deems it advisable.
Collect or supervise the collection of all monies belonging to the City from all
sources except Real and Personal Taxes and from other Governmental Jurisdictions.
Assist the City Manager in the purchase of all supplies, materials, and equipment
required by the various departments and agencies of the City, subject to the
ordinances relating thereto and the directions of the City Manager.
(f) The Finance Executive shall establish two divisions in the Department, operated
independently of each other as a security measure, but supervised by the Finance
Executive. One such division shall receive all revenues payable to the City as
hereinafter set forth; the other such division shall account for all such revenues as
hereinafter set forth.
(g) The Finance Executive shall receive and collect all charges for the use of City
property or special services rendered by the City, sums due the City on any contract,
public utility revenues from sewer and water operations, and all other sums due to the
City other than those which are by law paid directly to the Treasurer. It shall be the
duty of the Finance Executive to keep the City Manager informed as to all sums due
on taxes, accumulations in the Motor Fuel Tax Account to the credit of the City, and
all other revenues to which the City is entitled. Likewise, he shall also receive and
collect all other license fees, permit fees, and City charges where it has not either by
Statute or by this Code, been provided that they shall be otherwise collected. He shall
give every person paying money into the City a receipt therefor, specifying the date of
payment, amount and upon what account paid. Nothing in this section shall interfere
with the City Clerk collecting in behalf of the City such fees as said Clerk is now
collecting for and is by this Code provided for.
(h) The Finance Executive shall establish the City's accounting procedure in such a
manner that the accounts will show all financial transactions of each branch of the
City Government and all financial transactions relating to all appropriations, funds
and sub-funds, all cash receipts and disbursements, and all transactions effecting the
acquisition, custody, and disposition of assets. Such accounts shall at all times show
the fiscal condition of the City, including the current revenues and expenditures of all
municipal funds and accounts.
(i) The Finance Executive shall examine all payrolls, vouchers and bills and other claims
and demands against the City and shall not issue a warrant for payment thereof,
unless he has found by diligent investigation that the claim is in proper form,
correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly and legally due and payable,
and that it is accompanied by the certification of a responsible official of the
department concerned that the goods and services listed therein were actually
received. He may require a statement in writing under oath as to any fact or matter
concerning the justness or correctness of any such bill or claim. If he finds the claim
to be fraudulent, erroneous, or otherwise invalid, he shall refuse to authorize the
payment of same and shall make immediate report of the circumstances to the City
Manager.
The Finance Executive shall, immediately preceding each regular monthly meeting of
the Council, prepare a warrant on the Treasurer for the payment of all sums due from
the City, listing each item and the fund out of which it is payable; which warrant,
when properly signed by the Mayor and Clerk, shall authorize the issuance of a
voucher or check as provided by law for the payment of each item. No item shall be
included in such warrant unless it has been authorized by the Council.
A list of all items to be paid shall be submitted to the Mayor for his signature. Such
list shall contain the statement of the Finance Executive and of the City Manager to
the effect that all items contained herein are proper expenses due from the City for
services performed or materials furnished to the City. Approval of such list of items
to be paid by the Council on a roll call vote shall constitute the Council's approval of
the payment of all expenses listed thereon; provided that the Council may in the
motion to approve payment, except specific items from such approval, in which case
such items shall not be paid. Notwithstanding any such other provision in this Code
contained where employees' services have been previously authorized and such
services performed and being due and payable, the payment for such services may be
made and a regular warrant on the Treasurer for such payments issued without
requiring further Council authorization. It shall be the duty, however, of the Finance
Executive to prepare a report of such payments so made to be presented to the
Council at the next meeting following for further approval of the payments so made.
If the Finance Executive issues a warrant authorizing payment of any item which no
appropriation has been made, or for the purpose of which there is not sufficient
balance in the proper appropriation and allotment, or which is otherwise contrary to
law, he and his sureties shall be individually liable to the City for the full amount
thereof.
(j) Accounts shall be kept by Finance Executive for each appropriation made by the
Council, together with a record of each allotment of the appropriation by the City
Manager, and every purchase order and contract and every warrant passed for
payment shall state specifically against which it is drawn. The Finance Executive's
accounts shall show for each departmental appropriation and allotment made, the
amount of obligations incurred against the same, and the balance remaining to the
credit thereof.
No contract or purchase order involving the expenditure of tax or bond money shall
be issued or entered into, nor shall any such be valid unless the Finance Executive
shall first certify thereon that there is in the Treasury to the credit of the
Appropriation from which it is to be paid, a balance sufficient to meet the obligation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, stores and service requisitions and
emergency purchase orders issued in accordance with the rules promulgated by the
City Manager, may be certified not later than twenty-four hours after their issuance.
(k) The allotments of appropriations, as approved by the City Council and from time to
time revised, shall limit the amount of expenditures which may be certified against
any appropriation by the Finance Executive.
(l) If an official or employee of the City shall authorize or incur an obligation against the
City without first securing the Finance Executive's certification required by this
Article, he and his sureties shall be individually liable for the amount of such
obligations.
(m) At the close of each fiscal year, any balance of an appropriation, except those relating
to bond funds and other appropriations specifically granted for longer than one year
by the Council, shall automatically lapse and shall cease to be available for
expenditure, unless reappropriated by the Council.
(n) Whenever any appropriation or fund is exhausted, the Finance Executive
immediately shall notify the City Manager thereof, and he shall not thereafter draw
any warrant against any such fund or appropriation until the same shall be renewed.
(o) The Finance Executive shall keep in a suitable book an accurate list of all warrants
drawn upon the City Treasury, showing the date, number and amount of each, the
name of the person in whose favor drawn, and the fund out of which each warrant is
payable.
(p) The Finance Executive shall keep in his office in a book expressly for that purpose,
to be known as the bond register, a full and correct list of all outstanding bonds of the
City, showing the number, amount, time of maturity, rate of interest and place of
payment of each bond; and for what and to whom the same was issued; and when any
City bonds are surrendered, cancelled or paid, said register shall show the fact and in
his annual report to the City Manager the said Finance Executive shall describe
particularly the bonds sold, exchanged or redeemed during the fiscal year and give an
itemized statement of the expenses thereof.
(q) The Finance Executive shall require all officers charged in any manner with the
receipt, collection, or disbursement of City funds to submit to him monthly reports in
writing, showing in detail all such receipts, collection and disbursements. If any such
officer shall neglect to make such report or to adjust his accounts whenever required
by the Finance Executive or to pay over to the proper officer any money in his
possession belonging to the City, it shall be the duty of the Finance Executive to
cause a written notice to be served upon such officer and his sureties demanding a
settlement of his accounts with the City forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal of
such officer to make such settlement and pay over said monies for a period of ten
days after the serving of such notice, the Finance Executive shall report such officer
to the City Manager for his action in the matter, and proceedings shall be instituted
against such delinquent officer and his sureties for the recovery of any money due
said City.
(r) At the close of each, month and at any other time, if so ordered, the Finance
Executive shall prepare and submit to the City Manager a statement of the condition
of each appropriation and fund or sub-fund and such other reports as may be required
of him. At the close of the year he shall submit to the City Manager a statement of the
condition of each appropriation and fund or sub-fund and such other reports as may
be required of him. At the close of the year he shall submit to the City Manager a
complete report of the financial transactions of the year and the condition of the
City's finances, including a balance sheet for each fund and such other reports as may
be required of him.
(s) He, with the City Treasurer, shall within ninety days afer the first day of May in each
year, make out an annual report for publication, giving a detailed statement of all the
receipts and liabilities of the City, the condition of all unexpended appropriations, all
contracts unfulfilled, the balance of money remaining in the Treasury, all sums due
and outstanding, and all other matters necessary to exhibit the true financial condition
of the City. When examined and approved by the City Manager, the Treasurer shall
publish said report in such manner as the Council may direct.
(t) The Finance Executive shall conduct a thorough and continuous internal audit of all
receipts, payments assets and liabilities of all funds handled by the City, or by any
agency thereof, in order to protect the City from loss through accident, negligence, or
dishonesty. Said Finance Executive shall audit all reports of officers handling any
City monies and submit same to the City Manager, together with any obligations he
has thereto. It shall be his responsibility to see that all amounts legally due the City
are correctly computed, collected in full and deposited in the Treasury to the credit of
the proper fund and account. He shall verify the daily cash transactions and certify to
the correctness of the daily cash report.
The Finance Executive shall, when so ordered by the City Manager, and may upon
his own initiative, make special audits and investigations into the finances of any
department of the City Government. At the close of each fiscal year the Council shall
cause an audit to be made of the City accounts by duly qualified public accountants.
(u) All warrants, books, and all papers pertaining to his office as such Finance Executive,
shall at all times be open to the inspection of and subject to the examination of the
Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director, City Treasurer, and any Councilman.
SECTION 1.6 CITY TREASURER
(a) The City Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath
prescribed by law and shall execute a bond payable to the City of Mt. Vernon in the
penal sum of not less than double the amount of estimated taxes, special assessments
and licenses, and other receipts for the current year, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his office. which bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(b) The City Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the City and keep a separate
account of each fund or appropriation and the debit and credits belonging thereto and
shall issue receipts for all monies paid into the City Treasury. The Treasurer shall
keep an accurate register of all warrants issued and paid, showing the number, date,
and amount of each, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid,
the date of payment, and shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed. The Treasurer
shall segregate all monies belonging to the City separate and distinct from his own,
and is hereby prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, any funds of the
City in his custody and keeping for the use or benefit of himself or any other person.
All funds received upon any special assessment shall be segregated to a special fund
for that purpose.
The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the City Council of all funds collected
and all expenditures made and the balance of the funds in the City Treasury. The
Treasurer shall also annually file with the City Clerk a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures of the City and all transactions as Treasurer during the
preceding year, which account the Clerk shall immediately cause to be published in
the manner provided by law.
(c) All warrants drawn by the Treasurer shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned
by the Clerk.
(d) The City Treasurer shall receive a salary of $6,000.00 per year, payable in equal
monthly installments.
ARTICLE 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 2.1: CITY MANAGER
(a) The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term as
provided by law. Before taking office the City Manager shall furnish a fidelity
bond in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties, in which bond shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(b) The City Manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him
by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the City Council. He
shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the
municipality insofar as their enforcement is within the power of the City.
(c) The Manager shall attend all meetings of the City Council, shall keep the Council
informed as to the affairs of the City, and shall recommend to the Council such
actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the City.
(d) The City Manager shall hire and discharge all employees (other than those under
civil service or other tenure of office law) authorized by the City Council to be
hired, at such compensation as may be set or authorized by the City Council. All
employees shall perform their duties subject to the direction of the City Manager
or that of the superior to whom the Manager may assign such employee; provided
that the Manager may delegate to any other official or employee the authority to
hire or discharge any employee so authorized.
(e) All appointive officers of the City shall be filled by appointment by the Manager,
except where otherwise provided by law, and the Manager shall report to the
Mayor and Council such appointments or any removal from office, made by him
as soon as possible after the appointment or removal.
(f) Every administrative department of the City shall be under the supervision and
control of the Manager, who shall have the power to remove from office any
officer appointed by the Manager, subject to the provisions of this Section.
(g) The Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the City may be a
party, and may sign on behalf of the City any contract authorized by the City
Council, excepting where the Council directs that some other officer or officers
shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to it that all terms of any
contract to which the City is a party, are fully performed by all parties thereto.
(h) The Manager shall be general purchasing agent of the City, and except where
specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the Council, he shall make
all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment authorized by the Council in
the manner prescribed by, and subject to the limitations imposed by law. No
purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting upon authorization by the
Council and no expense shall be incurred, except for purposes for which no prior
appropriation is required by law, if the amount thereof is not covered by an
unexpended appropriation.
(i) It shall be the duty of the Manager to cause to be prepared each year the Annual
Appropriation Ordinance in time for consideration and enactment by the Council
during the first quarter of the fiscal year; and to prepare the Tax Levy Ordinance
for passage and file a certified copy with the County Clerk within the time
required by law. He shall keep current accounts of the amounts appropriated and
the amounts spent out of each appropriation, showing the unexpended
appropriations at all times.
(j) It shall be the duty of the Manager to keep current accounts showing at all times
the fiscal condition of the City, including the current and anticipated expenses,
appropriations, cash on hand, and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and
accounts; and shall see to the collection of all money due the municipality.
(k) The Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property
of the City and its location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all
such property, including equipment, buildings, parks and all other City property,
which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
(l) It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to the publication of all notices,
ordinances or other documents required by law to be published, and to prepare or
cause to be prepared, all reports which the City of any of the officials thereof are
required by law to prepare.
(m) The Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by
law to be kept by the City and not by a specific officer. Where the law makes it
the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain records, the Manager shall make
available to such officer all necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of
such records and shall make available a place for the custody of such records. And
in compliance herewith, the Manager shall make available to the Clerk,
stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the Journal of
Council Proceedings, and the record of ordinances and all other documents which
by law the Clerk is required to keep, and he shall perform similar services for the
Treasurer in the maintenance of bond registers and all other records or documents
which by law the Treasurer is required to keep or prepare. Where the law requires
or provides for certification of any records or documents by any officer of the
City, the Manager shall cause such records or documents to be properly prepared
and presented to each officer for his signature.
(n) The Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats, showing the
location of all City utilities, and other municipal properties, all street and other
public places, and all lots or parcels of land subdivided according to law.
(o) The Manager shall maintain an office in the City Hall and shall spend such time in
the performance of his duties as may be required by the Council. In the event that
the City Manager shall be absent from the City or incapacitated from performing
the duties of his position, the City Attorney shall act as Manager during such
absence or incapacity.
(p) The above described salary shall be adjusted quarterly hereafter by one-half the
percentage of increase in the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The average index number as
published for the month of May, 1981, for AAll Items@, in a table entitled,
AConsumer Price Index of U.S. City Average, All Items and Commodity Groups@,
shall have subtracted from it the same index number as published for the month of
August, 1981. The resultant number shall be divided by 2, and that figure used as
percentage for increase or decrease in the salary herein provided. The same
computation shall then be made quarterly thereafter, using the average index
figure for the last month of the prior quarter and the last month of the then quarter.
(q) The City Manager shall make periodic surveys of the functions, duties and work
load of all departments and officers of the City. Based thereon, the City Manager
shall, from time to time, determine the need of all departments and officers of the
City, all secretarial, stenographic, and clerical assistance, and shall, based upon
results of said periodic survey, have complete authority from time to time to
assign secretarial, stenographic, and clerical employees of the City to the various
departments and officers of the City in accordance with their current requirements.
The City Manager is hereby granted the right, authority, and power to hire such
secretarial, stenographic, and clerical employees as shall, in his opinion, be
necessary to the efficient discharge of business of the City and such other
limitations of those numbers of employees as shall be authorized by annual
appropriation and salary ordinances, and the City Manager shall further have the
power to discharge such employees.
(r) Any employee of the City in any position who shall become disabled or incapable
of performing the duties of his office or position shall be automatically retired arid
the City Manager is hereby granted authority to retire any employee who shall be
shown to be so disabled or incapable of performing the duties of his office or
position by certificate of a duly licensed physician. No retirement benefits shall be
due or payable to any employee, except under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund, Firemen's Pension Fund, or the Policemen's Pension
Fund. The provision of this subsection (r) shall not apply to officers under the
jurisdiction of the Fire and Police Commission.
SECTION 2.1A: ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER
A. There is hereby created the position of Assistant City Manager.
B. The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be
subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager and shall receive a salary within
ranges determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by the City Manager based
upon performance and merit.
C. The Assistant City Manager shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Assist the City Manager in planning, coordinating, analyzing, implementing, and
managing City departments, programs, and policies.
2. Coordinate with City department Heads to develop strategic plans to obtain
desired objectives.
3. Synthesize information from numerous sources, prepare reports, recommend
solutions, and make presentations to the City Manager, elected officials, City
staff, and the general public.
4. Perform special assignments; oversee and coordinate projects as assigned by the
City Manager.
5. Assist in the formulating and implementing of City administrative policies and
procedures; enforce departmental rules, regulations, policies, and procedures.
6. Plan, organize, and direct the administration of the City; develop and manage
departmental goals and objectives; provide administrative leadership in City
administration, personnel, and building maintenance.
7. Coach, direct, and supervise personnel engaged in performing City administration,
personnel, and building maintenance; plan, schedule, and assign work; instruct
and train, correct methods and procedures; establish departmental work priorities;
monitor work in progress; ensure City employees follow safe practices; revise
departmental policies and procedures.
8. Review and evaluate employee performances.
9. Develop, coordinate, and direct public relations activities for the City by
performing the duties personally or through subordinates.
10. Implement department operational procedures and ensure compliance with City,
County, State, and Federal ordinances, laws, regulations, and policies; resolve
departmental operational problems.
11. Assist, conduct, and participate in negotiations with union organizations
representing employees.
12. Coordinate and direct the City's participation in events and programs.
13. Assist in negotiating contracts with outside vendors.
14. Serve as interim department head as needed and perform duties of the City
Manager in his/her absence as directed by the City Manager or Council.
15. Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City Manager.
D. The Assistant City Manager shall specifically perform the duties of the Executive
Administrator, of the Department of Economic Development as provided within Section 2.13 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 2.2: LEGAL DEPARTMENT
A. Legal Department Established
There is hereby established a Legal Department for the City of Mt. Vernon which shall
consist of a Corporation Counsel and a City Attorney, and such Assistants and Special Assistants
as may be hereafter authorized, all of whom shall be Attorneys at Law duly licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois. The Corporation Counsel and the City Attorney shall each be residents of the
City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. The City Council may further, from time to time, authorize such
clerks, secretaries, assistants, and other staff as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the
Legal Department and the good of the City. The Legal Department shall be under the supervision
and direction of the City Manager for all administrative purposes.
B. Corporation Counsel
The Corporation Counsel of the City shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the
advice and consent of the City Council. He shall be the head of the Legal Department and shall
be responsible for its efficient operation. He shall be appointed on an indefinite basis and shall
continue in office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. The Corporation Counsel
shall advise the City Council, Mayor, City Manager, and heads of departments; shall prepare
and revise ordinances when requested by the City Manager, City Council, or Mayor. He shall
prepare for execution all contracts and agreements to which the City is a party, and shall approve
as to form all legal instruments. He shall give legal opinions on any legal matter or question
submitted to him by the City Manager, City Council, or Mayor, or any other officer of the City
authorized by the City Manager, City Council or Mayor.
He shall further represent the City of Mt. Vernon in all matters not involving litigation. The
Corporation Counsel shall further examine and approve as to form all resolutions, ordinances,
contracts, and other documents prepared by other parties and submitted to the City for the
approval, enactment, or execution by the City. The Corporation Counsel shall attend all official
meetings of the City Council.
C. Litigation
1. City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
prosecute all actions for violation of City Ordinances initiated or referred by the City Manager,
City Engineer, or other City official, except the Police Department and such other litigation
matters as may be assigned by the City Manager.
2. Assistant City Attorney. An Assistant City Attorney may be appointed by the City
Manager to prosecute all actions for violation of traffic ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon,
including all provisions of Article 18 hereof and also, complaints of ordinance violations made
by private citizens.
3. General Litigation. The Corporation Counsel or such other member of the Legal
Department as shall be designated by the City Manager from time to time shall prosecute and
defend any and all other suits or causes of action to which the City may be a party and shall
represent the City in all matters before the Circuit, Appellate, or Supreme Courts of the State of
Illinois, in any Federal Court hearing, hearings before the Illinois Commerce Commission or
other judicial or quasi-judicial commission where there is a possibility of an appeal to a court of
record.
D. The Corporation Counsel shall be paid a retainer of $125.00 per month for his
attendance upon the official bi-monthly meetings of the City Council. For all other services, the
Corporation Counsel and the City Attorney shall keep detailed time records of time necessarily
spent by each of them for their services, and shall bill the City monthly for services of the month
prior to such bill, which shall be at the same rate for hourly services as the fair, usual, and
customary hourly fee by attorneys in Jefferson County. The City shall further pay the proper out
of pocket expenses of the Legal Department, including all court costs, publication costs,
telephone expenses, and other out of pocket expenses.
E. Conflict of Interest
In the event that any member of the Legal Department of the City may be prevented from
representing the City in any matter for which their office would otherwise require them to
provide legal services to the City, including prohibition of representation by reason of conflict of
interest or other ethical prohibition or by reason of time constraint or in which any of them shall
desire or request assistance, the City Manager may authorize any other member of the Legal
Department to represent the City in any particular case, or the City Manager may employ Special
Counsel for any such purpose. In the event of appointment of Special Counsel who is not then
the Corporation Counsel, City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney appointed by the City
Manager, that appointment shall be at such salary or compensation as may be agreed upon
between the City Manager and that Special Counsel but which compensation shall be ratified by
the City Council.
F. The duties of the Corporation Counsel, the City Attorney, or any Special Counsel shall
not prevent either office from engaging in the general practice of law in any matter not in conflict
with the interests of the City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 2.3: CITY ENGINEER
(a) There is hereby created the office of City Engineer; who shall be appointed by the City
Manager with the advice and consent of the City Council and who shall, before entering the
duties of his office, take the oath prescribed therefor.
(b) The City Engineer shall devote his full time to the duties of his office and shall not
perform any professional services for any other person, corporation, or entity. He shall perform
the following engineering services for the City:
l. Attend all Council meetings and all Utility Commission meetings for the purpose
of ascertaining the desires of the City in regard to engineering projects or
problems and to offer advice on such projects or problems when requested.
2. Obtain resolutions when necessary for engineering projects and secure the
approval of the proper agency for saw.
3. Supervise all maintenance operations, including the preparation of estimates,
maintenance expenditure statements, inspection of work, ordering materials; and
checking bills for approval and payment by the City for projects not requiring
plans and specifications and not part of the MFT maintenance.
4. Make the necessary inspections of all problems of an engineering nature when
reported to the City or requested by the City Manager and recommendations for
the improvements or correction of same.
5. Represent the City in all transactions or working agreements when engineering
services are required.
6. Supervise the work on any construction which does not require detailed plans and
specifications.
7. Supervise all maintenance operations which are part of MFT maintenance,
including preparation of estimates, maintenance expenditure statements,
inspection of work, ordering of materials, checking bills for approval and
payment, and all other services for MFT work, including where appropriate, plans
and specifications.
8. Perform any other engineering and professional services directed by the City
Manager.
9. Supervise the staff of his office.
(c) The City Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall receive a salary
within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by the City Manager
based upon performance and merit.
SECTION 2.4: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works for the City of Mt. Vernon, which
shall be directed by the Superintendent of Public Works under the supervision of the City
Manager. The Department shall have jurisdiction and control of the operation, construction,
maintenance and improvement of all City streets, sidewalks, and other public places, not
including parks, sanitary sewage systems, or water system. The Superintendent shall personally
superintend all improvements upon streets, alleys, and sidewalks of the City of Mt. Vernon and
cause all unsecure and unsafe places thereon to be repaired, and shall cause all ordinances
relating to streets, alleys, and sidewalks to be enforced. He shall keep a record of all tools and
property in his possession belonging to the City and shall make monthly reports as to all services
performed by the department during the preceding month. He shall annually, under the direction
of the City Manager and City Engineer, prepare a program of maintenance for all streets, alleys,
and sidewalks and construction of new public facilities for the next ensuing year.
SECTION 2.5: CITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
(a) Establishment
There is hereby created the Mt. Vernon City Emergency Management Agency to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with AThe
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305. et seq). The term EMA is herein
defined to mean Emergency Management Agency where the same appears.
(b) Coordinator
The Coordinator of the City EMA shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration,
training, and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction and control of the City Council as
provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the
Mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment
is made as provided in this ordinance.
(c) Functions
The City EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the City as shall be prescribed in
and by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may the promulgated by the Governor, and in
addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any
Mutual Aid Agreement with any other political subdivisions, municipality, or quasi municipality
entered into as provided by AThe Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act".
(d) Service as Mobile Support Team
All or any members of the City organization may be designated as members of a Mobile
Support Team created by the Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency as
provided by law.
The leader of such Mobile Support team shall be designated by the Coordinator of the City
EMA Organization.
Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a City employee or officer while serving on
call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the
powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member
who is not a paid officer or employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(e) Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
The Coordinator of EMA may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreement with other cities or
political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been
approved by the City Council, and by the State Director of EMA, if required.
(f) Emergency Action.
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy
attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois or a major disaster
resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it
shall be the duty of the City EMA to cooperate fully with the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(g) Compensation
Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the City, if called for
training by the State Director of EMA; shall receive for the time spent in such training the same
rate of pay as is attached to the position held; such members who are not such City employees or
officers shall receive for such training time, such compensation as may be established by the City
Council.
(h) Reimbursement by State
The City Finance Director may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training members of the EMA
prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of
a Mobile Support Team while serving outside of the City in response to a call by the Governor of
State Director of EMA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State
incident to EMA activities as provided by law.
(i) Purchases and Expenditures
The City Council may, on recommendation of the City Coordinator of EMA, authorize
any purchase or contracts necessary to place the City in a position to combat effectively any
disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile and to protect the
public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the
case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the City Coordinator of EMA is
authorized on behalf of the City, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may
be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory
procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts or obligations,
as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, provided that if the City
Council meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that
body.
(j) Oath
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City EMA Organization shall,
before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which shall be filed with the
Coordinator:
AI, , do solemnly swear
(or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic, that I take this obligation freely, without any mental
reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the
duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Mt. Vernon
City EMA Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.@
(k) Office
The City Council is authorized to designate space in a City building, or elsewhere, as
may be provided for by the City Council for the City EMA as its office.
(1) Appropriation - Levy of Taxes
The City Council may make an appropriation for EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for EMA purposes only a tax not to exceed five(5)
cents per one hundred dollars ($100) of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to
all other taxes, as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act; however, that
amount collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty-five cents (254) per capita.
SECTION 2.6: HEALTH
(a) There is hereby created a Division of Sanitation within the City of Mt. Vernon under
the supervision of the City Manager and consisting of such employees as may be necessary
for the operation of the Division, provided that the maximum number shall be authorized
by the Annual Budget Ordinance.
The City will regularly collect and dispose of garbage and refuse of residential dwelling
units within the City; provided that the City shall not collect garbage at any place which is
not within the City limits; shall not collect garbage at any dwelling unit which is located
above business establishments which are located in the downtown area; shall not collect
garbage from any school, commercial, or industrial establishment; and shall not collect
garbage from any dwelling having five or more apartments or units.
A monthly service charge shall be collected from each residential dwelling unit receiving
City garbage and refuse collection; for purposes of assessing this fee, each single family
residence, each apartment, each mobile home, or each other living unit shall constitute a
Adwelling unit@. The service charge shall be in addition to any tax or other fee imposed or
received by the City for garbage and refuse collection and may be reviewed annually at the
beginning of each fiscal year. Effective. May 1, 2016, the service charge shall be $19.00 per
dwelling unit per month. The charge for garbage and refuse collection service shall be made
monthly and shall be made payable 16 days after rendition. The applicant for service, the
occupants of the dwelling unit served, and the user of the garbage and refuse collection
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the service charge set forth for service to
a dwelling unit. The City shall be under no obligation to furnish garbage and refuse
collection to any person who is in default as to any garbage and refuse collection charges or
to any dwelling unit occupied by a person who is in default as to any garbage and refuse
collection charges; and the City at any time after a charge becomes delinquent shall have
the full power and authority to terminate garbage and refuse collection service, and said
shall not be resumed until the delinquent charges and all other garbage and refuse collection
charges billed (whether otherwise due or not) are not paid in full. No garbage and refuse
collection service shall be provided to any dwelling unit upon application of any person
who is in default as to any garbage and refuse collection charges due the City, no matter at
which dwelling unit said default occurred until such person has paid all delinquent and
billed charges in full. No garbage and collection service shall be provided to any dwelling
unit occupied by any person who is in default as to any garbage and refuse collection
charges, no matter at which dwelling unit said default occurred and no matter whether the
said person is the applicant until such person has paid all delinquent and billed charges in
full. The garbage and refuse collection service fee shall be billable with water and sewer
charges; and in the event any person shall be otherwise entitled to a refund of a water or
sewer deposit or shall have a delinquent or billed garbage collection service charge, said
charge shall be deducted from the refund before payment of any refund or credit to said
person.
The garbage and refuse collection service fee shall be billable with water and sewer
charges; and in the event any person shall be otherwise entitled to a refund of a water or
sewer deposit or shall have a delinquent or billed garbage collection service charge, said
charge shall be deducted from the refund before payment of any refund or credit to said
person.
The owner or operator of each trailer park receiving garbage service for multiple dwelling
units but receiving a single billing shall on December 1, March 1, June 1 and September 1
submit a report to the City Manager as to the total number of occupied units and total
number of vacant units within the trailer park as of the reporting date so that the City can
determine the appropriate number of dwelling units to bill effective January 1, April 1, July
1, and October 1, respectively. In addition, upon request by the City Manager or his
designee or agent, each owner for operator shall submit within 10 days thereafter business
records and other information as may be required to document any report of dwelling units
submitted. In the event any owner or operator refuses or fails to file the required report on
the above due date or fails or refuses to submit documentation requested within 10 days,
then a monthly service charge shall be imposed based upon the total number of dwelling
units (occupied and vacant) described within the most recent report on file or upon such
number of units as determined by the City if greater than the number described within the
most recent report.
In the event charges, including penalty charges, for garbage service are not paid on or
before the due date of the bill for such services, such charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent. Thereafter, such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien
upon the real estate for which such garbage services are supplied, regardless of whether
such service has been supplied upon the application of an owner, an occupant or other user;
provided, however, that the owner of the real estate shall have no personal liability for the
delinquent charges unless said owner was also the applicant for or user of the services
giving rise to the charges. The City Manager or the Finance Director or a designee of either
is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies and
claiming such in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois, after
first giving seven (7) day notice by regular mail of such delinquency to the owner of said
real estate. This statement shall contain a description of the premises served, the amount of
the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for the unpaid amount as well as for
all charges for garbage service subsequent to the period covered by the bill. The lien for
garbage services may be enforced and foreclosed against the premises by suit in the Circuit
Court of Jefferson County, Illinois according to the rules and practices of said Court. The
City shall recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the City in
preparing, filing, and foreclosing the lien. The lien may also be enforced and foreclosed by
intervention in any suit already commenced in said Court or any other Court whenever said
intervention is proper under the law. In addition, whenever the City is made a defendant in
any suit on account of any lien, it shall have for the furnishing of garbage service full power
to enforce its said lien in said proceedings. The method herein provided for enforcing and
foreclosing a lien shall not be considered as excluding any other remedy or any other
method of collecting unpaid garbage service charges but shall be concurrent with all other
remedies and methods. The City shall recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the City in effecting collection for garbage services or incurred by the City in
effecting or defending any remedy.
(b) Garbage, when used herein, shall be held to include any refuse, accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking, or dealing in of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit, vegetables, or other things used for food preparation.
(c) Garbage and refuse collection shall be subject to the provisions of Section 12.24 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
(d) It shall be unlawful to place ashes, chemicals, drugs, poisons, or hazardous materials in
receptacles provided for garbage or other refuse.
(e) All vehicles used in the collection or hauling of garbage or other waste or refuse shall
be so constructed as to prevent leakage or spillage and fit with a cover to reduce odor
and to prevent garbage, waste, and other refuse from being deposited on public or
private places within the corporate limits or upon roadways.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the accumulation of
garbage, waste or other refuse upon premises owned or occupied by him or to allow
garbage, waste, or refuse to be carried or deposited upon any private property or upon
any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public places within the City.
.
SECTION 2.7: PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES DEPARTMENT
(a) There is hereby created a Parks and Public Facilities Department. The Department shall
have authority over the Veteran's Park, Lincoln Park and all lands acquired by the City by
donation, condemnation or otherwise for park purposes and, in addition, shall have responsibility
for maintenance of public buildings, public grounds and municipal right-of-ways. The Parks and
Public Facilities Department shall be administered by the Director of Parks and Public Facilities
who shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
(b) There is further hereby created a Park and Recreation Board which shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Manager and the City Council in the use, operation, and
maintenance of the park system of the City and other public grounds as determined by the
City Manager. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Beginning May 1, 2013, three (3)
members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two members for a term of two (2)
years, and two (2) members for a term of one (1) year; thereafter, each member appointed
shall serve a term of three (3) years. Terms shall commence on May 1 and expire on April
30. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term of the vacancy. Each
member shall serve without compensation. Failure of a member to attend three meetings
during a calendar year shall subject the non-attending member to removal as a member of the
Board upon recommendation of the Mayor and approval by the City Council.
(c) The City Council shall appropriate and levy a special tax for the use, maintenance and
operation of the City Park system and all funds received from such levy shall be separately
accounted for by the Finance Director of the City to insure that said funds are solely used for the
operation, maintenance and improvement of the Park system.
(d) The Director of Parks and Public Facilities shall be appointed by the City Manager and
shall receive a salary within ranges as determined by the City Council from time to time and
fixed by the City Manager, based upon performance and merit.
(e) The Director of Parks and Public Facilities shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
1. Plan, direct, and administer all park recreation programs; supervise and direct the
design, planning, development and implementation of recreational and instructional
park programs.
2. Inspect physical park and recreation facilities and develop plans for their replacement
and direct and evaluate construction, maintenance and repair of City Park grounds and
equipment.
3. Coordinate maintenance and repair schedules of property under the authority of the
Department and be responsible for the maintenance and general housekeeping of said
property.
4. Prepare and administer annual recreational budget; approve recreational expenditures;
prepare and maintain records of recreational expenditures and activities.
5. Supervise, inspect and evaluate the work of subordinate personnel engaged in
construction, maintenance and repair activities to insure compliance with project
standards; provide training and orientation to new employees; administer the terms of
the labor contract between City and the Union.
6. Plan, direct and evaluate the performance of a recreational coordinator, clerical staff
and other employees of the Department.
7. Direct and assist the Recreational Coordinator in the performance of specific duties of
the Recreational Coordinator; including duties of (1) acting as administrative assistant
to the Park and Recreation Board and keeping all records of the Board, minutes of
meetings for the Board and coordinate activities of the Board with the Office of the
City Manager; (2) acting as the City's representative in all recreational matters in related
organizations and assisting and making recommendations to appropriate civic
organizations or groups; (3) coordinating State and Federal grants with the Grant
Coordinator and insuring compliance with funding requirements and grant regulations;
and (4) supervising recreational employees, such as swimming pool employees and
umpires.
8. Plan, direct and evaluate the construction, maintenance, cleaning, and repair of public
buildings, right-of-ways, Park, and other public property under the authority of the
Department.
9. Plan, direct and evaluate the cleaning; setting up, opening, and closing of municipal
buildings and recreational sites.
10. Plan, direct and evaluate mowing of public grounds, trimming of trees and shrubbery,
cultivating of flowers, and landscaping of public grounds.
11. Organize, plan, direct; and evaluate long-range plans for public maintenance
improvements in conjunction with other City Departments; organize, plan, direct, and
evaluate preventative maintenance for public facilities.
12. Receive complaints and questions from the general public regarding public
maintenance activities and initiate corrective actions where necessary.
13. Prepare, submit and administer an annual budget; prepare projected costs for labor,
materials and equipment; review and approve requests for work materials and
purchases of services and equipment, and prepare and maintain records of work
performed.
14. Handle all administrative duties concerning the Parks and Public Facilities Department.
15. Provide a monthly and annual report of activities, costs. and projected activities to the
City Manager and Council and respond as necessary to other inquiries of the City
Manager and Council.
16. Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City Manager.
(f) The swimming pool of the City of Mt Vernon shall be under the authority of the Parks
and Public Facilities Department. The public swimming pool of the City of Mt Vernon and use
thereof by all persons shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Admission to the pool shall be refused to all persons having venereal disease,
contagious disease, infectious diseases such as colds, fevers, ringworms, foot
infections, skin lesions, carbuncles, pimples, inflamed eyes, ear discharge, or any other
conditions which have the appearance of being infectious. Persons with excessive
sunburn, abrasions which have not healed, corn plasters, bunion pads, adhesive tape,
rubber bandages, etc. or other bandages of any kind, will not be admitted.
2. No food, drink, gum or tobacco shall be allowed in the pool area.
3. All persons shall be required to take a shower in the nude with soap and warm water
before being allowed in the pool area.
4. Bathers who leave the pool area for any reason shall be required to shower before
returning to the pool.
5. All persons with long hair shall be required to wear caps while in the pool.
6. All persons shall report to the attendant after taking their shower, before entering the
water.
7. People in street shoes shall not be allowed in the pool area.
8. No flotation devices such as inflatable rafts or inner tubes shall be allowed in the
swimming pool.
9. No person shall engage in expectoration of water or other fluids, spouting or throwing
of water roughness, rowdiness, or loud or raucous behavior.
11. The Parks and Public Facilities Director shall have the authority to adopt the necessary
regulations in addition to the above in order to carry out these regulations and for the
efficient and safe operation of the swimming pool.
12. In addition to the penalty clause of this ordinance, any person violating these
regulations or the necessary directions of the Parks and Public Facilities Director, the
Manager of the swimming pool or the lifeguards, shall be subject to exclusion from the
swimming pool.
SECTION 2.8: HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
A. There is hereby created a Department of Human Resources of the City of Mt. Vernon
and the Office of Director of Human Resources.
B. The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be
subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager and shall receive a salary within
ranges determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by the City Manager based
upon performance and merit.
C. The Director of Human Resources shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Handle administrative duties concerning the Department of Human Resources for
the City of Mt. Vernon.
2. Prepare and administer annual budget for the Department of Human Resources
and submit yearly a fiscal proposed budget to the Office of the City Manager.
3. Prepare and maintain records of the activities of the Department of Human
Resources.
4. Provide reports as to matters relating to the Human Resources of the City to the
City Manager and Council.
5. Possess knowledge of Human Resource information and laws; implement Human
Resource laws and monitor the City's compliance with Human Resource laws.
6. Administer and coordinate hiring for City employment except the City Manager,
Department Heads, and employees subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners, including but not limited to posting new jobs internally,
advertising new positions, preparing, receiving, and maintaining job applications,
verifying references, conducting, coordinating background and credit checks of
prospective employees, and interviewing, testing and recommending applicants to the
City Manager.
7. Coordinate and administer drug testing policies of the City.
8. Process and maintain Personnel Action Reports of employees, and maintain
official personnel files for each employee of the City.
9. Assist, conduct, and participate in negotiations with union organizations
representing City employees.
10. Coordinate and implement training programs and activities of employees.
11. Insure compliance with Workmen Compensation laws and maintain records
relating thereto.
12. Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City Manager.
SECTION 2.9; FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS AND FAIR HOUSING BOARD
Sub-Section 1. Declaration of Policy:
A. In furthering the policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in its Constitution and other
laws; in order that the peace, health, safety and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the City
may be protected and insured; it is hereby declared the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois
to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, religion, national origin or
ancestry, to live in decent, sanitary, and healthful living quarters.
B. It is further declared to be the policy of the City that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease,
or otherwise control any housing accommodation, within the City, or any agent of any of these,
should refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations because of the race, religion, national origin or ancestry
of such person or persons or discriminate against any person because of his race, religion,
national origin or ancestry in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
C. In furthering the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon, this Council and its Commission on
Human Relations shall endeavor to work with, and cooperate with Real Estate Associations,
individual members thereof, lending institutions, and all others engaged in dealing with housing
accommodations in the City, in a spirit of harmony, to the end that the declared purpose of this
ordinance be accomplished in an orderly, lawful, and proper fashion.
Sub-Section II. Definitions:
As used in this ordinance, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the
following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section:
(a) Discriminate. The terms Adiscriminate@ or Adiscrimination mean any difference in the
availability of, or the terms of, the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or financing for housing
accommodations to any person in regard to such sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance,
because of the race, religion, national origin or ancestry of such person.
(b) Housing Accommodation. The term Ahousing accommodation@ includes any standard
building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied, or is maintained,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence, or sleeping place of
one or more human beings, or any real estate so used, designed, or intended for such
use.
(c) Real Estate Broker. The term@real estate broker@ means any natural person, partnership,
association, corporation or agent, thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration
offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents or negotiates for the sale, purchase,
exchange of rental of a housing accommodation of another, or collects rental for the use
of a housing accommodation of another.
(d) Owner. An Aowner@ means any person holding title to any housing accommodation,
such owner's authorized representative, or any person in control of any housing
accommodation.
Sub-Section III. Prohibited Acts:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or
salesman, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any of the foregoing, to discriminate
against any other person because of the race, religion, national origin or ancestry or such other
person or the friends or associates of such other persons, in regard to the sale, exchange, or rental
of, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation.
Without limiting the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate broker, real
estate salesman or agent, owner or other person, or lending institution dealing with housing in the
City:
(a) To discriminate against any person in the availability of, or the price, terms, conditions
or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any housing
accommodation in the City or in the furnishing of any facilities or services in
connection therewith.
(b) To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement of
advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form of application for the
purchase, lease, rental or financing of real estate used for residential purposes which
indicates racial preference.
(c) To exploit or overcharge any person for housing accommodations because of race,
religion, national origin or ancestry.
(d) To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with borrowing or
lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or
making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair
or maintenance of any housing accommodation.
(e) To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, or any housing accommodation
of the ground of loss of value because of the present or prospective entry into any
neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, religion, national origin
or ancestry.
(f) To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to
induce any owner of any Housing Accommodation to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective charge in the race, religion, national origin or
ancestry of persons in the neighborhood.
(g) To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing
for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation for the purpose of induction or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of any housing accommodation by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race,
religion, national origin or ancestry in the area will or may result in the lowering of
property values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
Sub-Section IV. Fair Housing Board:
There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board which shall consist of five members from the
community at large, one or more with experience as real estate brokers, in finance, or other
housing related fields. Members shall be appointed and be removable for cause by the Mayor,
with consent of the Council. In the first instance, one member shall be appointed for a term of
three years, two for a term of two years, and two for a term of one year. Thereafter each member
appointed shall serve for a term of three years. The Mayor shall designate one of the members
of the Board to be its Chairman. Any three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
Sub-Section V. Duties of the Fair Housing Board:
It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
(a) Receive or initiate, record, and investigate complaints charging any violation of
this ordinance.
(b) Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints by conciliation conferences,
holding a hearing where necessary, making findings of fact, issuing recommendations
to solve any problems.
Sub-Section VI. Enforcement Procedure:
(a) The Fair Housing Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose and provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provision of this ordinance
may file a written complaint setting forth his grievance with the Fair Housing Board.
Such complaint must be filed within 90 days of the commission of the alleged violation
and shall state the name and address of the complainant and of the person against
whom the complaint is brought, and shall also state the facts surrounding the alleged
violation.
(c) The Fair Housing Board shall investigate every such complaint thus filed. If the Fair
Housing Board determines that the party complained against has not engaged in any
unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact in writing and dismiss the complaint.
If the Fair Housing Board determines, after such investigation, that probable cause for
the complaint exists, the Fair Housing Board shall set a date for a conciliation hearing.
At such hearing, the Fair Housing Board shall interview the complainant and the person
or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve
the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion. If such attempts at
conciliation are not successful within sixty days after the date of filing of the complaint,
the Fair Housing Board shall then proceed promptly with a formal hearing of the
complaint.
(d) Such formal hearing shall be conducted by the Fair Housing Board upon due and
reasonable notice to all parties. The Fair Housing Board shall have full power to
subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by the Fair
Housing Board by proper petition to any court of competent jurisdiction. The Fair
Housing Board shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. At
the conclusion of the hearings, the Fair Housing Board shall render a written report and
recommendations which shall be served by mail upon the complainant and the party
complained against, No report shall be delayed more than sixty days after date of the
issuance of notice for commencement of such formal hearing.
(e) If, during the course of any proceedings prescribed herein, the Fair Housing Board, on
the basis of the evidence before it, concludes that a violation of this ordinance is
imminent, it may relay such evidence to the City Council, together with its
recommendation that the City Attorney be instructed to seek injunctive relief in any
court of competent jurisdiction to prohibit such violation.
Sub-Section VII. Penalty:
(a) The Fair Housing Board may include as part of its report a recommendation to the City
Attorney for prosecution of any person or persons who violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted by the Fair Housing Board or who fail
to comply with an order of the Fair Housing Board.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to the general penalty provisions of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 2.10
A. There is hereby created the Commission for the Advancement of Programs for the
Handicapped for the City which shall be an agency of City, and shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by this ordinance and by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
B. The Commission shall consist of twelve members, one of whom shall be the Mayor of
the City who shall serve as a member of such Commission ex-officio during his term of office.
The remaining eleven members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council.
Initial appointments shall be made of six members for a two year term, and six
members for a four year term, and thereafter all appointments shall be for a four year term. In the
event of a vacancy, said vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
C. The Commission shall designate one of its members as Chairman and one of its
members as Secretary, and shall have further officers as the Commission shall determine.
D. The Commission shall make an annual report to the corporate authorities not later than
May 1 of each year hereafter.
SECTION 2.11: DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
(a) There is hereby created a Department of Tourism of the City of Mt. Vernon. The
Department shall encourage, foster, promote, and stimulate conventions and tourism in the City
of Mt. Vernon and shall acquaint and inform the public as to these objectives by providing
information and other civic, educational, social, and public features and events we will
encourage, foster, promote, and stimulate conventions and tourism in the City of Mt. Vernon.
The Department of Tourism shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
(b) There is further hereby created a Tourism Board which shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the City Manager and the City Council in the expenditure of funds and in the
operation of the Department of Tourism. The Board shall consist of nine (9) appointed members
and three (3) non-voting ex officio members. The nine appointed members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council and each member shall serve a term of
three (3) years, which term shall commence May 1 and expire April 30 three years succeeding;
the three year terms shall be staggered so that the terms of three members expire each year. The
ex officio members shall be the Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon, Chairman of the Jefferson
County Board, and President of the Jefferson County Chamber of Commerce. All appointed
members shall be voting members and a majority of the voting members shall constitute a
quorum. Vacancies for appointed Board members shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term of the vacancy, and a vacancy for an ex officio member shall be filled by the
successor in office. Each member shall serve without compensation. Failure of a member to
attend three meetings during a calendar year shall subject the non-attending member to removal
as a member of the Board upon recommendation of the Mayor and approval by the City Council.
(c) The City Council shall impose a tax upon gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing,
or letting of hotel and motel rooms under the provisions of Section 8-3-14 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, and all funds received from such tax shall be kept by the City Treasurer in the
City Tourism fund to be used solely for the Department of Tourism.
(d) The Executive Administrator of the Department of Tourism shall be appointed by the
City Manager and shall receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time
to time and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
(e) The Executive Administrator of the Department of Tourism shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:
(1) To coordinate, recommend, and implement the Department of Tourism Programs.
(2) To be responsible for supervision, maintenance, and general housekeeping of
Department of Tourism facilities under the control of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(3) To act as the Administrative Assistant to the Tourism Board of the City of
Mt. Vernon and to keep all records of the Board, minutes of meetings for the Board, and to
coordinate activities of the Board with the office of the City Manager.
(4) To be responsible for submitting yearly a fiscal proposed budget to the office of
the City Manager.
(5) To handle all administrative duties concerning the Tourism Department for the
City of Mt. Vernon as directed by the City Manager.
(6) To provide the Board and the City Manager with all programs of tourism which
will be operated under the department.
(7) To act as the City's representative on all tourism matters and related organizations
or groups or as directed by the City Manager and to assist and to make recommendations to
appropriate civic organizations or groups.
(8) To provide a monthly and annual report of activities, costs, and projected
activities to the City Manager and City Council.
(9) To perform such other duties as directed by the City Manager and the City
Council.
SECTION 2.12: BUDGET OFFICER
The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, hereby adopts the provisions of Sections 8-2-9.1 through
8-2-9.10 inclusive of the Illinois Municipal Code.
There is further hereby provided the office of Budget Officer, who shall be appointed by the
City Manager and who shall take oath and post bond as provided in Section 3-14-3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code. In the event that no Budget Officer appointed by the City Manager shall hold
another municipal office, either elected or appointed, then that person shall not be entitled to
receive additional compensation for his duties as such. The Budget Officer shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Manager and shall have the powers and duties described in Sections 8-2-9.1
through 8-2-9.10 inclusive.
The City Council shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available for public
inspection at least ten (10) days prior to its passage, by publication in the general proceedings of
the City Council. The Council shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual
budget not less than one week after publication of such tentative annual budget.
SECTION 2.13: DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
(a) There is hereby created a Department of Economic Development of the City of Mt.
Vernon. The Department shall encourage, foster, promote, and stimulate business and industrial
development in the City of Mt. Vernon. The Department of Economic Development shall be
under the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
(b) An Executive Administrator of the Department of Economic Development shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
1. To coordinate, recommend, and implement the Department of Economic
Development programs.
2. To act as the Chairman of the Mt. Vernon Economic Development Commission,
to keep all records and minutes of the Commission, and to coordinate the activities of the
Commission with the City Manager.
3. To develop and submit an annual proposed budget for the Department for
consideration by the City Manager and City Council.
4. To organize and implement sales and marketing programs consistent with the
Commission's goals and objectives.
5. To maintain a data base on available industrial sites and buildings.
6. To organize and implement industrial retention programs consistent with the
Commission's goals and objectives.
7. To handle all administrative duties concerning the Department of Economic
Development for the City of Mt. Vernon as directed by the City Manager.
8. To provide monthly and annual reports of activities, costs, and projected
endeavors to the City Manager and City Council.
(c) There is further hereby created the Mt. Vernon Economic Development Commission
for the City of Mt. Vernon which shall be an agency of the City and shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by this Ordinance and by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
The Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Manager and the City
Council in the operation of the Department of Economic Development and the City's economic
development efforts.
The Commission (excluding the non-voting Chairman and non-voting Secretary) shall
consist of 21 members. Ten of the 21 members shall serve ex officio, said members being the
Mayor and Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, the Chairman of the County Board of Jefferson
County, the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon, the President of the Greater Jefferson
County Chamber of Commerce, the Illinois 54th District State Senator, and the Illinois District
107 State Representative; said ex officio members shall be non-voting members and may attend
meetings by an appointed designee. The remaining 11 members shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the City of Mt. Vernon with the advice and consent of the City Council. Each term of office
shall begin May 1, except that initial appointments shall take effect upon appointment. All
appointments shall be for a three year term, except the initial appointment of three members shall
expire on May 1, 1996, the initial appointment of the final four members shall expire May 1,
1997, and the initial appointment of four of the final four members shall expire on May 1, 1998.
Upon a member's tern expiring, the position becomes vacant unless filled by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council within 60-days of expiration of the term.
In the event of a vacancy, said vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by
appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
The Commission may designate one of its members or a non-voting administrative person
to serve as Secretary. The Chairman of the Commission shall be the Executive Administrator of
the Department of Economic Development; the Chairman shall be nonvoting.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the corporate authorities not later than May
1 of each year hereafter.
SECTION 2.14: TREE BOARD
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Tree Board which shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Manager and the City Council its duties and functions are limited to
those set. forth in this Ordinance.
B. Composition. The Tree Board shall be composed of eight members. Five shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. These five members
shall serve without compensation and shall reside within the City of Mt. Vernon. The Public
Works Director, Parks and Public Facilities Director, and the Downtown Mt. Vernon
Development Corporation Executive Director of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be the remaining
three and shall be ex officio members and shall not vote.
C. Appointment of Members. Each of the five appointed members shall serve a term of
two years; which term shall commence May 1 and expire April 30, two years succeeding. The
initial appointments shall expire upon April 30, 1995. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term of the vacancy. The Mayor shall designate the Chairperson of the Tree
Board.
D. Duties. The Tree Board shall advise the City Manager and the Council on matters
to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare regarding policy for
planting, maintaining and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants on City owned property.
Topics under this advice may be given and may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Development, implementation, interpretation, and amendment of a policy for the
planting, maintaining, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants on City owned property.
(2) Review, alteration, and/or revision of the Mt. Vernon Forestry Plan.
(3) Establishment of educational and informational programs to promote proper planting,
maintaining, and removal of trees upon property utilized by the City as a right-of-way for street
and/or utility purposes or by other public utilities as a right-of-way.
(4) Review, management, and updating of the City tree inventory.
(5) Recommending budget expenditures and planning goals and priorities regarding
purchase of trees and tree services and other financial decisions relating thereto.
ARTICLE 3 - Repealed per Ordinance # 89-29
ARTICLE 4
FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
All corporations, companies, firms and associations in operation under the laws of the State of
Illinois and which are engaged in the City ofMt. Vernon in effecting fire insurance, shall pay to the City on
or before the fifteenth day of July each year, a sum equal to 2% of the gross receipts of such corporations,
companies, firms and associations in the City for the year ending on July 1 preceding such report. Every
person who shall act in the City as agent or employee of any such corporation, company, form or
association, shall render to the City Clerk on or before July 15 of each year a true and verified account of
all premiums received by him or any person for him in the year ending July 1 preceding such report, in
behalf of any such corporation, company, firm or association and shall specify in such report the amounts
received for fire insurance. Such agent shall also pay to the City, upon rendering such report, the amount
required to be paid by such corporation, company, firm or association represented by him.
No corporation, company, firm or association shall transact any business within the City after July
15 of each year, unless and until the annual report required hereunder has been made and the fee paid in
full. The failure of any person or of any corporation, company, fir or association to comply with the
requirements of this Article shall be deemed a violation thereof.
ARTICLE 5
BUILDINGS
SECTION 5.1 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE
There is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal,
demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings and
structures, including permits and penalties, that certain Building Code known as International
Building Code, 2006 Edition, International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, International Mechanical
Code, 2006 Edition, International Fuel Gas Code 2006 Edition and International Energy
Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, each of which are issued by the International Code Council,
Inc.; except which portions of such Codes as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of
which not less than one copy of each has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk of
the City of Mt. Vernon, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein; and from the date on which this Ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling in construction of all buildings and structures therein contained within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 5.2 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
(a) The office of Building Official is hereby created and the executive official in
charge shall be known as the Building Official.
(b) The Chief Building Inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by the
City Manager based upon performance and merit.
(c) During the temporary absence or disability of the Building Official, the
appointment authority shall designate an Acting Building Official.
SECTION 5.3 QUALIFICATIONS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
To be eligible to appointment as Building Official, the candidate for the position shall
have had experience as an Architect, Structural Engineer, Building Inspector, or Superintendent
of Building Construction or have such other qualifications as determined by the City Council.
The candidate shall be physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections.
SECTION 5.3A CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Neither the Building Official nor any other inspector or person making inspections or
issuing permits under any Code enacted herein shall have any interest whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process, or device entering into or used in
or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition. Nor shall the
Building Official, any inspector nor any person making inspections nor issuing permits engage in
the occupation or business of electrical work or contracting or be interested directly or
indirectly in any firm or corporation engaged in such business during his or her term of office.
SECTION 5.4 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
(a) The Building Official shall devote such time as may be necessary to the
performance of his duties. The City Clerk shall receive applications required by this Code, issue
permits and furnish required certificates, but no permit or certificate shall be issued without the
written approval of the Building Official. He shall examine premises for which permits have
been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that provisions of law are complied with
and that construction is prosecuted safely.
He shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code. He shall, when requested by proper
authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters
referred to in the Building Code, and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance
with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during
construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such
notices or orders as may be necessary.
(b) Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by
the Building Official or his duly appointed assistant. The Building Official may accept reports of
inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and
reliability. No certificates called by any provisions of the building code shall be issued on such
reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible office of such service.
(c) The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of
permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or
orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to
building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in
existence.
(d) All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons
at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official
without his written consent.
(e) The Building Official shall make written reports to his immediate superior once
each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued
and orders promulgated.
(f) No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the applicant
shall have complied with the Illinois Architectural Act and shall have presented proof of such
compliance to such Building Official.
(g) No permit shall be issued as required by the Building Code until the applicant
shall have complied with the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code of the
Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois. Proof thereof shall be provided to the
Building Official, together with certified results of percolation tests and a sketch showing the size
and type of septic tank and distribution box, and field tile system as required by such Act.
(h) The Building Official shall enforce all laws relating to the installation, alteration,
and use of electrical equipment, and shall perform all duties of the Electrical Inspector defined
within Article 7 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon and exercise all
authority granted thereunder.
SECTION 5.5 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS
The Building Official may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary, in the
discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the municipality.
SECTION 5.6 RIGHT OF ENTRY - VIOLATION
The Building Official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable
hour. The Building Official shall have the power to order all work stopped on the construction,
alteration, or repair of buildings in the City when such work is being done in violation of any
provision of this Code. Such work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order without
the written permission of the Building Official.
SECTION 5.7 DEFINITIONS
(a) Wherever the word Amunicipality@ is used in the Building Code, it shall be held to
mean the City of Mt. Vernon. (b) Wherever the term ACorporate Counsel@ is used in the Building
Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 5.8 RIGHT OF ENTRY-ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTION
WARRANT
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce or to determine compliance
with any provision of this Article or of any building, electrical, fire, housing, plumbing, or
other health and safety provision of the Revised Code of Ordinances or of any Code
adopted thereby, or whenever the Building Official, any Building Code Inspector, or other
designated Inspector has reasonable cause to believe there exists in or upon any building,
structure, or premises a condition or violation which makes such building, structure,
premises, or any part thereof (which are also collectively referred to herein as Apremises@)
a nuisance, unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official or Inspector shall have
the right, as hereinafter defined, to enter any such building, structure, premises, or any
part thereof at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed
upon said Building Official or Inspector. However, except as hereinafter stated or as
otherwise permitted by law, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied by a
person with apparent authority to allow entry, the Official or Inspector shall first identify
himself and request entry, and upon request present proper credentials; or if such
building, structure, or premises is not occupied by a person with apparent authority to
allow entry, the Official or Inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate an
owner, occupant, or other such person having apparent authority to allow entry of such
building, structure, or premises and shall request entry. If entry is refused or if no owner,
occupant, or such other person with apparent authority can be found, the Building Official
or Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy as provided by law to secure entry. AA
Person With Apparent Authority@ means a person who reasonably appears to be 18 years
or older and who reasonably appears to be either the owner or any other person to whom
the owner has granted care, possession, custody, or control over the property, such as (but
not limited to) a lessee, manager, caretaker, or lawful occupant.
In the event any person shall fail to give consent or shall interfere with the right of
entry of any Building Official or Inspector, the City may apply for an Administrative
Inspection Warrant. An application for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be
based upon a reasonable belief by an Inspector that an inspection is required to enforce a
health, safety, or public welfare Ordinance, Code, or Regulation: (a) said inspection may
be justified as to a specific building, structure, or premises on the belief that there is
located within or upon the particular building, structure, or premises to be inspected one
or more violations of statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations that the Inspector is
authorized to enforce, or (b) said inspection may be justified as part of a general
inspection program authorized by the Revised Code of Ordinances, such as fire, building,
or housing inspections to enforce or to determine compliance.
An application for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall identify the office
and authority of the Inspector designated to make the inspection, shall identify the
premises to be inspected, shall set forth the purpose and justification of the inspection,
and shall state that the owner or other person with apparent authority to allow entry of the
place to be searched has refused entrance after request for entry was made or shall state
that the consent of an owner or other person with apparent authority of the area to be
searched cannot reasonably be obtained or that consent is not required by law. The
application for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall also identify the applicable
health, safety, or public welfare Ordinance, Code, or Regulation subject of the inspection
or enforcement. An application for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be under
oath. The application for Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be submitted to a
Judge of the Second Judicial Circuit, but need not be filed with the Clerk of said Court
until a warrant has been executed or has been returned Anon executed.@ Notice of the
submission of an Application for Administrative Inspection Warrant is not required to be
given to any person. The Judge shall issue the Warrant if the requirements of this
Section have been met, including specifically that the justification as required by law has
been found. An Administrative Inspection Warrant shall constitute authority to inspect,
which authority to inspect shall include the authority to use any reasonable force
necessary to enter upon the premises and shall include the authority to photograph the
premises subject of the Warrant. The Inspector shall also have the authority to remove
any item that presents an immediate and obvious threat to health or safety if such removal
(i.e. abatement action) is otherwise permitted by law.
Upon issuance of an Administrative Inspection Warrant, said warrant shall state
the date and time of issuance, the justification and purpose of the inspection, the date or
dates on which the inspection may occur, the identification of the premises to be
inspected, and shall bear the signature of the Judge of the Second Judicial Circuit issuing
the warrant. Upon presentation of an Administrative Inspection Warrant to any owner or
occupant or other person with apparent authority of a structure or premises authorized to
be inspected pursuant to said Administrative Inspection Warrant, said owner or occupant
or other person with apparent authority shall permit immediate entry into said structure or
onto said premises. In the event no owner or occupant or other person with apparent
authority is present upon the premises to be inspected at the time of execution of the
Warrant, the Inspector may enter upon the premises, and no person shall interfere with the
inspection, and the premises may be inspected and a copy of the Warrant shall be left
upon the premises in a conspicuous place and thereafter a copy of the Warrant shall,
within a reasonable time as determined by the circumstances, be served personally or be
served by regular mail to the last known address of the owner or other person with
apparent authority and to the known adult occupants of the premises, unless same shall be
excused by the Court.
A police officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the Administrative
Inspection Warrant; such police officer shall assist the Inspector authorized to execute the
Warrant, which assistance may include using any reasonable force necessary to enter
upon the premises or enter within any building or structure or necessary to protect the
Inspector from harm or threat of harm.
Not later than ten days after execution of an Inspection Warrant, the Inspector or
his designee shall file a Return with the Clerk of the Court setting forth the date and time
of the inspection and the Inspector or his designee shall (unless excused by the Court)
serve the Return upon the owner or other person with apparent authority and upon the
known adult occupants of the premises subject of the inspection by personal service or by
regular mail to the last known address. If any item is seized or removed from any
premises, the Return shall identify the item seized or removed, shall state the reason for
the removal and shall include a photograph of the item seized or removed.
No Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be required to enter upon and inspect
areas of any premises, structure, or building as follows:
1) Areas of commercial space (i.e. non-residential) where the public is invited
into.
2) Areas where the owner, occupant, or possessor has no reasonable
expectation of privacy within the area and as to the items to be inspected.
3) Areas of a business subject to extensive regulation (e.g. alcohol, weapons)
where the inspection will impose only a minimal threat to justifiable
expectations of privacy and the inspection is a necessary part of a regulatory
scheme designed to further an urgent governmental interest.
4) Areas for which an emergency situation reasonably appears present
requiring immediate entry to determine, prevent, or address an immediate
threat to health or safety.
5) Areas that are not occupied and that are open (unsecured and accessible)
requiring entry to determine if any immediately hazardous condition exists.
6) Areas for which consent to inspect has been given by a person who appears
to have apparent authority to consent.
Inspections without a Warrant shall be limited as to time, place, and scope as determined
by the justification for the inspection without a Warrant.
SECTION 5.9 FEES
(a) No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the fee described
in this ordinance shall have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the
additional fee, if any, due to an increase in estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have
been paid.
(b) For a permit for the erection, alteration, or repair of any building or the
construction of a parking lot, the fee shall be at the rate of $7.50 for the first $1,000.00 of
estimated construction cost, $2.50 per $1,000.00 for all amounts up to $500,000.00, and $1.50 per
$1,000.00 for all amounts above $500,000.00, in each case based upon the estimated cost as
estimated by the Building Inspector, not to exceed the actual cost of the applicant.
(c) For a permit for wrecking or demolishing any building, the sum of $5.00 for a one
story building and $10.00 for any other building or structure. For a permit for moving a structure,
the sum of $10.00 if the building or structure is to be removed from the City, and in the event of
moving from one point to another point within the City, the combined building and moving fee
shall be charged at the rate. of two-thirds of the amount which the building fee would be, based
upon the estimated cost to construct a similar building. There shall also be a $50.00 license fee for
the moving of the building or structure.
(d) In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a
permit may be estimated and adjustment of the fee made and the portion of the fee for
uncompleted work returned to the permit holder, provided that no refund of a prescribed
minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of a permit, a similar
adjustment and return may be made; provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties
incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made no
work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued.
(e) The term Aestimated cost@ as used in this section, means the reasonable value of all
services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other appliance devices entering into and
necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided that the
cost of excavation or grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely for
embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure, is not
deemed a part of such estimated cost.
(f) The fees for the permit above described shall not be charged to or collected from
an applicant under the following circumstances:
(1) The work is being done for the use of a government entity, or for the use of
a not-for-profit organization whose purposes are religious, educational, or charitable; or for the
qualified improvements or qualified property within the Mt. Vernon Enterprise Zone;
(2) The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that said fees
have not been and will not be included in any payment to any contractor or other person.
(3) Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits and
otherwise fully comply with the ordinances of the City, unless exempted therefrom by any law of
the State of Illinois or of the United States.
SECTION 5.10 DANGEROUS AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
(a) Any dangerous building in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be
unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in the City; and it shall be
unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the
same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(b) The term "dangerous building" as used in this Ordinance is hereby defined to mean
and include:
(1) Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure that is dangerous to
the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may
cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the
occupants of it or of neighboring structures;
(2) Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
(3) Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause is liable
to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part
of such a structure;
(4) Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors, windows, walls, or other defects is
available to and frequented by minors, trespassers, malefactors, disorderly
persons, or other persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure;
(5) Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause does
not meet State or Local Building Codes, Electrical Codes, Plumbing Codes,
Fire Codes, or other health and safety codes.
(c) Whenever the Building Official or any person designated by him, upon inspection
of any building or structure in the City shall determine that such building or structure in the City is
a dangerous building, he shall thereupon post a Notice upon the building condemning the building
and shall cause written Notice to be served upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof,
if any, by registered or certified mail to the last-known address or by personal service. The date of
service of Notice by mail shall be the date on which the Notice is mailed. The Notice shall
indicate that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such
dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by
demolishing it; and that the condition must be remedied immediately and without delay.
No person shall remove, alter, or deface any Notice required to be posted pursuant to this
Ordinance. If the Notice given hereunder has not complied with within ten (10) days from the date
when the Notice is served, the City may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the
dangerous building; except specifically otherwise provided herein, the City may demolish, repair,
or cause the demolition or repair f a dangerous and dilapidated building as provided within 65
ILCS 5/11-31-1
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the City Manager may declare a
specific structure to be a nuisance constituting an eminent danger to health, safety, and life and
authorize by summary action demolition of such structure. The City shall recover its expenses
arising from such summary demolition as provided herein.
(e) If a structure constitutes a dangerous and dilapidated building as defined within
Paragraph (b)(4) above, the Building Official may upon the written request of the owner permit
the temporary boarding up of said structure subject to the following provisions:
(1) No structure shall be boarded up for a period in excess of ninety (90) days
from date of service of the Notice. Within said 90-day period, the owner
shall repair the structure and bring said structure into full compliance with
City Ordinances and Building Codes or the owner shall demolish the
structure.
(2) All exterior openings in a building structure larger than one square inch in
size must be covered with a minimum of one-half inch thick exterior grade
plywood, masonite, or equivalent strength sheet-like material that is rated
and labeled for use in direct contact with weather. Fastening devices may
be nails or screws not less than one and one-half inch in length and shall
not be spaced more than six inches apart around the perimeter of each sheet
of material.
(3) The boarding up of a building shall not be a defense to a demolition
proceeding, nor may the Court order a dangerous or dilapidated building
boarded up. The boarding up of a building shall be an admission by the
owner or occupant that the building or structure is a dangerous or
dilapidated building.
Upon the Building Official determining that it is necessary to immediately remedy a
dangerous condition arising from a dangerous and dilapidated building as defined in Paragraph
(b)(4) above, the Building Official with or without notice may cause a structure to be boarded up
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons; and all
associated direct costs thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the structure and shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is situated and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
(f) Any building or structure which has or may be damaged by fire, decay, or other
cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be torn down and removed. Upon
determination by the Fire Chief or Building Official that a building or structure has been damaged
to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, a Notice shall be served upon the owner of the
premises by personal service or by registered or certified mail to his last-known address. Such
Notice shall notify the owner that the building has been damaged by fire, decay, or other cause to
the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value and that the building must be demolished within 10
days from date of this Notice and that the building must be immediately vacated and not occupied.
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or to permit such building to be occupied after
service of Notice. This Subsection shall not be a limitation upon any other provision of Section
5.10 herein.
If the Notice given herein has not been complied with within 10 days from the date when
the Notice is served, the City may proceed to demolish the building in the same manner as
provided for the demolition of a dangerous building.
(g) In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this Ordinance, the Chief
of the Fire Department, or any other municipal officer whose duty it is to investigate fires, may
make the investigation authorized by statute found the Fire Investigation Act, 425 ILCS 10.01 et
seq. If such officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied or situated as to
endanger persons or property, or by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of repair, or for any
cause is especially liable to fire, or is liable to cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall
order the dangerous situation removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant of
the premises. Service of such notice may be in person or by registered or certified mail to the
last-known address, and any person so notified may appeal from the decision of such officer in the
manner provided by law.
(h) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Ordinance, or
permitting any dangerous building, or any building or structure, to remain in a dangerous
condition, or to remain after it has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value,
shall be fined as provided in this Ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.
SECTION 5.11 UNSAFE EQUIPMENT.
(a) The term "unsafe equipment" as used in this Ordinance is hereby defined to mean
any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers, or other equipment which is in such disrepair or condition that it is a hazard to
the life, health, property, or safety of the public or the occupants of any premises or structure.
(b) Any unsafe equipment in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be
unlawful to maintain and permit the existence of any unsafe equipment in the City; and it shall be
unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any unsafe equipment on the premises
upon which it is situated to permit the same to remain in an unsafe condition.
(c) Whenever the Building Official, or any person designated by him, upon inspection
of any equipment in the City shall be determined that such equipment constitutes unsafe
equipment, he shall thereupon cause written Notice to be served upon the owner and the occupant
thereof by registered or certified mail to the last-known address or by personal service. Such
Notice shall state that the equipment has been declared to be unsafe equipment and that such
unsafe equipment must be removed or repaired and that the removal or repair must be completed
immediately and without delay. In addition, the unsafe equipment shall be placarded and
designated as unsafe equipment.
If a person receiving such Notice of unsafe equipment has not complied therewith within
ten (10) days from the time that the Notice is served upon such person, then the City Manager, or
someone designated by him, may proceed to remedy the condition or remove the unsafe
equipment or repair the unsafe equipment. The owner or possessor of the equipment or other
responsible person shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs, including a reasonable
attorney's fee, incurred by the City in removing or repairing the unsafe equipment or remedying
the unsafe condition. In addition, any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
Ordinance by permitting any unsafe equipment to remain in an unsafe condition shall be fined as
provided in this Ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each date during or on which the violation occurs or continues.
SECTION 5.12 ACCESSIBILITY OF BUILDINGS TO PHYSICALLY
HANDICAPPED AND ELDERLY PERSONS.
A. Definitions.
A physically handicapped person is hereby defined to be a person who:
(1) has non-ambulatory disabilities or impairments that, regardless of cause or
manifestation, for all practical purposes confine the individual to a
wheelchair; or
(2) has semi-ambulatory disabilities or impairments that cause the individual to
walk with difficulty or insecurity, including those persons using braces or
crutches, amputees, arthritics, spastics, and those with pulmonary and
cardiac ills; or
(3) has sight disabilities of total blindness or impairments affecting sight to an
extent that the individual functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed
to danger; or
(4) has hearing disabilities or deafness or hearing handicaps that might make a
person insecure in public areas because that person is unable to
communicate or hear warning signals; or
(5) has disabilities of in coordination or peripheral nerve injury; or
(6) has aging or those manifestations of the aging process that significantly
reduce mobility, flexibility, coordination, and perceptiveness, but are not
otherwise accounted for in subparagraphs (1)-(5) hereof. rev.10/85.
B. The provisions of this Section 5.12 shall apply to all buildings hereafter erected for
any of the following uses or occupancies:
(a) Buildings for amusement devices providing shelter.
(b) Armories
(c) Art Centers
(d) Auditoriums
(e) Churches
(f) Administrative buildings of the City
(g) Club Houses
(h) Court Houses
(i) Dance Halls
(j) Department Stores
(k) Gymnasiums which normally admit spectators
(l) Financial institutions
(m) Public areas within funeral homes
(n) Lodge Halls
(o) Manufacturing buildings
(p) Markets
(q) Museums
(r) Office buildings
(s) Oil Company service stations
(t) Public convenience stations or toilets
(u) Recreation Buildings
(v) Restaurants
(w) Retail and Service Stores
(x) Schools
(y) Seminaries
(z) Service Clubs
(aa) Skating Rinks
(bb) Sports Arenas
(cc) Transportation Passenger Terminals
(dd) Theaters
(ee) All other buildings with facilities that purport to serve the public.
C. The provisions of this Section 5.12 shall further be applicable to all buildings
undergoing major remodeling where substantial repairs or substantial alterations are made in the
appearance, design or layout of an existing structure.
D. All buildings to which this ordinance shall apply and for which the first floor is not
on ground level shall be required to construct a ramp thereto, making that building accessible to
the physically handicapped, which ramp shall comply with the following regulations:
(a) The ramp shall not have a slope greater than 1 foot rise in 12 feet, or 8.33%.
(b) The ramp shall have smooth surfaced handrails that are 32 inches in height,
measured from the surface of the ramp, and that extend 12 inches beyond the top
and bottom of the ramp. The ramp shall be at least 42 inches wide and when two
handrails are provided, the distance between the handrails shall be not less than 36
inches.
(c) The ramp shall have a non-slip surface.
(d) All ramps shall have a level platform at the top, with the following minimum
dimensions:
1. If a door swings out onto the platform or toward the ramp, the
platform shall be a minimum of 5 feet deep and 5 feet wide.
2. All ramps shall have level platform at not less than 30 foot intervals
for, the purposes of rest and safety, and shall have level platforms
whenever the ramp turns.
(e) Whenever parking shall be provided for a building or structure which is subject to
the terms of this Section, automobile parking areas shall have spaces set aside that
are accessible to and as near the building entrance as possible, and identified for
use for the handicapped, which spaces shall allow a net and clear 12 feet for
parking, ingress and egress, and shall further be subject to the following
regulations:
1. A parking space open on one side shall allow room for persons in
wheel chairs or individuals on braces or crutches to get in and out of
a automobile on a level surface suitable for wheeling or walking.
2. Such parking spaces shall be provided so that individuals in wheel
chairs or using crutches and braces are not, whenever reasonably
possible, compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
3. Such parking space shall be reserved for use by the handicapped by
the posting of an official sign. The City Manager is hereby
authorized to reserve spaces for handicapped parking on public
streets and public property and to post official signs indicating such
reserved handicapped parking; and private property owners are
hereby authorized to reserve spaces for handicapped parking on
private lots and private property and to post official signs indicating
such reserved handicapped parking.
4. Such parking spaces shall be reserved for use by vehicles bearing
registration plates or a special decal or device issued to a
handicapped person pursuant to Section 3-616 or Section 11-1301.2
or to a disabled Veteran pursuant to Section 3-609 of AThe Illinois
Vehicle Code@ or bearing a handicapped parking visor clip issued by
the City of Mt. Vernon pursuant to Section 18.16(i).
E. Entrances, Doors and Doorways.
1. At least one primary entrance to each building shall be usable by
individuals in wheel chairs.
2. Doors shall have clear opening of not less than 32 inches when open
and shall be constructed in such a manner as to be operable by an
individual in a wheel chair.
3. The floor on the inside and outside of each doorway shall be level
for a distance of 5 feet from the door in the direction that the door
swing and shall extend one foot beyond each side of the door.
4. Sharp inclines and abrupt changes in level at doorsills are
prohibited.
5. If there are two consecutive doors to a single entrance, the distance
between doors should be a minimum of 54 inches plus the width of
the door.
6. Revolving doors may be used, but shall not be considered to provide
any exit width. Where installed, each revolving door in a building
shall be accompanied by at least one adjacent conforming exit door.
Such conforming doors shall remain unlocked from both sides at all
times when building is in normal use.
F. Walks and Floors.
1. Walks shall have a level platform at any entrance or exit, which is at least
five feet by five feet, if a door swings out onto the platform or toward the
walk.
2. Walks shall have a level platform at least three feet deep and five feet wide,
if the door does not swing out to the platform or toward the walk.
3. Blending of all crosswalks and drives C whenever sidewalks cross other
sidewalks, driveways, or parking lots, they shall blend to a common level.
4. Curb cut-outs shall be provided for major streets and thoroughfares to blend
sidewalk level to street level at corners and other intersections of streets and
alleyways. (Curb cut-outs or level grading at alleyways or similar traffic
intersections.)
5. In the interest of mobility and safety, extra effort and consideration shall be
given to procurement and installation of non-slippery floor surfaces and/or
floor finishes.
G. Toilet Rooms.
Where toilet facilities are required for public use or for use by employees, at least
one toilet room for men and one for women shall be constructed as follows:
1. Toilet rooms shall have sufficient space to allow traffic of individuals in
wheel chairs.
2. Toilet stalls shall have a minimum of five feet by four feet unobstructive
space extending from the front edge of the water closet (or, if necessary due
to limited space or consideration to weight, walls to dimension of four feet
wide by five feet, minimum).
3. Doors to the toilet room or stall shall be considered an obstruction when
they open into the area outlined in subparagraph 2 hereof. The doors must
be 32 inches wide when open.
4. A handrail shall be provided to assist in transfer to and from the water
closet.
5. Toilet rooms shall have at least one lavatory facility, including a mirror and
shelf usable by individuals in wheel chairs.
6. Toilet rooms shall have at least one towel facility or dispenser mounted no
higher than 40 inches from the floor.
7. Water closets shall have seats 20 inches from the floor.
8. Toilet rooms having multiple stalls shall have one stall with water closet
which is at least five feet by four feet.
H. Public Telephones.
1. An appropriate number of public telephones shall be made accessible to
and usable by handicapped persons.
2. Such telephones shall be placed so that the dial and the headset can be
reached by individuals in wheelchairs.
3. An appropriate number of public telephones shall be equipped for those
with hearing disabilities and so identified with instructions for use.
I. Water Fountains.
Where water fountains are required or otherwise installed, they shall be accessible
to and usable by the physically disabled, located approximately 30 to 40 inches from the floor.
J. Elevators.
Where elevators are installed into a multiple-store building, they shall conform to
the following requirements:
1. Elevators shall be accessible to and usable by the physically handicapped in the
level that they use to enter the building, and at all levels normally used by the
general public.
2. Elevators shall allow for traffic by wheel chairs.
3. Elevators shall be provided in all new public buildings over two stories in height.
K. Identification of Public Buildings.
All facilities within a building used by the public shall be identified in the
following manner:
1. Raised letters or numbers shall be used to identify rooms or offices.
2. Identification should be placed on the wall to the right or left of the door, at
a height between 4'6" and 5' 6".
3. Doors that are not intended for normal use and that might prove dangerous
if a blind person were to exit or enter by them shall be made quickly
identifiable to the touch by knurling the door handle or knob.
L. Seating.
1. Places of assembly with fixed seating arrangements in the aforementioned
buildings shall provide performance viewing positions (Aparking spaces@)
for wheelchairs.
2. Viewing positions for wheelchairs shall be provided in a reasonable and
convenient section or sections of the facility by either or both of the
following methods:
a. Providing portable seats which can be easily removed.
b. Providing clear space devoid of any portable or fixed seating
arrangement.
These positions shall be located so as not to interfere with egress from any
row or seats, shall be reachable by means of ramps and/or elevators, and
shall not infringe upon aisle requirements.
3. There shall be no steps in the aisles or in the access route to the
performance viewing positions, but the aisles may be inclined.
SECTION 5.13 PARKING LOTS - STORM WATER DETENTION
No premises within the City of Mt. Vernon shall be improved for parking or parking lot
purposes, whether for surface parking or by a parking structure, unless and until an excavation
permit or a building permit shall have been issued therefor and the requisite fee paid therefor.
No building permit or excavation permit shall be issued for any structure or for any
parking lot, other than a single family structure, unless there shall have been attached to the
application therefor a storm water detention plan describing the method for handling storm water
in a manner so that storm water runoff shall not be increased as a result of such structure without
detention and other storm water handling facilities, and until such structure without detention and
other storm water handling facilities, and until such storm water detention plan shall have been
approved by the City Engineer.
ARTICLE 6
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
SECTION 6.1: CONSTRUCTION
This Article shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be protected, and temperance in the
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be fostered and promoted by sound and careful control
and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors.
SECTION 6.2: DEFINITIONS
Unless the context clearly and unambiguously otherwise requires, the following words
and phrases as used in this Article shall be construed according to the definitions set forth
below:
1. AAlcohol@ means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
2. AAlcoholic Liquor@ includes alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every liquor
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. AAlcoholic liquor@ shall
not include any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent or less of
alcohol by volume.
3. ABeer@ means a beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water and includes
among other things beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.
4. ABowling Alley@ means an establishment or premises or part of an
establishment or building as the case may be wherein the game of bowling
with composition balls and ten wooden pins is played.
5. AClub@ means a corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; PROVIDED that such club files with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under
this Article two copies of a list of the names and residences of its members and
similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member his
name and address; AND PROVIDED FURTHER that the affairs and
management of such club are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting,
and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any
profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the
members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the
members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general
revenue of the club.
6. AConsumption Sales@ means the sale or offering for sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the licensed premises where it is sold.
7. AControl Premises@ means the licensed premises and all property adjacent to
the licensed premises which is owned or leased by or which is under the
authority or supervision of the licensee; control premises shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the licensed premises, parking lots, sidewalks and
walkways. Except as provided within ' 6.5 with regard to a Hotel License,
each building, facility or business required for a particular classification (e.g.
restaurant, hotel, lounge, tavern, etc.) must be under the sole and exclusive
ownership and control of the licensee and no part thereof shall be leased,
contracted, subleased or subcontracted to another person by the licensee,
provided nothing herein shall prohibit the licensee from employing a manager
or contracting for management services for which the licensee retains
responsibility and liability.
8. AConvicted@ means and includes a plea of guilty, a plea of no contest, or
probation or any plea admitting guilt or admitting the facts of an offense; and it
means and includes any finding of guilt by a court, a jury, an administrative
agency or any other trier of fact.
8a. “Festival Area” means municipally owned property located at 207 S. 7th
Street, commonly known as the Armory and municipally owned property
and right of way located upon 9th Street between Broadway and Casey
Street.
9. AHotel@ means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate
pay to transient travelers and guests in which twenty-five (25) or more rooms
are used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more
public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity; said hotel must actually be
engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms and must be filing
returns and paying the Mt. Vernon Motel-Hotel tax.
10. ALicensee@ means any individual, corporation, partnership, or other person
holding a license under the terms and provisions of this Article.
11. “Licensed Premises” means the area as described in the application where
alcoholic liquor is served, consumed, stored, or sold and areas internally or
externally connected thereto by doorway, which areas are integrally related
to the operation of the licensed establishment. “Licensed Premises” is
meant and defined as the interior of a building or a fully enclosed area and
does not include a parking lot, a sidewalk, walk, covered walkway, or any
unenclosed area, except however, “Licensed Premises” shall include (i) the
sidewalk dining area of a Restaurant Licensee or a Restaurant with Lounge
Licensee which is in compliance with Article 32 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances and which is subject to a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor
Permit described within Section 6.5 subparagraph 15 herein, (ii) shall
include the area described within the application and License for a Festival
Events License and (iii) shall include the area described within the
application and License for a Retail Business Customer License.
12. ALocal Liquor Control Commissioner@ shall mean the Mayor of the City of
Mt. Vernon.
13. AMotel-Hotel Tax@ means the tax imposed by ordinance No. 87-27 of the City
of Mt. Vernon.
14. AMt. Vernon Liquor Advisory Board@ means the Liquor Advisory Board
established by Section 6.20 herein.
15. AOriginal Package@ means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead, or other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped,
sealed, and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.
16. APackage Sales@ means the sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor
in the original package and not to be opened to be consumed in whole or in
part on the premises where sold.
17. APublic Property@ means (1) any public street, alley, sidewalk or public way,
(2) all property owned by the United States, the State of Illinois or other State
or any municipality or other political subdivision or agency thereof and (3) any
property, including privately owned property, which is open to or held out for
use by the public, except a Alicensed premises@ as defined above.
18. AResident Manager@ or AManaging Agent@ means the person designated as
manager within the application for license. The Resident Manager or
Managing Agent must be a bona fide resident of Jefferson County, Illinois and
must be a full-time employee of licensee who is physically present on a daily
basis at the license premises not less than forty (40) hours per week; the
Resident Manager or managing Agent must have management authority
including control of the premises, all books and records and must have the
authority to make decisions and give consent regarding any matter concerning
the control premises. A corporation and similar business entities must conduct
business by a resident manager or managing agent.
19. ARestaurant@ means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
20. ARetailer@ means a person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form.
21. ASell At Retail@ and Asale at retail@ refer to and mean sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
22. AService Bar@ means a place or location not within the view of the public
where alcoholic liquor may be poured and served. A service bar may only be
located in a kitchen, food preparation area or waiter or service station area of a
licensee.
23. ASale@ means any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, whether for immediate or future delivery, for a consideration and
includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal,
proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
24. ASampling@ means a supervised offering at a licensed premises of an alcoholic
product or products as a sales promotion of said products by a licensee,
provided that a sampling product may only be tasted in the following amounts:
distilled spirits, 1/4 ounce, wine 1 ounce, and beer 2 ounces.
25. ASpirits@ means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended, or otherwise mixed with alcohol or substances.
26. ATo sell@ means to advertise for sale or to solicit or receive any order for or to
keep or expose for sale or to keep or possess with intent to sell.
27. AWine@ means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including any such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined.
SECTION 6.3: APPLICATIONS AND LICENSING
A. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall sell or offer for sale, possess for sale,
advertise for sale or display for sale alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of the City
without having first obtained a license to do so as provided in this Article.
B. NATURE AND EXTENT OF LICENSE. The license required by this Article
shall be a retailer's license and shall permit the licensee to sell and offer for sale alcoholic
liquor at retail upon the licensed premises specified and described in the licensee's
application and as defined within this ordinance. Each license granted shall be subject to the
provisions of this Article, other applicable Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, and all
applicable laws of the State of Illinois and the United States, including but not limited to the
Illinois Liquor Control Act.
A license issued hereunder shall be a purely personal privilege good for not to exceed
one (1) year after issuance, and said license shall not constitute property; nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated; such license shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of
the licensee except as hereinafter provided. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on
April 30 following issuance. Any sale of alcoholic liquor after expiration of a license shall
constitute sale of alcoholic liquor without a license; if an applicant seeks renewal of an
existing license, an application for renewal shall be submitted with the required license fee
prior to expiration of the existing license. Expiration of a license shall occur by operation of
law without any notice or hearing and there shall be no right to reinstatement of any license,
although an application for a new license may be submitted. A licensed premises shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector at all times.
A license issued hereunder shall not be transferred or otherwise conveyed through a
change in ownership or change in interest of any licensed premises or any licensee. Any
change in stock ownership, a partnership interest or other change in any ownership interest
shall constitute an attempt to transfer a license and shall terminate the license by operation of
law without notice or hearing.
A license issued hereunder shall not be delivered to the Licensee and no license
issued for any premises shall be effective unless and until the Licensee has obtained a
valid Certificate of Occupancy for the licensed premises under the Revised Code of
Ordinances; a copy of the original license may be provided to a Licensee prior to the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the premises solely for the use by Licensee to
obtain financing, to obtain State licenses, to permit construction or remodeling, or for
other valid reasons approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner if the Licensee
and the City, by and through its Local Liquor Control Commissioner, have executed an
agreement which defines the Licensee’s obligations and the restrictions on the license
prior to delivery of the original license. No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made by any
Licensee prior to delivery of the original license to the Licensee. No remodeling,
alteration, or other construction shall be made to any licensed premises without a building
permit and compliance with all requirements and procedures associated therewith.
C. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. All applications for licenses under this
Article shall be in writing, under oath, addressed to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner,
and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, all
partners shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation or club, the application
shall be signed and verified by the president and secretary. The information recited in the
application shall be under oath or affirmation as to each person signing the application. The
willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in any application shall constitute
cause for denial of a license or revocation of any license issued hereunder.
The applicant has a duty to keep the City Clerk and the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner advised as to its current mailing address. The applicant has a duty to file a
completed application and to provide all information required or requested. The applicant has
a duty to timely comply with the requirements of this Article and to diligently prosecute any
application filed with the City Clerk. The applicant has the burden of proof to establish the
applicant's qualifications and the qualifications of the premises for a license.
Each application shall include the following information and statements:
1. Name, birth date, social security number, residence address, and citizenship
(and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization) of the
applicant in the case of an individual.
2. In the case of a partnership, the names, birth dates, social security numbers,
and residence addresses of all partners.
3. In the case of a corporation or club, the names, birth dates, social security
numbers, driver's license numbers, and residence addresses of the officers,
directors, managers; and the names, birth dates, social security numbers, and
residence addresses of all persons who own or have an interest in over five (5)
percent of the stock.
4. In the case of a partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership; in the
case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation; or in the case of a
foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date of its
becoming qualified to transact business in the State of Illinois.
5. The location where the applicant proposes to engage in the business for which
the application is submitted along with an affirmative statement that the
proposed location does not conflict with the location restrictions detailed with
Section 6.11 herein.
6. The class of license for which the application is submitted.
7. The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased.
8. The nature of the business which the applicant intends to carry out and the
amount of applicant's anticipated gross revenue from other sources within the
proposed licensed premises.
9. A list of the governmental entities to which the applicant has submitted an
application(s) for a liquor license; the date of the application; the disposition of
such application; amounts of and reasons for fines imposed; and the dates,
reason, and length of suspension or revocation of such license, if any.
10. A statement that the applicant, individual applicant, partners of a partnership
applicant, and officers, manager, directors, and stockholders of any corporation
applicant have never been convicted of keeping a house of ill fame, convicted
of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality,
or convicted of any felony under any federal or state law.
11. A complete criminal background and credit check authorization for each
person identified within the immediately preceding subparagraph.
12. The name of any person identified within Subparagraph 10 who has been
issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax year.
13. Evidence of dram shop liability insurance covering the entire period of the
license in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. The certificate shall
insure applicant and owner or lessor of the premises in such amounts as may
be required by the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000.00, whichever amount is greater.
D. PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO HOLD A LICENSE. No license shall issue to:
1. A person who is not a bona fide resident of the City.
2. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the City.
3. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
4. A person who has been convicted of a felony or who has been convicted of
pandering or any other crime of morality or a person who has been convicted
of being a keeper of a house of ill fame under the laws of the State of Illinois
or any other federal or state law, unless the Commissioner determines within
his sole discretion that such person now warrants the public trust.
5. A person whose license issued under this Article or the Illinois Liquor control
Act has been revoked for cause.
6. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued
under this Article would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
7. A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such
manager or agent is an actual resident of Jefferson County, Illinois and
possessed the same qualifications required of the Licensee and meets the
requirements of Section 6.2 (18).
8. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license
is to be issued.
9. Any law enforcing public official, mayor, or any member of the City Council;
and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or indirectly
in the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
10. Any person, club, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license.
11. A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified
to obtain a license.
12. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder
or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship or residence within the political subdivision,
except however, the manager must be an actual resident of the city.
13. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign
corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to
transact business in Illinois.
14. A person who has been convicted of any gambling act or offense as prescribed
by any criminal code or statute of any state, including but not limited to
Illinois, or as prescribed by any statute or regulation of the United States or as
prescribed by any ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon or any other political
subdivision of the United States or any state.
15. A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal
government for the current tax period.
16. A partnership to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period or if any of the partners have
been issued a federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current
tax period.
17. A corporation if the corporation or any officer, manager, or director thereof or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the
stock of said corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp of a
federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
18. A person in default of any payment to the City of Mt. Vernon, including any
licensing fee under Article 6 or under any other Article of the Revised Code,
any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any tax imposed by the
City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer or garbage services, or a
person in default on any loan agreement or contract with the City.
E. BOND. No written Bond shall be required; however, each applicant making
application for license hereunder, by acceptance of a license, agrees to indemnify the City
against all losses or injury arising against said City by reason of the conduct or operation of a
business under such license.
F. SEPARATE APPLICATION. Separate application by a licensee or a related
person must be filed for separate classes of licenses by any applicant desiring to operate more
than one licensed business, and a separate license must be obtained by any applicant desiring
to operate a licensed business at more than one licensed premises.
G. MULTIPLE LICENSES. Licenses permitting a person or related person or
entity to operate more than one (1) licensed premises are not desirable and an application by
an applicant or by a person or entity related to a current license holder for a license or for a
second license may be denied solely on the basis that the applicant, or a related person or
entity, including any stockholder, partner or other interested party in said applicant, person,
or entity, is the holder of another license or is interested in, either directly or indirectly,
including as a shareholder, partner or other ownership interest, in another license. “Related”
means being employed by, owning stock in, being a partner in, having any interest directly or
indirectly in, or being related by blood or marriage in the following relationships: spouse,
parent, step-parent, grandparent, step-grandparent, child, step-child, grandchild,
step-grandchild, brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle, aunt, niece or nephew. In all
events, no person or related persons or related entities shall possess more than one license
that permits sales of package liquor, except a Licensee having two such (package sales)
licenses as of August 21, 2017 may continue to renew such existing licenses so long as each
licensed premises continues in lawful operation without interruption.
H. APPLICATION PROCEDURE. Each applicant desiring to engage in the
business of sale of alcoholic liquor shall make application to the City Clerk for a license to do
so. Such application shall be referred to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and if
applicable to the Mt. Vernon Liquor Advisory Board. The application shall be processed in
accordance with the procedures set forth within this Article. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have sole authority to approve or reject such application. In the event
such application is approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, a license shall be
issued by the Clerk to such applicant signed by the Commissioner and countersigned by the
Clerk, who shall keep a complete record of all such licenses issued.
SECTION 6.4: PAYMENT OF LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES
All fees payable under this Article shall be paid in full by cash, certified check, or
money order and submitted at the time the application is made; if the application is denied
and no license or permit is issued, then the license or permit fee shall be returned to the
Applicant.
The license fee for each license classification and any permit fee shall be as provided
within Section 6.5; after a license or permit is issued, the fee paid for said license or permit
shall be non-refundable. When a license is issued prior to November 1 of a licensing year, the
full fee shall be paid; if a license is issued on November 1 or thereafter of a licensing year,
one-half of the fee shall be paid; no additional proration of the fee shall be made.
SECTION 6.5: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, PERMITS, AND FEES
Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor shall be of the following classes:
1. A ATavern License@ shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption and
package sales of alcoholic liquor. The license fee for a ATavern License@ shall
be Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) per annum.
2. A AClub License@ shall entitle Licensee to make consumption and package
sales of alcoholic liquor. The license shall issue only for clubs and bowling
alleys; provided that no person shall receive a license to sell alcoholic liquor
upon any premises as a club unless it has the qualifications described in
Section 6.2(5) of the Revised Code. The license fee for a AClub License@ shall
be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum; provided, however, that
with respect to a club as defined within Section 6.2(5) having a total
membership of less than 300 members, the license fee shall be Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00).
3. A “Restaurant With Lounge License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package
sales. This license shall issue only for licensed premises having a dining area, a
kitchen area, and a lounge area physically separate, divided, and apart from
one another, and no sales of alcoholic liquor shall occur within the dining area
except with meals. The dining area of a Restaurant with Lounge License shall
include any sidewalk dining area which is in compliance with Article 32 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances and which is subject to a Downtown Sidewalk
Dining Liquor Permit described within Section 6.5 subparagraph 15 herein.
The Licensee fee for a “Restaurant With Lounge License” shall be Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
4. A “Restaurant License” shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption sales
of beer and wine only; the Licensee shall make no package sales. This license
shall issue only for restaurants as defined herein. No person shall receive a
“Restaurant License” to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises unless it has
the qualifications described in Section 6.2(19) of the Revised Code and also
meets all of the requirements hereinafter stated. No restaurant licensed
hereunder shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals and all meals served
shall include food actually prepared within the kitchen upon the premises.
Meals shall be served during all times that the licensed premises is open to the
public. The restaurant’s total gross receipts from food and non-alcoholic
beverages shall be not less than 51% of the total gross receipts from all sources
including food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages, and video
gaming. No restaurant shall have any lounge or bar or other similar area; only a
service bar is permitted. The kitchen shall be equipped with a stove or grill or
other similar device, affixed to the premises, having an open flame or exposed
heat source upon which a majority of all cooking shall occur; microwave
devices and portable devices such as hotplates and countertop ovens are not
prohibited, but microwave and portable devices shall not be the only, nor the
predominant, cooking method. The dining area of the Licensed Premises of the
Restaurant License shall include any sidewalk dining area which is in
compliance with Article 32 of the Revised Code of Ordinances and which is
subject to a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit described within
Section 6.5 subparagraph 15 herein. The license fee for a “Restaurant License”
shall be Eight Hundred Dollars ($800.00) per annum.
5. A AHotel License@ shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption sales of
alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package sales. This license shall
issue only for hotels and motels. No person shall receive a AHotel License@ to
sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises unless the premises has the
qualifications described in Section 6.2(9). The license may issue to the hotel
owner or hotel operator or may issue to the Lessee of the restaurant situated
within the hotel provided that in all events the licensed premises shall be the
entire hotel and Licensee shall be responsible with regard to the provisions of
this Ordinance for the licensed premises and control premises of the hotel. The
license fee for a AHotel License@ shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00)
per annum. A violation of this Ordinance by a Licensee holding a license as
the Lessee of the hotel restaurant shall also be considered to be the violation of
the hotel premises for licensing purposes regardless of in whose name the
license is held or has been held.
6. A AHotel Ticket License@ shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption sales
of alcoholic liquor only as specifically hereinafter provided; the Licensee shall
make no other consumption sales and shall make no package sales. This
license shall issue only for hotels and motels. No person shall receive a AHotel
Ticket License@ to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises unless it has the
qualifications described in Section 6.2(9), except that the premises shall not be
required to have a restaurant. This license shall entitle Licensee to provide
drink tickets as an amenity to the Licensee's registered guests whose room
rentals are subject to the Mt. Vernon Motel-Hotel tax; the Licensee shall not
provide drink tickets except with the rental of a room and the Licensee shall
not make any separate sales of tickets or of alcoholic liquor; tickets shall be
date stamped and shall be redeemable only on the date of issue and shall be
limited to three (3) tickets per transient guest per day. The alcoholic liquor
shall be served only by an employee of the Licensee and the alcoholic liquor
shall be consumed upon the licensed premises only within a predesignated area
during a predesignated time, each of which must appear upon the drink ticket.
No tickets shall be redeemable as or used for room service and no alcoholic
liquor shall be provided to any guests or other persons for consumption within
any room upon the licensed premises except the pre-designated area. The
license fee for a AHotel Ticket License@ shall be Eight Hundred Dollars
($800.00) per annum.
7. A “Package Sales License” shall entitle Licensee to make package sales of
alcoholic liquor; and, if applicable, limited consumption sales of beer and wine
only. Except as hereinafter provided as to a Licensee first licensed prior to
August 21, 2017, the Licensee shall make no consumption sales. The license
fee for a “Package Sales License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00)
per annum if only for package sales. A Licensee licensed prior to August 21,
2017 and who thereafter remains continuously licensed and lawfully operating
without interruption may elect to make package sales of alcoholic liquor and
consumption sales of beer and wine as hereinafter provided by paying a
licensing fee of Four Thousand Dollars ($4,000.00); said Licensee shall
comply with all of the requirements of Article 11, Section 11.16, of the
Revised Code of Ordinances as well as all of the requirements of Article 6 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances, with the most restrictive requirement being
applicable in the event of any conflict; said Licensee shall not have any lounge
or bar or other similar area, and only a service bar shall be permitted and said
service bar shall serve, and the consumption of beer and wine shall only occur
within, a restricted area where the video gaming terminals are situated. No
Licensee, except a Licensee initially licensed prior to August 21, 2017, may be
issued a Package Sales License permitting consumption sales nor be issued any
license under Article 11, Section 11.16, of the Revised Code of Ordinances by
reason of the herein described Package Sales License.
8. A “Package Sales Beer and Wine License” shall entitle Licensee to make
package sales of beer and wine only; the Licensee shall make no consumption
sales. The license fee for a “Package Sales License” shall be Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
9. A “Wine-Makers License” shall entitle the Licensee to manufacture wine
and to store wine on the licensed premises, to make sales of wine
manufactured on the premises to distributors and to importing distributors
for resale, to sell and offer for “sale at retail” wine manufactured on the
premises and also beer, and to ship wine manufactured on the premises
directly to a resident of the State of Illinois who is 21 years of age or older
for that resident’s personal use and not for resale. “Sale at retail” upon the
licensed premises as to wine shall be for consumption or for sale by the
package; but as to beer, such sale at retail shall be for sale of beer for
consumption upon the premises only and not for package sales of beer. The
license fee for a “Wine-Makers License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) per annum.
10. A “Banquet Room License” shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption sales of
alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package sales. The license shall issue
only for a place of business which has one or more separate rooms used for
accommodating banquets, parties, meetings, and similar functions. Licensee shall not
permit consumption of alcoholic liquor except during the scheduled time of the
banquet, party, meeting, or similar event. The manager or other employee of Licensee
must be on duty and on the licensed premises at all times any person or persons are
upon the premises and all events shall be under the supervision and direction of the
employee or employees of Licensee. No Licensee shall operate a lounge or a bar upon
the licensed premises at any time except during and for scheduled banquet, party,
meeting or similar event. The license fee for a “Banquet Room License” shall be Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
11. A ATemporary Special Event License@ shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor. This license shall be a temporary license
which shall be issued solely to a not-for-profit organization for one (1) day,
and no organization shall be entitled to more than three (3) such temporary
daily permits in any one calendar year. The application for such ATemporary
Special Event License@ shall designate the premises for which a license is
desired and the hours of operation. The license fee for a ATemporary Special
Event License@ shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per day. No premises or control
premises shall be the place for more than six (6) Temporary Special Event
Licenses and/or Temporary Special Use Licenses (either singly or in
combination) during any one calendar year. All beverages, including alcoholic
liquors, served for consumption during a special event shall only be served
within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or container; no
beverage shall be served for consumption during a special event within a glass
bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can, cup, or mug or similar type container.
12. A “Temporary Special Event Permit License” shall entitle the Licensee to
make sales of alcoholic liquor; the license shall issue only to a Licensee
who holds a valid license under one of the other license classifications of
the City of Mt. Vernon and the Licensee shall be subject to the restrictions
of such license with regard to the type of sales which Licensee may make.
The permit license shall be a temporary license which shall be issued for
one day and no Licensee shall be entitled to more than 26 such temporary
daily permit licenses in any one calendar year. The application for such
“Temporary Special Event Permit License” shall designate the premises for
which a license is desired and the hours of operation. No permit license
shall be issued for any premises within one hundred (100) feet, measured
from boundary lines, of any property having a residential zoning
classification within the Schedule of District Regulations of Article 21 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances. The license fee for a “Temporary Special
Event Permit License” shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day. No
Temporary Special Event Permit License shall issue unless the applicant
shall provide written authorization or permission evidencing its right to use
the premises subject of the Temporary Special Event Permit License,
provide general liability insurance in an amount required within the
permission or authorization, and comply with all other applicable provisions
of Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. All beverages, including
alcoholic liquors, served for consumption during a special event shall only
be served within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or
container; no beverage shall be served for consumption during a special
event within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can, cup, or mug or
similar type container.
13. A ATemporary Special Use License@ shall allow a holder of an Illinois
Winemaker=s Premises License to transfer a portion of its wine inventory from
its State licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby
created and to sell or offer for sale at retail only in the premises specified in the
license hereby created the transferred wine for use or consumption, including
package sales, but not for resale in any form. Each Temporary Special Use
License shall be for one (1) day and no winemaker shall be entitled to more
than three (3) such Temporary Special Use Licenses in any one calendar year.
The application for such Temporary Special Use License shall designate the
premises for which the license is desired and the hours of operation. The
license fee for a ATemporary Special Use License@ shall be Fifty Dollars
($50.00) per day. No premises or control premises shall be the place for more
than three (3) Temporary Special Event License and or Temporary Special Use
License (either singly or in combination) during any one (1) calendar year.
14. A “Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit” shall entitle the Permittee to
make sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption in accordance with the
provisions of its license within a sidewalk dining area licensed under Article
32 of the Revised Code of Ordinances; such Permit shall be subject to all of
the provisions of Article 32 of the Revised Code of Ordinances in addition to
the provisions and requirements of Article 6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances. A Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall issue only to a
Licensee who is holder of a valid Restaurant License or Restaurant with
Lounge License; it shall be a permit granting additional privileges to such
Licensee. The fee for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall be
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per annum. A Downtown Sidewalk Dining
Liquor Permit shall permit the Licensee to make sales for consumption within
the sidewalk dining area subject to the following restrictions: (i) Alcoholic
liquor shall not be sold, served, consumed, or possessed within a sidewalk
dining area during any period when a City permitted parade or other City
permitted event is conducted on the right-of-way that is adjacent to said
sidewalk dining area. (ii) No alcoholic beverage may be stored or mixed within
the sidewalk dining area. (iii) A sign must be posted in a visible location
within the sidewalk dining area that states: "It is unlawful to remove
alcoholic beverages from the sidewalk dining area."
15. A “Festival Events License” shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption
sales of beer and wine on specific dates. The license shall issue solely to a notfor-
organization and shall issue only for a location situated within a Festival
Area as defined within Section 6.2 of this Article. The application for a
Festival Events License shall designate the specific dates that alcoholic liquor
shall be available for consumption upon the licensed premises. The license fee
for a Festival Events License shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day
for each day specified within the application, provided that the maximum fee
during each licensing year shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
No Festival Events License shall issue unless the applicant shall provide
written authorization or permission evidencing its right to use an area within
the Festival Area, provide general liability insurance in an amount required
within the permission or authorization, and comply with all other applicable
provisions of Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. All beverages,
including alcoholic liquors, served for consumption during a festival event
shall only be served within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam
cup or container; no beverage shall be served within a glass bottle, cup, or mug
or a metal can, cup, or mug or similar type container.
.
16. A “Brew Pub License” shall entitle the Licensee to manufacture beer on the
licensed premises and to store the manufactured beer on the licensed premises,
to make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises to distributors and to
importing distributors for resale, and to sell and offer for sale at retail the beer
manufactured on the premises; such "sale at retail" shall be for consumption
upon the licensed premises or sale by the package only at the licensed
premises. A Brew Pub License shall also entitle Licensee to make consumption
sales of beer or package sales of beer which is not manufactured on the
licensed premises. The license fee for the “Brew Pub License” shall be Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
17. An “Interchange Video Gaming License@ shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of beer and wine only. The license shall issue only for
establishments situated within a three-fourths mile radius (3,960 feet) of the
point of intersection of the center line of Interstate Route 57 Exit Ramp
Number 95 and the center line of Illinois State Route 15, or of the center line
of Interstate Route 57 Exit Ramp Number 94 and the center line of Veterans
Memorial Drive, or the center line of Interstate Route 64 Exit Ramp Number
80 and the center line of Illinois State Route 37. In addition, the license shall
issue only for establishments licensed under Article 11, Section 11.16 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances having not less than 5 licensed video gaming
terminals; the Licensee must meet all requirements of Article 11 and Article 6
of the Revised Code of Ordinances, and in the event of any conflict, the most
restrictive requirement shall be applicable. No premises licensed hereunder
shall have any lounge or bar or other similar area; only a service bar is
permitted and said service bar and consumption sales shall serve only the video
gaming terminals or similar type additional terminals, such as an internet
station. The license fee for a Video Gaming License shall be Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
18. A “Retail Business Customer License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package
sales. The Licensee shall, except during events subject to a Temporary
Special Event Permit License, make sales only of beer and wine. The
License shall issue only to a retail business whose primary sales are not the
sale of alcoholic liquor or food and for which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
only an amenity offered for sale to customers of the retail business. The
licensed premises shall have no lounge, bar, or other similar area; only a
service bar is permitted. The licensed premises may include the entire
business premises of Licensee, which business premises shall be fully
described with the Application for License. All beverages served for
consumption upon the business premises shall be served only within and
consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or container; no beverage
shall be served within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or metal can, cup, or mug
or similar type container. A Retail Business Customer License shall also
entitle Licensee to apply for a Temporary Special Event Permit License
which permits the sale of all alcoholic liquor for consumption and which is
not restricted to sale of beer and wine only. The Licensee fee for a Retail
Business Customer License shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per
annum.
Except as limited by the terms of the license of the permit, all licenses and permits
shall be annual licenses and permits, and same shall expire on April 30 of each year
following the date of issuance and shall consist of the name of the Licensee, the address and
description of the licensed premises, and if applicable a notation permitting Sunday sales.
SECTION 6.6: POSTING OF LICENSE OR PERMIT
Every person licensed under the provisions of this Article shall immediately post and
keep posted while in force in a conspicuous place upon the premises described in such
license the license so issued hereunder and also any license required to be issued under the
Illinois Liquor Control Act; all permits shall also be conspicuously posted in the same
manner as a license.
SECTION 6.7: LICENSE FOR EACH SPECIFIC PREMISES; TRANSFER TO
OTHER PREMISES OWNED BY LICENSEE
A License issued hereunder shall apply only to the licensed premises described in the
application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location shall be so described in
each license.
After a license has been granted for a particular premises, a licensee may request a
transfer of said license to another premises owned by licensee. The licensee shall file a
request in writing and under oath that licensee desires to transfer the license to a new
premises owned by licensee; the licensee shall also submit a non-refundable one Hundred
Dollar ($100.00) processing fee and shall submit an application for a license for the proposed
premises, which application shall be in the form and shall be subject to the same application
procedure as provided in Section 6.3 and as provided within this Article. A licensee may not
request a transfer of a license to a premises not owned by or leased by licensee, nor may
licensee request transfer of the license to another person.
SECTION 6.8: SURRENDER OF LICENSE
Any licensee who desires to surrender and terminate a license issued hereunder shall
file in the Office of the City Clerk a written notice under oath addressed to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner advising the commissioner of the intent to surrender the license and
the effective date of the termination of the license. The termination of the license shall not be
effective until the date stated within the notice and may be withdrawn by the licensee prior to
the effective date by filing in the Office of the City Clerk a statement in writing under oath
withdrawing the notice of surrender, provided that a notice of withdrawal shall be null and
void and of no effect if filed on or after the effective date of the termination. If no date of
termination is stated within the notice then the termination shall be immediately effective
upon filing of the notice.
SECTION 6.9: NUMBER OF LICENSES
Effective April 16, 2018 there are currently authorized and issued in the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois six (6) Tavern Licenses, six (6) Club Licenses, twenty (20)
Restaurant with Lounge Licenses, five (5) Restaurant Licenses, one (1) Hotel License,
three (3) Motel-Hotel Ticket Licenses, seven (7) Package Sales Licenses, ten (10)
Package Sales Beer and Wine Licenses, two (2) Wine-Makers Licenses, two (2) Banquet
Room Licenses, two (2) Festival Events Licenses, two (2) Brew Pub Licenses, fifteen
(15) Interchange Video Gaming Licenses, ten (10) Retail Business Customer Licenses and
an unlimited number of temporary Licenses.
Nothing herein shall restrict or limit the authority of the City Council to change by
Ordinance the number of licenses authorized and in existence.
SECTION 6.10: RENEWALS
A license may be renewed at the expiration thereof provided the licensee is then
qualified to receive a license at the premises for which such renewal license is sought and
complies with all ordinances of the City including health, building, zoning, and fire safety
ordinances.
Applications for renewal of license shall be filed by the licensee with the City Clerk in
the same manner and under the same terms and conditions as for an original application,
except for an application for renewal should be filed not less than sixty (60) days prior to
expiration of the license (i.e. March 1). The application procedure for renewal of a license
shall be the same as for an original application, except that such application shall not be
subject to review and action by the Liquor Advisory Board unless referred to the Advisory
Board by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall preliminarily or tentatively grant or deny in writing the renewal of license without any
hearing; provided that if the applicant, within ten (10) days from date of the notice of the
preliminary or tentative decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, shall file in the
Office of the City Clerk a written request for hearing upon the application then a hearing de
novo shall be conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within thirty (30) days
from date of the written request, which hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 6.21 herein. The preliminary or tentative decision of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall be served by certified mail return receipt requested to the
address stated within the application; the date of mailing the decision of the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner in a properly addressed envelope shall be the date of the notice
regardless of whether the applicant actually receives the notice.
The renewal privilege herein described shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be
issued within its jurisdiction. The City Council may eliminate licenses, amend license
classifications, and/or impose such regulations and restrictions as deemed necessary by the
City Council to protect and promote the public interest.
SECTION 6.11: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one
hundred (100) feet of any church; school; hospital; home for the aged or indigent persons
or veterans, their wives, their children; or any military or naval station; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly
organized clubs, restaurants, licensed premises within a Festival Area, or grocery stores.
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon
any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of
the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted
to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any
connection between such premises or such other portion of the building or structure used
only by the licensee, his family, and personal guests.
No licensee shall hold forth or operate at any place other than the licensed premises
designated in his application for a license.
No license except a Temporary Special Event License or a Temporary Special Use
License or a Festival Events License or Temporary Special Event Permit License or Retail
Business Customer License shall issue for any premises except the interior of a building or a
fully enclosed area adjacent to and forming part of a building constituting a licensed premises
which area is fully enclosed by a permanent solid board fence not less than 8 feet in height
and which area has no entry or access except from the interior of a building forming part of
the licensed premises, provided that the required fence (which must meet all other
requirements) for a dining area where food is actually served may be a wrought iron fence
not less than five feet in height for a premises licensed as a restaurant or as a restaurant with
lounge upon the written approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner after a
determination by said Commissioner that such wrought iron fence and the use thereof is
compatible with adjacent properties and uses. A Temporary Special Event License or
Temporary Special Use License or a Festival Events License or Temporary Special Event
Permit License may issue for the interior of a building and/or a fully enclosed area which is
fully enclosed by a permanent or temporary fence not less than 4 feet in height and which
area has no entry or access point except entrances that are clearly designated as the only place
of entry or exit and which area (including without limitation the fencing and each entrance) is
monitored at all times by an adult agent of the Licensee who shall be not less than 21 years of
age. Sidewalk dining areas subject of a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall
comply with the requirements of Article 32 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
No license except a except a Package Sales Beer and Wine License shall be issued to
an applicant whose principal business at the premises described in the application is the sale
at retail of groceries or drugs.
No license except a Package Sales Beer and Wine License or Interchange Video
Gaming License shall be issued to any premises where gasoline, diesel, petroleum fuels, or
other fuels for motor vehicles as defined within the Illinois Vehicle code are dispensed or
sold nor to any premises immediately abutting or adjacent to a premises owned, leased,
managed, or controlled by a Licensee in whole or part where gasoline, diesel, petroleum
fuels, or other fuels for motor vehicles as defined within the Illinois Vehicle Code are
dispensed or sold.
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at
any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age
or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food,
lunches, or drinks for such minors.
When a license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any
person for the period of one (1) year thereafter for the conduct of business of selling
alcoholic liquor at retail on the premises or on any part of the premises subject of the revoked
license.
No license shall be issued to any massage parlor as defined within Article 11, Section
11.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
No license shall be issued to any sexually oriented business which shall include an
adult store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, escort agency, semi-nude model studio,
sexual encounter center or similar adult use.
No license shall be issued to any tattoo shop, tattoo parlor or to any similar business
offering tattoo services.
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 800 feet
of any massage parlor as defined within Article 11, Section 11.14 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances or within 800 feet of any sexually oriented business or within 800 feet of any
tattoo shop, tattoo parlor or any similar business offering tattoo services. For purposes of this
subparagraph measurements shall be in straight line without regard to intervening structures
or objects from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
Not more than one license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
for any structure or for any lot as defined by Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
The location restriction within this subparagraph shall not apply to a licensed premises
having a valid license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor issued prior to December 18,
2006 for so long as the license for the premises in question is renewed each subsequent year
and continues in effect during all periods from such date(i.e. The R & R Crossing and The
Depot); nor shall the location restriction within this subparagraph apply to a licensed
premises forming part of a planned shopping center situated upon real estate having the
Zoning Classification B-PL, Planned Business District.
SECTION 6.12: HEALTH AND SAFETY LAWS
All premises licensed pursuant to this Article shall be in compliance at all times with
the City's building, fire, and zoning ordinances and all state ordinances and all state statutes
pertaining to health, sanitation, and public safety.
Licensees shall comply at all times with all other applicable ordinances of the City and
statutes of the State of Illinois.
SECTION 6.13: CESSATION OF BUSINESS
The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership, dissolution of a corporation, or
bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to exist provided that the executor or
administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the
deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such
insolvency or such bankruptcy until the expiration of such bankruptcy, or insolvency of such
licensee.
A licensee who will be ceasing to do business or who closes his or her place of
business for more than ten (10) days shall give the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
written notice of such cessation or closing as soon as practical after the decision to close or
cease business is made, but in any event before the cessation or closing. Such notice shall
state the reason therefor and the date of closing or cessation. Any licensee who ceases to do
business or closes his or her place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive
days and who fails to show good cause shall be subject to having his or her license
suspended, revoked, or a fine imposed.
SECTION 6.14: HOURS OF OPERATION
It shall be unlawful to sell, to offer for sale, or deliver at retail, or give away in or
upon any licensed premises any alcoholic liquor except during the following hours:
1. Monday-Thursday.
Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 1:00 a.m. of the succeeding
day of each day from Monday through Thursday inclusive.
2. Friday and Saturday.
Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 2:00 a.m. of the succeeding
day of each day from Friday through Saturday inclusive.
3. Sunday.
(a) From 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. Sunday.
(b) All other sales on Sunday are prohibited.
4. New Year's Day.
Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, persons, firms, and corporations
licensed to sell malt or alcoholic liquor may serve and sell malt and alcoholic
liquor at the licensed premises between the hours of 6:00 a.m. on New Year's
Eve and 8:00 a.m. on New Year's Day or until normal permitted hours as
provided above for said day, whichever is later; provided, however, that entry
to the licensed premises, shall be denied to all persons at 2:00 a.m. on New
Year's Day, and no person shall be permitted to enter or reenter the premises
after said time until the licensed premises thereafter opens for normal
permitted hours as provided above. All persons or patrons within the licensed
premises at said 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day shall be permitted to remain and
be permitted to purchase and to consume malt and alcoholic liquor, although
no person shall be permitted reentry upon exiting or leaving the licensed
establishment until the licensed premises thereafter opens for normal permitted
hours as provided above.
5. General Provisions.
Businesses primarily offering goods and services other than sales of alcoholic
liquor, such as restaurants, clubs, hotels, motels, gas stations, and grocery
stores, may remain open at all hours otherwise permitted by law, but no
alcoholic liquors shall be sold or delivered except during the hours provided
above. Furthermore, any lounge area or separate area for sale or service of
alcohol shall be closed. Businesses primarily offering sales of alcoholic liquor
shall remain open only during the hours provided above.
Each licensee shall require and have all customers off and out of said premises
within twenty (20) minutes after the closing times provided herein, which
twenty (20) minutes shall be considered a grace period to all time for closing
and for all customers to leave the premises, but all sales or deliveries shall
cease at the closing hours herein specified.
Whenever time is referred to in this Article, it shall be understood and is
hereby enacted that the same shall be consistent with the official time of the
City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, whether the same shall be central standard time or
central daylight savings time.
No individual other than a licensee or paid employee who is actually on duty
for cleaning or maintenance purposes shall remain in a licensed premises after
the closing time and grace time specified herein above.
SECTION 6.15: DRIVE-IN WINDOWS.
A. Drive-in windows maintained and operated on premises duly licensed for the
sale of alcoholic liquors within the corporate limits of the City shall be adequately lighted
during business hours by natural or artificial white light so that all persons or vehicles
transacting business at such windows shall be clearly visible. From sunset until closing time,
said drive-in windows shall be directly lighted by no less than two (2), 300-watt incandescent
lamps or their equivalent, spaced at least eight (8) feet apart, located directly over or near
said drive-in window, with light rays so directed as to most effectively light the outside area
immediately adjacent to said window.
B. In order to enforce this section, the City shall have the right to require the filing
with it of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the lighting as above required. This
paragraph shall constitute an additional regulation of premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic liquors.
C. Only Apackage sales@ are permitted at drive-in windows.
D. Only a licensee having a Tavern or Package Sales license shall maintain and
operate a drive-in window at which alcoholic liquors are sold.
SECTION 6.16: BOOKS AND BUSINESS RECORDS.
It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and maintain books and records
pertaining to all business conducted at the licensed premises. It shall be the duty of every
licensee to make the books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of
investigation and control by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Such books and
records need not be maintained on the licensed premises but must be maintained in the state
of Illinois.
SECTION 6.17: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
A. No licensee shall cash checks or drafts to any purchaser or prospective
purchaser of alcoholic liquors, which checks or drafts have been given such purchaser or
prospective purchaser in payment of personal services, nor shall he give alcoholic liquors to
any customer on credit.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no Licensee or any agent, representative,
manager, or employee of such Licensee shall permit or allow any person under the age of
21 years to enter or remain upon any control premises, nor shall any person under the age
of 21 years enter or remain upon any control premises. Provided, however, that the
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to persons under the age 21 years remaining only
within the dining area of a restaurant or a bowling area which is physically separate,
divided, and apart from any bar or lounge area of a licensed premises; nor shall the
prohibition apply to persons under the age of 21 years who enter a licensed premises
primarily offering goods and services other than sales of alcoholic liquor, such as
groceries, medicinal drugs, or motor fuels or the to the licensed premises of a property
subject to a Retail Business Customer License; nor shall the prohibition apply to a person
under the age of 21 accompanied by a parent or legal guardian entering a premises
licensed to make only package sales of alcoholic liquor. In addition, the foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to persons between the ages of 18 and 21 years if the
provisions of Section 6.17 O hereinafter set forth are applicable Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no person under 21 years of age shall be permitted, nor shall any person under
21 years of age, enter any premises licensed as a tavern.
A person charged with a violation in any court or administrative hearing of this
Subsection shall have the burden of proving that he meets one of the described exceptions.
C. No waiter or waitress nor any other employee of licensee shall enter, appear or
remain within any dining area, any bowling area, or package sales area or other area of the
control premises where minors are permitted, nor within any area which may reasonably be in
view of a minor, unless said waiter, waitress or other employee shall be wearing or attired in
non-transparent clothing which hides from view or prevents view of the breasts, the genitals,
the buttocks and all areas of the torso and thigh from the bottom of the breast area downward
to an area of the body which would cover from view the entire buttocks and genital area of
the body.
D. No person shall possess any open container or consume any alcoholic liquor
upon any public property as defined in section 6.2(17) within the corporate limits of the City.
No licensee shall allow or permit any individual to transport or carry any alcoholic liquor out
of the licensed premises of the licensee except in the original package with the seal unbroken.
E. No gambling devices of any kind or nature, games of chance, punch boards,
slot machines, dice, or any other instrument of gambling shall be permitted or allowed upon
any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquors except video gaming terminals
licensed and permitted under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and Section
11.16 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
F. No licensee nor any manager, agent, or employee of licensee shall permit or
allow any waitress, waiter, hostess, bartender, employee, agent, patron, or any other person to
enter or remain upon any licensed premises or any control premises nor shall any such
licensee, manager, agent, waitress, waiter, hostess, bartender, employee, patron or any other
person enter or remain upon the licensed premises or control premises unless dressed in nontransparent
and opaque clothing which completely covers from view the human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely covered, and the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, buttocks, anus, anal cleft and anal cleavage, and the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other clothing, provided the areola or nipple is not exposed in whole or in
part. This subparagraph shall not be construed to apply to a person engaged in the bona fide
use of a single sex restroom for its intended purpose or to an occupant(s), not otherwise
visible to the public, within a hotel or motel room situated upon a control premises.
No licensee nor any manager, agent or employee of licensee shall knowingly permit
or allow any employee, agent, patron or any other person upon the licensed premises or
control premises to engage in nor shall any licensee, employee, agent, patron or any other
person knowingly engage in or knowingly participate in the fondling, caressing, or erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic area, vulva, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or
female breasts, whether covered or not, of another person. This subparagraph shall be
construed so that each the person engaged in the touching and the recipient of the touching
are each in violation of this Ordinance.
G. No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the
age of 21 years except as hereinafter provided or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known to him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient,
or in need of mental treatment or to any person who is known to be an object of charity or
who is known to be supported by any charitable association or institution or any relief
commission or organization. Upon violation of this Subsection, the following fines and
penalties shall be imposed upon the licensee and upon any officer, associate, member,
representative, employee, or other agent of licensee.
1. For the first violation of this Subsection, the licensee shall pay a fine of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and the officer, associate, member, representative,
employee, or other agent of licensee shall also pay a fine of Two Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($250.00).
2. For the second violation of this Subsection within any twelve (12) month
period, the licensee shall pay a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00), and
the officer, associate, member, representative, employee, or other agent of the
licensee shall also pay a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
3. For the third violation of this Subsection within any twelve (12) month period,
the licensee shall pay a fine of Three Thousand Dollars ($3000.00), and the
officer, associate, member, representative, employee, or other agent of the
licensee shall also pay a fine of Five Hundred Fifty Dollars ($550.00).
4. The intent of this Subsection and the fines and penalties imposed hereunder are
to punish both the licensee and the officer, associate, member, representative,
employee, or other agent of the licensee for each violation. The foregoing fines
and penalties shall be in addition to any action taken or sanction imposed by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall not in any manner limit the
authority of said Local Liquor Control Commissioner, who shall have authority
to impose any penalty described within Section 6.21 herein, including
suspension or revocation of the license.
H. Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor in his or
her possession. Any person who violates this Subsection shall be subject to the following
fines and penalties: (1) for the first violation of this Subsection, a fine of one Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) shall be imposed; (2) for the second violation of this Subsection, a fine of
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) shall be imposed; and (3) for the third violation within
any twelve (12) month period, a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed.
For the purpose of preventing the violation of this Subsection, any licensee or his
agent or his employee may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is
unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over
the age of 21 years. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes or has reason to believe
that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the
prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of
some form of positive identification containing proof of age issued by a public officer in the
performance of his official duties. A reasonable belief by the licensee or his agent that a
person is 21 years of age or over shall not be a defense to any action under this Article unless
said licensee or agent shall have demanded and received some form of positive identification
as above-described that such person is 21 years of age or over.
I. No person shall sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years
any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of
such person, nor shall any person sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years
evidence of age and identification of any other person.
J. No person under the age of 21 years shall present or offer to any licensee, his
agent, or employee any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is
false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the purpose of procuring or attempting to
procure the servicing of any alcoholic beverage, nor shall any person under the age of 21
years have in his possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of age and identity.
K. No licensee under this Article shall sell or deliver any package containing
alcoholic liquor to any other person or shall sell the contents of any such package for
consumption on the premises, unless such package shall have affixed thereto all canceled
revenue stamps which may be required by federal or state laws and unless same shall also
bear thereon a clear and legible label containing the name of the manufacturer and the kind of
alcoholic content thereof.
No licensee under this Article shall sell or have in his possession or use any package
or container of alcoholic liquor which does not comply herewith at the time same was
delivered to him.
L. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell,
give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years except in
the performance of a religious ceremony or service and except as herein provided.
M. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is
forbidden except the consumption of alcoholic liquor by such person in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony or except under the direct supervision of the parent or parents
of such person in the privacy of the home is not prohibited.
N. No person under the age of 21 years (including a person in pursuance of an
order of his parents) shall have any alcoholic beverage in his possession or on any street or
highway or in any public place or any place open to the public unless he is making a delivery
of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of his employment; this prohibition shall not apply to
waiters and waitresses within the licensed premises of his or her employer.
O. No person under 21 years of age shall draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor
within or upon any licensed premises. Waiters and waitresses must be at least 18 years of
age within all licensed premises, except that waiters and waitresses within a premises
licensed as a tavern must be at least 21 years of age.
P. No room or place where alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed, or any room
adjacent thereto, shall be connected by any elevator, lift, dumb waiter, or similar device for
carrying, transporting, or elevating food or alcoholic liquor within any room or rooms upon
any upper floor of the same premises; provided this provision shall not apply to hotels.
Q. No person except a manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor holding
a federal license therefor shall fill or refill in whole or in part any original package of
alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind of quality of alcoholic liquor, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks, or other
containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages.
R. No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have any alcoholic liquor in or
about any motor vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
S. Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell, ship, transport, or in anywise
dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand known to the
trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or other containers of
said alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any such act to be done, shall forfeit said alcoholic
liquor and said packages and containers and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties
provided for violation of this Article.
T. No licensee shall permit any illegal, disorderly, or immoral practices upon the
control premises.
U. No Licensee shall unlawfully discriminate against any person, either with
regard to the services that it offers or with regard to its employment practices, and each
licensee shall comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to
discrimination.
V. Each and every part of AAn Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors@ enacted by the
General Assembly of the State of Illinois approved January 31, 1934 as amended and
regulations promulgated thereunder which relate in any manner to the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquors is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Article to the same
extent and with the same legal effect as if fully set forth herein except where otherwise
specifically changed or amended in this Article. Any violation of such applicable and adopted
provisions of said Act shall be deemed a violation of this Article and be subject to the
penalties herein provided.
W. Bottle clubs and set-up establishments are prohibited. For purposes of this
Section, a set-up establishment means any public or private premises not holding a liquor
license pursuant to this Ordinance which sells, gives away, serves, pours, stores, or otherwise
dispenses and/or glasses mix, ice, water, and soft drinks for the purpose of consumption of
alcoholic liquors on the premises.
No individual, partnership, corporation or other person operating as a public
accommodation shall permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises unless
licensed under Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. No person shall possess or
consume alcoholic liquor at a public accommodation unless said public accommodation is
licensed under Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. For purpose of this subsection
APublic Accommodation@ means a refreshment, entertainment, or recreation facility of any
kind whose goods, services, facilities, privileges or advantages are extended, offered, sold or
otherwise made available to the public. This subsection specifically, but without limitation,
prohibits all establishments generically known or referred to as ABYOB@ (bring your own
booze/bottle/beer) or ABrown Bag@ establishments. Each the person who possesses or
consumes the alcoholic liquor and the person in control of the public accommodation who
knowingly permits the consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor in a public
accommodation not licensed under Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be in
violation of this subparagraph.
X. No driver or operator of a cab or other vehicle for hire shall stop, stand, or park
at any drive-up window or any premises where alcoholic liquor is sold, nor shall any driver or
operator of a cab or other vehicle for hire make any purchase of alcoholic liquor while
driving or operating said cab (whether on duty or off) unless the cab or vehicle for hire is
actually occupied by a fare or customer making a purchase of package liquor for the personal
use of said fare or customer.
Y. No sales of alcoholic liquor, excluding certain sales permitted by the “Wine
Makers License” classification, shall be made except by personal delivery of the alcoholic
liquor at the licensed premises to the customer making the purchase of the liquor; nor
shall a customer’s order for alcoholic liquor be made by phone, by internet, by
intermediary, nor by any other similar method unless the purchase is completed and actual
delivery of the alcoholic liquor is made in person to the customer at the licensed premises.
Z. During a temporary event or festival event licensed under Section 6.5 of Article 6, no
person shall serve for consumption or consume on the premises of the event any alcoholic
liquor or other beverage, except within or from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or
container; no person during a temporary or festival event licensed under Section 6.5 shall
serve or consume upon the premises of the event any alcoholic liquor or other beverage
within or from a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can, cup, or mug or similar type
container upon the premises of the event.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this Section 6.17 shall be subject to the provisions of Section 22.6 of the
Revised Code. In addition, Licensees shall be subject to the authority of the Local Liquor
Commissioner.
SECTION 6.18: GIFTS OF ALCOHOL FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
No licensee nor any other individual, partnership or corporation or other person shall
give away any alcoholic liquor for commercial purposes or in connection with the sale of
nonalcoholic products or to promote the sale of non-alcoholic products.
No licensee nor any other individual, partnership or corporation or other person shall
advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off licensed premises, any of the practices
prohibited under the subsection above. This includes, but is not limited to, advertisements
using the word Afree@ or Acomplimentary@ and includes sampling, test marketing or tasting.
This subsection does not prohibit a licensee from giving a Asampling@ to patrons or
customers at the licensed premises of the licensee; and this subsection does not prohibit an
individual, partnership, corporation or other person from serving invited guests alcoholic
liquor without charge or other consideration at an open house or other social event for
purposes of commemorating a special event or occasion during a time that the site of the
event is not otherwise held out to the public for commercial purposes and no sales nor
promotions of sale of non-alcoholic products are occurring; provided no individual,
partnership, corporation or person shall have more than one (1) open house or social event
during any calendar year and said open house or social event shall not advertise either prior
to or during the event any licensee nor any alcoholic liquor.
SECTION 6.19: LIABILITY OF LICENSEE FOR ACTS OF MANAGER
EMPLOYEES AND OTHER NAMED PERSONS
Every act or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any provision
of this Article or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of the licensee shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or admission had been done or admitted
by the licensee personally.
SECTION 6.20: (DELETED) LIQUOR ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION 6.21: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
A. AUTHORITY. The Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the applicable
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of this Article and of Ordinances, Resolutions,
rules and regulations relating to alcoholic liquor as may be adopted. The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall have such powers and duties as provided within the Illinois
Liquor Control Act and shall have such powers and duties as hereinafter specified:
1. To receive applications; investigate applications; and grant, renew or deny
liquor licenses.
2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed under this Article to determine whether any of the provisions
of this Article, the Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, laws of the State of
Illinois, or the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any rules or regulations adopted
by it, have been or are being violated and at such time to examine the premises
of the licensee in connection herewith.
3. To receive complaints from any citizen of the City that any of the provisions of
this Article or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been or
are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter
provided.
4. To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the City Treasurer.
5. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath any applicant for a local
license or for a renewal thereof or any licensee under this Article upon whom
notice of suspension or revocation of license has been served; to examine or
cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee under
this Article; to authorize any law enforcing officer to require any applicant or
licensee to furnish said officer with a complete, current list of all employees of
said applicant or licensee including the names and addresses of all employees;
and to hear testimony and take proof for their information in the performance
of their duties and for such purposes to issue subpoenas. For the purpose of
obtaining any of the information desired by the Commissioner under this
Article, he may authorize his agent to act in his behalf.
6. To require fingerprints of any applicant for the local license or for a renewal
thereof (except as prohibited by law): for purposes of obtaining fingerprints
under this Subsection, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall collect a
fee and forward the fee to the appropriate policing body who shall submit the
fingerprints and the fee to the Illinois Department of State Police.
7. Suspend or revoke any license issued by him if he determines that the licensee
has violated any provisions of this Article or of any ordinance or Resolution
enacted by the City of Mt. Vernon or of any provision of the State Liquor
Control Act or any applicable rule or regulation issued by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner which is not inconsistent with law. Notwithstanding
any other language herein, a license may be revoked for a first offense. If a
suspension is imposed then said suspension may be up to thirty (30) days for
each offense. In lieu of a suspension, the commissioner may impose a fine of
not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation, although
the maximum fine that may be imposed upon any licensee for the period of the
license shall not exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) each license
year. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
8. To issue a written order immediately and summarily closing a licensed
premises for not more than seven (7) days without notice or hearing to the
licensee if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that
the continued operation of the specified licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, provided said written order shall state
the reasons for said order and shall advise the licensee of a date and time for
hearing to give the licensee an opportunity to be heard on the matter.
B. RECORDS. The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause to be
maintained a complete record of all licenses issued pursuant to this Article. A copy of each
license shall be maintained by the City Clerk.
C. HEARINGS UPON APPLICATIONS. Applicants for a license, applicants for
renewal of a license and applicants for a transfer of a license to another location shall be
entitled to a public hearing before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner upon full,
complete and strict compliance with all provisions of this Article relating to applications for
same. The applicant shall be given written notice at least three (3) days prior to said hearing.
Upon completion of the public hearing, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall either
grant or deny the application and shall make findings of fact in support of the decision.
D. HEARINGS UPON NON-APPLICATION MATTERS. Except as hereinafter
provided, no license holder shall receive a written reprimand, nor shall a license be
suspended or revoked or a fine imposed except at a public hearing before the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. The licensee shall be given written notice of the charge at least three
(3) days prior to said hearing affording an opportunity to appear and defend.
A licensed premises may be immediately and summarily closed for not more than
seven (7) days without notice or hearing upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reason(s) for closing if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that the
continued operation of the specific licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare
of the community. Within said seven days, a hearing shall be held giving the licensee the
opportunity to be heard on the matter.
Upon completion of any public hearing, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
make findings of fact. If the commissioner determines that any licensee has violated any
provision of this Article or any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, the
Commissioner may impose such penalties and take such action as is authorized by this
article.
If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines that a reprimand, suspension,
fine or revocation is warranted, he shall issue a written order after the hearing stating the
reasons for the determination and shall cause a copy of such order to be served upon the
licensee by personal service or by certified mail to the address of the licensee appearing of
record, with the date of deposit in the United States mail being the date of service. In the
event a fine is imposed, the order shall specify the date by which the fine shall be paid. If the
fine is not paid by the specified date, such shall constitute cause to suspend or revoke the
license. A copy of each order issued by the Commissioner shall be maintained in the office of
the City clerk.
In making the determination to reprimand, suspend, revoke, or impose a fine or in
determining the length of a suspension imposed, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may consider the nature of the violation, past violations of the licensee, and the facts and
circumstances surrounding the violation as presented at the public hearing.
E. WRITTEN ORDER. The written order of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner required to be issued hereunder shall be issued within five (5) days after a
written transcript of the public hearing is received by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner from the certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter if either party
orders said transcript and in any event, a written order shall be issued within thirty (30) days
from date of the public hearing.
F. HEARING PROCEDURES. All hearings before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be subject to the following procedures:
1. The licensee shall be entitled to a three (3) day written notice of the hearing.
2. Witnesses shall be sworn, but in all other respects hearings shall be informal
and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
3. A complete record of all evidence, testimony, and comments before the
commissioner shall be taken by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand
reporter.
4. Review of the proceedings before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings. No new or
additional evidence shall be admitted or considered.
5. Except as otherwise provided herein, appeals shall be in accordance with
Section 7-9 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, although no matter shall
proceed to appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission unless and until a
hearing has been conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
6. Initial costs and hourly fees for the certified court or shorthand reporter's
attendance at the formal hearings before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon; said costs and hourly
fees shall be assessed against the licensee if a reprimand, fine, suspension or
revocation is issued or imposed.
7. All costs of preparing and transcribing an official record on appeal to the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be borne by the licensee requesting a
review of the official proceedings and shall be paid prior to the date of the
appeal hearing.
SECTION 6.22: HOUSE RULES
Licensee shall be permitted to enact Ahouse rules@ regulating conduct of patrons;
however, said house rules shall be reasonable, shall be consistent with the provisions of this
Article, and shall be subject to the approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No
house rules shall unlawfully discriminate against any individual.
SECTION 6.23: STATUS OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
Effective September 1, 2014, all property within the corporate limits of the City as to
which the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor has been previously permitted by local
referendum or by petition and all other property within the corporate limits of the City
zoned or hereafter zoned Class B-1, Primary Business District; Class B-2, Secondary
Business District; Class B-3, Interchange Business District; Class B-PL, Planned
Business District; or Class IPCA-PUD, Industrial Park Conservation Area, including
territory hereafter annexed to the City of Mt. Vernon, shall be property upon which the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted. However, as to such property as to
which sale at retail of alcoholic liquor is permitted only by reason of the zoning
classification, the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail shall not be permitted upon such
property upon the property being rezoned to a zoning classification not listed above, nor
shall the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail be permitted as a nonconforming use upon such
property after such rezoning. All property upon which the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor
is permitted shall be subject to all provisions of Article 6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances, including without limitation, the requirement that a license be obtained under
Section 6.3 herein.
SECTION 6.24: EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Article shall immediately be effective and applicable to all
existing applicants for licenses, licensees, and licenses; and to all licensed premises; and to
any proceedings or procedures affecting same. Except nothing hereunder shall revoke or alter
the classifications of valid outstanding licenses on the effective date of this Article or the
rights attendant to said classification; provided all licenses or renewal licenses issued after
the effective date of this Article shall be in accordance with the classifications established
hereunder and subject to all restrictions and regulations of such classification.
SECTION 6.25: SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this
Article or any part thereof or application thereto to any person, firm, corporation, licensee, or
circumstance if for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Article or any part thereof. It is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent of the City Council that this Article would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof not
been included.
ARTICLE 7
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION 7.1
The following terms and words, as they are used in this Article are defined as follows:
(a) Electrical Equipment.
The term Aelectrical equipment@ means conductors and equipment installed for the
utilization of electricity, supplies for light, heat or power, but does not include radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds or signals and does not include
apparatus, conductors, and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including
common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission,
or other public utilities for use in their operation as public utilities.
(b) Electrical Contractor.
The term Aelectrical contractor@ means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment for the utilization' of
electricity for light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for
wireless reception of sounds and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment
installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois Commerce Commission or other public utilities for use in their operation as
public utilities.
(c) Electrical Inspector.
The term Aelectrical inspector@ means the Building Official of the City appointed and
compensated under Article 5 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Vernon, or any of his duly authorized agents.
(d) Work, Wiring, Apparatus, Device.
The words, Awork@, Awiring@, Aapparatus@, Adevice@, and similar words and term mean and
refer to and include all details in connection with any attachment or any part thereof of
any and all similar things used in connection with electricity, either directly or indirectly.
SECTION 7.2
There is hereby adopted by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois that certain Electrical Code,
NFPA 70: National Electric Code, 2008 Edition, issued by the National Fire Protection
Association, at least one copy of which is on file with the City Clerk, and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein and so set out in full; and, from the date of which this Ordinance
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation, alteration, and use
of electrical equipment within the City of Mt. Vernon and on any City property that may be
located outside the corporate limits.
Any part of said Code which may be in conflict with this Ordinance is hereby superseded.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any electrical device that does not
comply with said Code.
The following Articles of the National Electrical Code are hereby amended or superseded
as follows:
a) Article 230.70: All commercial buildings shall have a separate outside main
disconnect to the electrical system.
b) Article 230.79 and Article 230.42: Other than one and two-circuit installations as
stated in Code, all services shall have a minimum rating of 100 amps.
c) Article 230.50: Only heavy wall rigid metallic conduit or schedule 80 rigid
non-metallic conduit shall be used up to the service disconnect/over-current
device.
d) Article 250.50 and Article 250.52: Grounding electrodes for all services shall
consist of a 5/8" x 8' (minimum) copperweld ground rod installed vertically (in
ground with at least 12" of clearance from foundation wall and a minimum of 6"
ground cover).
e) Article 210.8: Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel is required
in all types of buildings as stated in Article 210.8 (1-8).
f) Article 334.10: Type NM and NMC cables shall be permitted only in residential
dwellings, except as prohibited in 334.12. Exception: garages and storage
buildings incidental to residential use.
g) Article 310.2 (b): Conductor Material - all conductors in this article shall be
copper.
h) Article 210.4: All branch circuits shall include an equipped grounding conductor
identified as described in 210.5(b). The Electrical Inspector, upon inspection, may
order the installation of such conductor in the event of its absence.
i) Article 406.9: Where an equipment grounding conductor does not exist in the
receptacle enclosure and it is impossible to install such conductor to meet Code, a
ground fault circuit interrupter type of receptacle shall be used.
j) Article 394: Concealed knob-and -tube wiring shall not be permitted for new or
existing installations. Upon inspection, the Electrical Inspector may order the
removal and/or replacement of such wiring with an approved method.
k) Article 210.19.1: Branch-circuit conductors supplying loads other than cooking
appliances as covered in Paragraph C above and as listed in 210.2 shall have any
ampacity sufficient for the loads served and shall not be smaller than #12.
Exception: Switch legs that serve single lighting fixtures of a current rating which
would not exceed rating of conductor may be of #14 AWG.
l) Article 230.90: Services - Screw shell fuse panels shall not be allowed for services
or distribution panels.
m) Article 230.50 (B): Service entrance cable shall be installed in heavy wall rigid
metal conduit or schedule 80 non-metallic conduit up to service
disconnect/over-current device.
n) Article 230.28: The minimum size conduit extending vertically above the meter
enclosure on overhead service drops shall be 11/4" trade size.
SECTION 7.3
The Electrical Inspector shall not engage in the occupation or business of electrical work
or contracting, or be interested directly or indirectly in any firm or corporation engaged in such
business, during his term of office.
SECTION 7.4
The Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the installation, alteration, and
use of electrical equipment. He shall be subordinate to the City Manager, who shall have the
administrative authority under this Ordinance.
The Electrical Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, shall have authority to
enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. If the Electrical Inspector shall
inspect and examine any building, structure or premises and shall determine that such building,
structure or premises is unsafe or dangerous by reason of faulty, defective or deteriorated
electrical usages, or wiring or by reason of improper and unsafe electrical usages, the Electrical
Inspector shall have full power and authority to order the public utility supplying electrical
energy or service to said property to disconnect such electrical service until the dangerous or
unsafe conditions found in such building, structure or premises are corrected.
The City Clerk shall sign and issue all permits and certificates required by this Ordinance
and keep a record of such permits and certificates, but the City Clerk shall not issue any permit or
certificate until same has been approved by the Electrical Inspector.
The Electrical Inspector shall sign and issue all notices required by this Ordinance and
cause a record of the performance of his office to be kept by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
collect all fees required by this Ordinance. In the absence of the Electrical Inspector the Fire
Chief may issue temporary permits and otherwise act for the Electrical Inspector.
SECTION 7.5
All registration fees, including the registration fees of the Electrical Contractor and also
of the inspection fees, shall be retained by the City as General Corporate Funds.
SECTION 7.6
No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered in the City of Mt. Vernon except
upon a permit first issued by the Electrical Inspector. However, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to repairs and maintenance, public service agencies, power companies, temporary
testing systems, railway utilities and transmitting equipment. That each permit fee provided for in
this Ordinance will include an inspection fee as hereinafter set forth and a registration fee of fifty
cents (504).
No real estate shall be annexed to the City of Mt. Vernon upon which there has been
constructed or erected any building or improvement within 12 months prior to the date of
annexation, where the construction or erection thereof would have required an electrical permit if
same had been located within the City of Mt. Vernon on the date of such construction or erection,
unless and until the owner thereof shall have obtained an inspection of such electrical installation
in the manner provided by the within Electrical Code and shall have paid the inspection fee
provided herein for such inspection; and shall have obtained a certificate that such electrical
work complies with the provisions of the within Electrical Code.
SECTION 7.7
In accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-37 et seq, there is hereby established
an Electrical Commission for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
The Electrical Commission shall be composed of six members, as follows: The Electrical
Inspector, who shall be ex-officio Chairman; and of the other five members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, one shall be an
electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician, one the Chief of the Fire Department and one
a representative of an electricity supply company; and one a registered professional engineer.
The Electrical Commission shall have such powers as are fixed by statute and by
ordinance, including this Article; it shall interpret this Article, where necessary, hear appeals
from the orders of the Electrical Inspector and make recommendations to the Electrical Inspector
and City Council.
The members of the Electrical Commission shall serve without pay, including the
Electrical Inspector, for his services in this behalf.
Each member of the Electrical Commission shall serve for a period of three years from
the date of his appointment or until his successor shall be appointed.
SECTION 7.8
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of installing or altering
electrical equipment in the City shall apply for registration to the City Clerk. Upon the filing of
an application in the form prescribed by the Electrical Commission and payment of the
registration fee and inspection deposit fixed herein, and upon approval by the Electrical
Commission, the Electrical Inspector shall register the applicant as an Electrical Contractor, and
shall cause to be issued to the applicant a certificate of registration which will authorize the
applicant to engage in such business for the fiscal year in which it is issued.
If, in the opinion of the Electrical Inspector, any registered Electrical Contractor shall
have willfully or repeatedly violated any of the provisions of this ordinance, the Electrical
Inspector shall prefer charges against such offending registered Electrical Contractor to the
Electrical Commission. The Electrical Commission shall immediately conduct a hearing, after
which, by a majority vote, if found guilty, such registration of said Electrical Contractor shall be
revoked, and any unexpired registration fee shall be returned by the City as liquidated damages.
The City Clerk shall keep a suitable record of all registrations.
The fee for registration as an Electrical Contractor shall be Forty dollars ( $ 40.00 )
payable on or before April 30 of each year hereafter, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to
the City Clerk. The certificate of registration issued by the City Clerk shall expire on the first day
of May following its issuance. Neither the City Electrical Inspector nor the Electrical
Commission shall cause to be issued any such certificate of registration until the payment of such
fee shall be made.
The license holder shall maintain on deposit with the City Clerk, the sum of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) to cover the cost of inspection fees. This deposit will be drawn upon monthly to cover
the fees charged for the previous month. Failure to maintain this deposit in its full amount for a
period of more than thirty (30) days will be reason for revocations of license by the Electrical
Commission.
Before any permit to install or alter electrical work shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation entitled to secure permits under this ordinance, he shall designate himself or some
other person who shall be known as ASupervising Electrician@, who shall be responsible for
electrical work.
The Supervising Electrician shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age, and shall
have had at least four (4) years experience in the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance
of electrical wires, equipment, and apparatus, or an experienced equivalent thereto. Applicant
shall furnish the names and addresses of former employers, the period of time employed, and in
what capacity, proof of which service shall be furnished in a manner satisfactory to the Electrical
Inspector; or, every applicant provided for in the preceding article shall be required to answer a
reasonable number of questions in writing, to show that he has sufficient Electrical Code
knowledge and technical training to supervise the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance
of electrical wires and apparatus authorized by permits issued by the Electrical Inspector.
Applicants shall be required to answer to the satisfaction of the Electrical Inspector at least
seventy percent (70%) of the questions prepared by him.
SECTION 7.9
1. Receptacles installed on 15 to 20 ampere branch circuits must be of the grounding
type in kitchen, basement, laundry, garage, and all damp locations.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to exchange or sell installation within the
corporate limits of the City, any electrical equipment that requires additional wiring, such as
stokers, blowers, air conditioning units, ranges, built-in cooking units, signs, coin operated
devices, etc., without listing such apparatus, describing such equipment, complete with the name
and address of the purchaser, and the location where the equipment is to be installed.
This list to be made available to the Electrical Inspector upon request.
3. Illuminated signs of all types shall have a minimum clearance from the ground or
walkway of ten (10) feet and shall not extend more than ten (10) feet out from the property line,
nor closer than two (2) feet to the curb line of the street. All signs in alleys and over driveways
shall have a minimum clearance of fifteen (15) feet. The sign support shall be of steel sufficient
strength to adequately support it under all wind and weather conditions. Guys shall be of chain or
galvanized steel cable.
SECTION 7.10
In addition to a permit fee of fifty cents (504) as heretofore provided herein, the following
inspection fees shall be paid to and collected by the City Clerk for various classes of work, as
follows:
Minimum charge, $3.00.
Reinspection Charge, $6.00 per hour.
All residential buildings remaining unoccupied for a period of six months, or residential
buildings in which meters have been removed, shall be reinspected before the electrical use is
permitted.
All other buildings shall be reinspected upon change of occupancy. Hourly rates for
unclassified work, $5.00.
Inspection for permission to cover electric work, $2.00 each.
Service entrance charges:
100 ampere or less $3.00; $2.00 per each additional
100 ampere capacity beyond 100 ampere capacity. (this charge applies to each individual
feeder).
Branch circuit charges, fifty cents (504) per each installed branch circuit.
Motor and/or generator: $2.00 up to and including 5 h.p. 104,less than 5 h.p. for the
purpose of arriving at charges. Entire motor load may be totalized in arriving at charges.
Transformers
No charge up to and including 3 KVA or KW.
$1.00 each transformer over 3 KVA up to and including 10 KVA.
$2.00 for each transformer over 10 KVA up to and including 25 KVA.
Transformers over 25 KVA shall be charged at a rate of 10c per KVA or MN.
Fixture schedule $2.00 for first ten lamps. Ten cents (104 ) for each lamp over ten.
Convenience outlets. Two dollars ($2.00) for first ten and 10c for each convenience outlet
over ten.
Welders:
$2.00 for each welder up to and including 15 KVA or KW.
104 for each KVA or KW over 15 KVA or KW.
Appliances rated in KW or KVA will be the same as welders.
Appliances by h.p. - 1/3 h.p. or less will be figured as convenience outlets. See motor
charge for appliance in excess of 1/3 h.p.
Switchgear: $3.00 for the first operating unit.
$1.00 for each additional operating unit.
Motor Control Center: $2.00 per section.
(a) Illuminated Signs:
1. Signs mounted inside buildings and in windows. $3.00
2. Signs mounted outside -
First fifty (50) sq. ft. of area or less 5.00
Each sq. ft. of area over fifty (50) sq. ft. .10
Maximum for any one sign 30.00
(b) Outline Lighting:
1. First fifty (50) linear feet or less of tubing 5.00
2. Each 1 foot over 50 feet .05
3. First 50 sockets or less 5.00
4. Each socket over 50 .02
5. Maximum for any one installation 30.00
Isolated control system for furnaces, 150 watt or less $2.00
(In excess of 150 watt, see Motors.)
Called Inspections:
Called inspections shall be those field trips required by the licensed holder for the
convenience and information of the license holder per hour $5.00
X-Ray Equipment. (Transformers) 504 per KVA or KW capacity.
Motion Picture Projector (professional) 504 per KVA or KW capacity.
Panelboard (each panelboard):
100 ampere main and less $2.00 - $1.00 each additional 100 ampere capacity.
Charges made for the inspection of items which are charged by watts or horsepower shall
not receive additional charges for the branch circuit in connection with the same item.
Flat fee (total charge for one family new residence provided with):
(a) Total amperage of less than 100 amps
and not less than 200 amps ............................................................................$ 18.50
(b) A service of 200 amps .......................................................................................24.50
(c) Excess of 200 amps .................................................................... 10.00 per 100 amps
or parts thereof
(d) For all other electrical permits, services, updating and other electrical work, a
minimum fee of $7.50 for all services up to 200 amps and $10.00 for 200 amps
and above.
Flat Fee (total charge, except for illuminated signs and outline lighting), for new structure
provided with 400 ampere service or greater, .08 times total service of 400 ampere or above.
The fees for the permit above described shall not be charged to or collected from an
applicant under the following circumstances:
1. The work is being done for the use of a governmental entity or for a not-for-profit
organization whose purposes are religious, educational, or charitable.
2. The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that said fees have not
been and will not be included in any payment to any contractor or other person.
3. Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits and otherwise
fully comply with the ordinances of the City, unless exempted therefrom by any
law of the State of Illinois or of the United States.
SECTION 7.11
There shall be an annual inspection of all business buildings, factories, schools, churches
and other buildings where large group of persons congregate, by the Electrical Inspector and the
Fire Department.
SECTION 7.12
The Electrical Inspector may revoke permits or registrations for cause, subject to appeal
for hearing before the Electrical Commission. Appeals of the orders of the Electrical Inspector
shall be informal and as may be prescribed by rules of said Commission.
SECTION 7.13
This Article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party
owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by the enactment and administration
of this Article.
ARTICLE 8
Fire and Police Commission
Fire Department and Police Department
SECTION 8.1 FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION
There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in accordance with and
pursuant to Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code, which Board shall consist
of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. Such Commissioners shall have the qualifications, take oath, give bond, and meet such
other requirements as other appointive officers in the City of Mt. Vernon and as required by law.
Each Commissioner shall serve for a term of three (3) years with the terms being staggered,
except one Commissioner appointed in 2018 shall serve an initial term of four (4) years, which
terms shall commence May 1 and expire April 30, three years succeeding. Upon a
Commissioner's term expiring, the position becomes vacant unless filled by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council within sixty (60) days of expiration of the term. (Note: given
the provisions of this amending Ordinance, the terms of the Commissioners after adoption of the
Ordinance shall expire as follows: one Commissioner in 2018, one Commissioner in 2019, and
one Commissioner in 2020, which three dates reflect the existing three Commissioners serving
their current terms with current expiration dates, and the two new appointments to the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners serving terms expiring in 2021 and 2022.)
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such duties and such power and
authority as shall be granted by the provisions of Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code and shall make rules only concerning the appointment, removal, and discharge
of officers and members of the Fire and Police Departments of the City, and shall maintain an
eligibility register of persons eligible for appointment to each Department. Appointments to each
Department, except that of the lowest rank (e.g. Patrolman or Fire Fighter) and except that of the
Chief and the Assistant Chief of the Police Department and the Chief and the Assistant Chief of
the Fire Department, shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made.
The Chief and the Assistant Chief of the Police Department and the Chief and the Assistant
Chief of the Fire Department may be appointed from among members of the Police and Fire
Departments regardless of rank or may be appointed from any qualified applicants from the
general public without first considering members of the Department. The Rules and Regulations
of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners providing for appointments shall be consistent
with this Section.
All applicants for a position in either the Fire or Police Department of the City shall be at
least 21 years of age. All applicants for a position in the Fire Department or Police Department
shall be citizens of the United States, and applicants for a position in the Fire Department, except
Chief or Assistant Chief, shall, in addition, be residents of Jefferson County, Illinois for not less
than six months prior to the date of the application. All persons appointed to the position of Chief
or Assistant Chief of the Fire Department and all persons appointed to a position in the Police
Department shall, during their first six months of employment, become bona fide residents of
Jefferson County, Illinois. Except as herein provided, all persons appointed to a position in the
Fire or Police Department shall be and remain domiciled and bona fide, full-time residents of
Jefferson County, Illinois during any time when they shall hold such position with the City. Any
employee who shall fail to establish and/or maintain his domicile and residency within Jefferson
County, Illinois shall be subject to discharge from employment with the City.
SECTION 8.2 POLICE DEPARTMENT
There shall be and is hereby established a Police Department in the City which shall
consist of one (1) Chief of Police, one (1) Assistant Chief of Police, three (3) Captains of Police,
six (6) Sergeants, and six (6) Corporals. The Police Department shall also include Patrolmen up
to but not exceed thirty-two (32) in number as determined by the City Manager. In addition, to
prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary exigencies or to prevent material
impairment of the Police Department, the City Manager may authorize and request the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners to make temporary appointments not to exceed six (6) months in
length. The duties and assignments of each officer below the rank of Chief of Police shall be
determined by the Chief of Police.
(a) The Chief of Police shall be the highest in rank of the Police Department and shall
direct the same and assign to all officers under him their respective duties and their respective
hours of duty. From the records of the Department, he shall make monthly reports and
recommendations to the Fire and Police Commission and City Manager, setting forth fully all the
doing of his Department for the preceding month. He shall cause the public peace and quiet to be
preserved and see that all laws and ordinances of the City are complied with.
(b) The Assistant Chief of Police shall be acting Chief of Police in the absence of the
Chief of Police, and shall also discharge all his duties and shall be subordinate to the Chief of
Police.
(c) Captains of Police shall be subordinate to the Chief and Assistant Chief of Police
and shall perform such duties and functions as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their
superiors.
(d) Sergeants shall be subordinate to the officers above mentioned and shall perform
such duties as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their superiors.
(e) Corporals shall be subordinate to the officers above-mentioned and shall perform
such duties as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their superiors. Patrolmen shall be
subordinate to the officers above-mentioned and shall perform such duties as shall be assigned by
the Chief of Police and their superiors.
(f) Each member of the Police Department shall receive such salary and uniform
allowance as may be provided for by ordinance, and shall furnish therefrom his own uniform and
revolver.
(g) Each member of the Police Department is hereby authorized to arrest all persons
found committing any offense against the laws of the State of Illinois or Ordinances of the City,
and to commit such persons for examinations or until they can be brought before the proper
magistrate or judge, and shall have the power and authority to serve warrants on persons within
or without the City when necessary, for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged
with the violations of any ordinances or statutes or for examination or trial.
(h) Any member of the Department may be removed from his office by the Fire and
Police Commission for cause, upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard in his
own defense. Cause for removal or discharge are as follows:
(1) Disobedience of the orders of his superiors.
(2) Intoxication.
(3) Violent, insolent or abusive language to any superior officer or member of
the public.
(4) Consuming intoxicating liquor when on duty or reporting for duty under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(5) Conduct on or off duty unbecoming a member of the Department or
detrimental to the best interests of the City.
(6) Absence from duty without leave.
(7) Refusal to pay debts.
(8) Inefficiency.
(9) Lack of good physical or mental condition or inability to perform duties.
(i) All members of the Department in every position shall be retired upon reaching
the age of sixty-five (65) years.
SECTION 8.3 FIRE DEPARTMENT
There shall be and is hereby established a Fire Department in the City of Mt. Vernon
which shall consists of one Chief of the Fire Department , one Assistant Chief, one Lieutenant or
Captain Inspector - Training Officer - Lead Paramedic, one Lieutenant or Captain Inspector -
Training Officer, three Captains and nine Lieutenants and/or Lieutenants - Training Officers -
Hazardous Materials Officers; the Department shall also include Fire Fighter - Paramedics not to
exceed fifteen in number as determined by the City Manager. The Department may also include
twenty-eight Auxiliary Firefighters. In addition, in order to prevent a stoppage of public
business, to meet extraordinary exigencies or to prevent material impairment of the Fire
Department, the City Manager may authorize and request the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners to make temporary appointments not to exceed six months in length. The
Department shall also have one civilian secretary and one special skilled equipment mechanic
who shall not be members of the Fire Department; said secretary and mechanic shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall be members of the City=s classified service.
(a) The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the highest in rank of the Fire
Department and shall direct the operation of same. He shall have custody of all equipment,
apparatus, and property belonging to the Department, and shall cause same to be kept in good
repair. He shall attend all major fires occurring within the City, have command of the
Department at all times, and see that the members of the Department faithfully perform their
respective duties. He shall maintain a record of all fires occurring within the City, the date and
location of each, the owner of the property destroyed by the fire, the cause of the fire, the loss
incurred thereby, whether same was insured or not, and such other information as shall be
pertinent. He shall examine all buildings and structures for fire hazards or combustible materials.
The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby authorized to enter any building or structure at any
reasonable time for the purpose of examining such structures or premises or any part thereof,
which may appear to constitute a fire hazard or to be in violation of any ordinance of the City
relating to fires or fire prevention.
The Fire Chief shall also be charged with the investigation, inspection, and enforcement
of ordinances and regulations of the City relating to fire control, fire prevention, and fire hazards.
(b) The Assistant Fire Chief shall perform the duties of the Chief in the absence of the
Chief and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Fire Chief.
(c) Captains of the Fire Department shall perform such duties as may be assigned to
them by the Fire Chief.
(d) Lieutenants of the Fire Department shall perform such duties as may be assigned
to them by the Fire Chief or their superior officers, and shall be subordinate to the officers above
named.
(e) Firemen shall perform such duties as may be assigned to them by the Fire Chief or
their superior officers, and shall be subordinate to the officers above named.
(f) The Inspector - Training Officer - Lead Paramedic shall perform such duties as are
provided and required by the provisions of Article 9 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon, including the duties of Fire Prevention Inspector and shall perform such
duties as are assigned to him by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(g) The Inspector - Training Officer shall perform such duties as may be assigned to
him by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(h) The Maintenance Supervisor shall perform such duties as may be assigned to that
officer by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(i) Repealed
(j) All members of the Department shall be paid such salary and uniform allowances
as may be provided by Ordinance and shall provide therefrom their uniforms and other necessary
clothing. They shall serve such hours or shifts as may be provided by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(k) Auxiliary firemen shall not be members of the regular Fire Department of the City
but shall be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of the Fire Department of the City.
Auxiliary firemen shall be a voluntary service organization, and auxiliary firemen shall receive
no wages for services performed; however, an auxiliary fireman may receive remuneration from
third persons receiving direct benefits from the service of the auxiliary fireman, provided the
written approval and authorization of the Chief of the Fire Department is obtained prior to the
performance by an auxiliary fireman of the assigned duty. Despite any payments from third
parties to auxiliary firemen paid through the City, auxiliary firemen are not salaried employees of
the City and shall not be entitled to any fringe or other employee benefit unless required by law;
separate accounting and records shall be maintained as to all payments received from third
parties, and all payments paid through the City shall be paid by the City to the auxiliary firemen
by separate check clearly designating the source of the payments.
(1) Any officer or member of the Department may be removed from his position by order
of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners for cause upon written charges and after an
opportunity to be heard in his own defense. Cause for removal or discharge are as follows:
1) Disobedience of the orders of superiors.
2) Intoxication
3) Violent, insolent, or abusive language to any superior or member of the public.
4) Drinking intoxicating liquors while on duty or reporting for duty under the
influence of intoxicating liquors.
5) Conduct on or off duty unbecoming a member of the Department or detrimental to
the best interests of the city.
6) Absence without leave.
7) Refusal to pay debts.
8) Inefficiency.
9) Lack of good physical or mental condition or inability to perform his tasks.
10) Failure to obtain and maintain continuously State of Illinois Fire Fighters II
Certification or other fire training or certification required by the City.
11) If appointed after January l, 1989, failure to obtain and maintain continuously
Emergency Medical Technician/Ambulance (EMT-A) Certification, Emergency
Medical Technician/Intermediate (EMT-I) Certification, Emergency Medical
Paramedic (EMT-P) Certification, Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
Instructor Certification, Emergency Rescue Technician (ERT) Certification, or
other training or certification required by the City, unless excused in writing by the
Chief for good cause.
12) If appointed after January 1, 1989, failure to participate in the physical fitness
training program established by the Department or failure to meet and maintain such
physical fitness, agility, and ability as required and determined by the Department.
SECTION 8.4 POLICEMEN'S PENSION FUND
There is hereby established a Policemen's Pension Fund for the City of Mt. Vernon,
pursuant to provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 108- 2 of the Illinois Revised Statute. There is
hereby created a Board of Trustees which shall consist of five (5) trustees who are residents of
the City. Two (2) trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor for a period of two (2) years each, or
until their successors shall be appointed and qualified. The third and fourth members of the
Board shall be elected by the members of the active police force for a term of two (2) years each,
or until their successors shall be elected and qualified. The fifth member shall be elected by and
from beneficiaries of the Fund for a term of two (2) years or until his successor shall be elected
and qualified.
The election provided for elected members of the Board shall be held biannually on the
third Monday in each April hereafter, at such place or places in the City and under the Australian
Ballot System and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointive members of the
Board of Trustees. The terms of each trustee shall begin on the second Tuesday of May following
such election. The Board of Trustees shall have such power and duties as are provided by Article
3 of Chapter 108-2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
The Policemen's Pension Fund shall receive 8.5 percent of the salary of each member of the
Police Department and all proceeds from the levy of a tax provided for such fund under the
provisions of the Statutes of the State of Illinois. The Treasurer of the City of Mt. Vernon shall
be the Treasurer and Custodian of the Fund and shall make disbursements therefrom only by
direction and authority of the Board of Trustees.
In the absence of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon may sign
checks authorizing disbursements as directed by the Board of Trustees, provided said checks are
also signed by either the President or Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
SECTION 8.5 FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
There is hereby established and adopted a Firemen's Pension Fund pursuant to provisions of
Article 4 of Chapter 108-2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. There is hereby created a Board of
Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund which shall consist of the City Treasurer, City Clerk,
Chief of the Fire Department, and Mayor, and also three (3) Trustees who shall be chosen from
the firemen who have been duly retired under provisions of the statute above set forth. The
members of the Board chosen from the active and retired firemen shall be elected by ballot in an
election held on the third (3rd) Monday in April under the Australian Ballot System at such place
and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the Board.
Each elected member of the Board shall hold office for a period of three (3) years and until
his successor has been duly elected and qualified. The Board shall have such powers and duties
as are provided by provision of Article 4 of Chapter 108-2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. There
shall be set apart and paid in the fund seven and three-fourths percent (7-3/4 %) of salaries of all
members of the Fire Department and all proceeds of the annual tax levy provided by Statute.
Treasurer of the Board shall be custodian of the fund and shall make disbursement therefrom
only by direction and authority of the Board of Trustees.
In the absence of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon may sign
checks authorizing disbursements as directed by the Board of Trustees, provided said checks are
also signed by either the President or Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
SECTION 8.6 COMMUNITY SERVICES PERSONNEL
(a) The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint 32 Community Services Personnel, subject
to the advice and consent of the City Council. Prior to appointment, all proposed Community
Services Personnel shall be investigated by the Police Department for any possible crime records.
No person shall be appointed to Community Services if he or she has been convicted of a felony
or any crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all Community Services
Personnel may be terminated without cause and without notice or hearing by the Mayor, subject
to the advice and, consent of the City Council.
(b) Community Services Personnel shall not be members of the regular Police Department
of the City, nor shall Community Services Personnel carry firearms. Community Services
Personnel shall be residents of Jefferson County. Identification symbols worn by Community
Services Personnel shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular Police
Department and shall be selected and approved by the Chief of Police of the City. Community
Services Personnel shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the
direction and control of the Chief of Police of the City. Community Services Personnel shall not
wear their uniform or identification symbols except during the performance of their assigned
duties under the direction and control of the Chief of Police.
(c) Community Services Personnel shall have the following duties and powers when
properly assigned and on duty:
1. To aid or direct traffic in the municipality, including, but not limited to, during official
school functions, or at community sponsored festivals and gatherings within the municipality, or
during events sponsored by the City.
2. To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters.
3. To aid in case of civil disorder.
(d) Community Services Personnel shall not serve as security guards for private individuals
or businesses. Persons who have received an appointment as Community Services Personnel may
accept employment as security guards solely as private individuals; provided, however, that said
persons shall not wear their Community Services Personnel uniform or symbols and shall not,
during the course of such private employment, perform any act or make any representation that
their employment is being performed pursuant to or is related to their appointment as Community
Services Personnel.
(e) Community Services Personnel shall be a voluntary service organization, and
Community Services Personnel shall receive no wages for services performed; however,
Community Services Personnel may receive remuneration from third persons receiving direct
benefits from the services of the Community Services Personnel, provided the written approval
and authorization of the Chief of Police is obtained prior to the performance of the Community
Services Personnel of the assigned duty. Despite any payments from third parties to Community
Services Personnel paid through the City, Community Services Personnel are. not salaried
employees of the City and shall not be entitled to any fringe or other employee benefit unless
required by law; separate accounting and records shall be maintained as to all payments received
from third parties, and all payments paid through the City shall be paid by the City to the
Community Services Personnel by separate checks clearly designating the source of the
payments.
ARTICLE 9
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
SECTION 9.1 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODES
There is hereby adopted by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion those
certain Codes known as the International Fire Code 2006 Edition issued by the International
Code Council and the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2006 Edition, issued by National Fire
Protection Association, the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified, or amended, of which Codes not less than one copy of each have been and are
now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon, and the same are hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this Ordinance
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Mt.
Vernon. In the event of a conflict between the two foregoing referenced Codes, the more
restrictive or stringent provision of the respective Codes shall control.
SECTION 9.2 DEFINITIONS
(a) Wherever the word AMunicipality@ is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be
held to mean the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(b) Wherever the term ACorporate Counsel@ is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(c) Wherever the term AFire Official@ is used within the Codes adopted herein, it shall
be held to mean the Fire Prevention Inspector for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, or such fire
official as designated by the Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department.
(d) Wherever the term AFire Prevention Code@ is used herein, it shall be held to mean
Article 9 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon and the Codes adopted
thereby.
SECTION 9.3 PROHIBITION OF STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN
OUTSIDE, ABOVE-GROUND TANKS.
(a) Notwithstanding any provision of the Codes adopted herein, the storage of
flammable liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited within the corporate limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon, except upon real estate having an industrial zoning classification, provided
all provisions of the Codes adopted herein shall be applicable to said storage upon said industrial
real estate.
SECTION 9.4 PERMITS
All permits or license referred to in the Fire Prevention Code shall be valid for a period of
one year from May 1 to April 31 only and must be renewed annually.
SECTION 9.5 AMENDMENTS MADE IN THE FIRE PREVENTION CODE
(a) In addition to the requirements of Section F-307.0 of the International Fire Code,
the following provisions shall also apply:
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or other open burning fire
or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained within the limits of the City of Mt. Vernon
1. Except as provided in Section 13.8 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
2. Except in an incinerator constructed pursuant to specifications which hereinafter
follow.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of the Section shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon. In
addition, any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be liable for and shall
reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the City, including without limitation
any labor expenses, man hour costs, machinery and equipment costs, and any material costs,
incurred by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department, associated with or relating to responding to the
violation and/or fire or the containment of said fire, and all reasonable attorney’s fees and other
costs incurred by the City in the collection of said costs and expenses.
(b) Incinerators shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. The incinerator shall be built with primary and secondary combustion chambers. It
shall include a down pass and/or other means of creating turbulence for the gases of combustion
to assure thorough mixing of gases of the products of combustion prior to their entering the
secondary combustion chamber. Total heat release in the entire incinerator, excluding ash pit,
shall not be more than 24,000 B.T.U.'s per cubic foot per hour.
2. The secondary combustion chamber shall be designed so that the gas velocity at
some point in this chamber shall not exceed nine feet per second at 14001F. The length of this
gas travel shall be a distance not less than the cross sectional area of that part of the passage in
which that velocity is attained.
3. Charging doors for the incinerator shall be substantial in design and weight, made
of heavy, high-grade cast iron accurately hinged having straps for anchoring securely into
masonry, or as otherwise acceptable, and with ample free air openings for aeration and secondary
air.
4. Cleanout and ash doors in hot areas shall be cast iron of sufficient weight to avoid
warping. Under-grate ash doors shall be steel or cast iron of sufficient size to facilitate cleaning.
5. Grates shall be of heavy duty cast iron construction dumping type, all grate
support members shall be such that the grates are supported independent of the refractory walls.
The free air opening shall be at least 40%.
6. Exterior construction may be of common brick, sheet steel, or cast iron. Interior
construction shall have linings of first quality high heat duty refractory (cone-31) with thickness
in accordance with rated capacity of incinerator. The incinerator roof is to be constructed of an
acceptable thickness high heat duty refractory supported by steel members bearing independently
of inner walls.
7. Spark arrester shall be installed on top of stack made of high temperature
aluminum alloy or vitrified fire clay or cast iron or conical design.
8. Capacity - Incinerator shall be a Class 1 unit having a rated capacity of not less
than 25 pounds per hour suitable for Type 1 waste. All establishments, commercial, industrial, or
residential where burning inside or outside is contemplated, shall first be investigated by the Fire
Department for load factor determination. Permission shall be granted to install incinerator of an
acceptable design within the load factor determination.
9. Incinerator shall be constructed according to plans and specifications available at
the Mt. Vernon Fire Department or may be ''portable'' or Apackage@ unit fabricated in accordance
with Incinerator Institute of America and N.F.B.U. Standards.
10. Classification 1
a. Type of waste Type 1 Rubbish.
b. Permissible components Combustible waste, paper cartons, rags,
floor sweepings, domestic, commercial, or
industrial sources.
c. Approximate composition Rubbish 100%.
by weight. No garbage, animal, or human tissue,
organic, or vegetable matter is permitted.
d. Moisture content % 25% of weight.
e. Incombustible solids % 10% of weight.
f. BTU value/pounds of refuse 6500 as fired
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, using, or in charge of any incinerator
located within the Fire Limits of the City of Mt. Vernon to cause, suffer, or allow the emission or
discharge of smoke, dust, fumes, gas, mist, or vapor from any such source into the atmosphere
which is of a shade in excess of No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart, as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines or of such capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree greater
than does smoke of a shade equal to No. 1 on said Ringlemann Chart.
B. The effluent from the stack shall be odorless.
C. The effluent from the stack shall not exceed a particular matter emission of 0.4
grains per standard dry cubic foot of wet gas volume when calculated to fifty percent (50 %)
excess air; Except that smoke with a density not exceeding No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart may
be permitted for a period of periods aggregating three (3) minutes in any hour.
Any emission or discharge into the open air of smoke, particulate matter, or other matter
as herein above described, from any single such source in excess of the limitations established in
or pursuant to the above shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, exchange,
deliver, or install for use, in the Fire Limits any make, model, or type of incinerator which does
not meet the requirements of this Article.
In approving any make, model, or type of incinerator, the following minimum standards
shall apply and no such make, model, or type shall be approved unless it shall conform to the
minimum standards as set forth in the National Board of Fire Underwriters for Incinerators
Bulletin No. 82 dated July, 1958.
All classifications for incinerators shall fall into one of the following:
Class 1
Class ''A@ Domestic and Small Industrial Type Incinerators
Class 11
Class AB@ Domestic and Small Industrial Type Incinerators
Class 111
Class AC@ Flue Fed Incinerators
Class 1V
Class AD@ Commercial and Industrial Type Incinerators
SECTION 9.6 ADOPTION OF FURTHER REGULATIONS
There are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference the following: Title 41: Fire
Protection Chapter 1: State Fire Marshal Part 160, Storage, Transportation, Sale, and Use of
Gasoline and Volatile Oils:
Rules and Regulations Relating to General Storage. Part 170, Storage, Transportation,
Sale, and Use of Gasoline and Volatile Oils: Rules and Regulations Relating to Service Stations,
Part 180, Storage, Transportation, Sale, and Use of Gasoline and Volatile Oils: General Rules.
Part 100, Fire Prevention and Safety.
In the event of a conflict between the foregoing and the Codes adopted within Section 9.1
herein, the more restrictive or stringent provision of the respective Codes shall control.
SECTION 9.7 APPEALS
Whenever the Fire Prevention Inspector, designated fire official, or the Chief of the Fire
Department, shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the intent and meaning of the Code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision to City
Manager within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision; thereafter the decision of the City
Manager may be appealed to the City Council within 30-days from date of decision of the City
Manager.
SECTION 9.8. REGULATION OF SALE AND POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS
Subsection 1. Fireworks are any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect of a
temporary exhibitional nature by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation; fireworks
shall include AConsumer Fireworks,@ ADisplay Fireworks,@ and APermitted Fireworks@ as
hereinafter described.
Subsection 2. AConsumer Fireworks@ mean those fireworks that must comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the Consumer Products Safety
Commission, as set forth in 16 CFR, Parts 1500 and 1507 and classified as fireworks UN0336 or
UN0337 by the United States Department of Transportation under 47 CFR 142101. Consumer
Fireworks (1.4G Fireworks) do not include APermitted Fireworks@ described within Section 3
herein and shall not include ADisplay Fireworks@ (1.3G Fireworks) as defined within the Illinois
Fireworks Use Act, but Consumer Fireworks shall include (but shall not be limited to) the
following:
(a) Blank cartridges;
(b) Toy cannons in which explosives are used;
(c) The type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same;
(d) Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrocket, Roman candles, bombs or other devices of
similar construction;
(e) Any fireworks containing any explosive compound;
(f) Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances providing visual effects;
(g) Sparkling devices which produce a shower of sparks upon ignition (except
Sparklers, defined below) including, but not limited to items commonly known as
Afountains,@ Aspinners,@ Awheels,@ or similar devices.
Subsection 3. The term APermitted Fireworks@ shall mean and include snake or glow worm
pellets, smoke devices, trick noisemakers known as party poppers, booby traps, snappers, trick
matches, cigarette loads, and auto burglar alarms; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other similar devices and toy pistol paper or plastic caps as hereinafter specifically defined:
(a) Snakes, glow worm - Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a
large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate.
(b) Smoke devices - Tube or skewer containing pyrotechnic composition that upon
ignition produces white or colored smoke as a primary effect.
(c) Trick noisemaker - Item that produces a small report intended to surprise the user;
these devices include:
(1) Party popper - Small plastic or paper item containing not more than 16 mg
of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A string protruding
from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper streamers and
producing a small report.
(2) Booby trap - Small tube with string protruding from both ends, similar to a
party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to ignite the
friction sensitive composition, producing a small report.
(3) Snapper - Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the
device explodes, producing a small report.
(4) Trick match - Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a small
quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the
match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.
(5) Cigarette load - Small wooden peg that has been coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette containing
one of the pegs, a small report is produced.
(6) Auto burglar alarm- Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition that
produces a loud whistle and/or smoke when ignited. A small quantity of
explosive, not exceeding 50 mg, may also be used to produce a small
report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
(d) Sparklers - A wire or stick coated with pyrotechnic composition which shall not
exceed one hundred grams per item that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition.
(e) Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, and other similar devices - Devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five-hundredths grains or less of explosive
compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosive.
(f) Toy pistol paper or plastic caps - Item which contains less than twenty
five-hundredths grains of explosive material.
Subsection 4. Any term used within this Ordinance not otherwise defined herein shall have the
same meaning as provided within the Illinois Fireworks Use Act (425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq).
Subsection 5. Neither the State of Illinois nor the City of Mt. Vernon recognize the term ASafe
and Sane Fireworks@ and any item labeled as such are subject to the definitions contained herein.
The labeling of a device shall not determine whether the device is a permitted firework or is a
consumer firework. If the possession, use, or sale of a firework is not authorized within this
Ordinance then it is prohibited; and if authorized, such possession, use, or sale is restricted as
provided within this Ordinance.
Subsection 6. No person may sell or hold for sale or distribute or offer for sale or possess or
purchase or discharge any AConsumer Firework@ within the City of Mt. Vernon, without first
strictly complying with the provisions of the Illinois Fireworks Use Act, and without first
complying with the provisions of Section 9.8 of the Revised Code of Ordinances; provided that
in the event of a conflict between said Illinois Fireworks Use Act and Section 9.8 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall control. Only such AConsumer
Fireworks@ as are authorized by the Illinois State Fire Marshal=s Office pursuant to the Illinois
Fireworks Use Act and as are authorized and approved by the Fire Chief of the City of Mt.
Vernon shall be permitted for sale, distribution, or possession within the City of Mt. Vernon.
Subsection 7.
(A) No person may sell, possess for sale, distribute or offer for sale any fireworks in
the City of Mt. Vernon unless such person has first obtained a permit to sell fireworks pursuant
to this Ordinance and also, if applicable, a transient merchant license under Section 11.7 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances. A fireworks permit shall be required for each location where
fireworks are sold, held for sale, distributed or offered for sale. No permit shall issue except for
Permitted Fireworks and/or Consumer Fireworks.
An applicant for a permit under this Ordinance shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a fee
in the amount of $25.00 per location, which fee shall not be refundable; each permit shall be
issued for not longer than one (1) year and shall in all events expire on April 30 following the
date of issuance. All permits shall be issued within 15-days from receipt of a proper application if
the applicant and location are in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with State
and Federal law.
Any person who desires to obtain a fireworks permit shall file a written application with
the Fire Chief. The permit application shall be under oath and shall include the applicant's name,
permanent business address (which must include a street address), residence address of the
applicant(if the applicant is a corporation the residence address of its officers), residential and
business telephone numbers, the location at which the applicant intends to do business, a copy of
the applicant's certificate of registration under the Illinois Retailer's Occupation Tax Act, a
complete inventory and list of all fireworks to be sold or offered for sale, and a certificate of
insurance evidencing a general liability policy in the amount of not less than One Million Dollars
($1,000,000). In addition, the application shall provide a copy of a written lease or other written
evidence from the owner of the location where the applicant proposes to sell indicating
permission of the owner to use the location. Each permit issued hereunder shall clearly designate
that it is a AConsumer Fireworks Permit@ if the permit authorizes the sale of AConsumer
Fireworks.@ Unless the applicant has also complied with each of the provisions of the Illinois
Fireworks Use Act no person shall be issued a AConsumer Fireworks@ Permit.
(B) No person may purchase or possess any Consumer Fireworks in the City of
Mt. Vernon unless such person has first obtained a permit to possess said fireworks pursuant to
this Ordinance and pursuant to the Illinois Fireworks Use Act. An applicant for a permit under
this Ordinance to possess Consumer Fireworks shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a fee in the
amount of $25.00 per applicant, which fee shall be non-refundable; each permit shall issue for
not longer than one (1) year and shall in all events expire on April following the date of issuance.
All permits shall be issued within 15 days from receipt of a proper application if the applicant is
in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and with the Illinois Fireworks Use Act.
Any person who desires to obtain a permit to possess Consumer Fireworks shall file a written
application with the Fire Chief; the permit applicant shall be under oath and shall include the
applicant=s name, business address (which must include a street address), a residence address of
the applicant (if the applicant is a corporation the residence address of its officers), residential
and business telephone numbers, location at which the applicant intends to possess fireworks,
and a certificate of insurance evidencing a general liability policy in the amount of not less than
One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00). In addition to the permit to possess as required herein, the
applicant shall also be required to obtain the required display permit under Subsection 12 herein
before discharge or display of any Consumer Fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon. No permit to possess Consumer Fireworks shall be issued unless all requirements,
including training requirements, of the Illinois Fireworks Use Act have been complied with.
(C) Prior to the issuance of the permit each applicant shall file with the Fire Chief a
cash deposit in the amount of $1,000 to secure compliance with this Ordinance unless the
applicant is the owner of real estate situated within Jefferson County, Illinois and provides
written proof of same. The Fire Chief shall hold the cash deposit as security for compliance with
this Ordinance and if the applicant or permit holder or any employee or agent of same shall fail to
comply with this Ordinance and a fine shall be assessed under Subsection 11 then said cash
deposit shall be applied to payment of said penalty. Unless an alleged violation is pending, the
cash deposit shall be held for 30-days after expiration or surrender or termination of the permit at
which time any balance of the cash deposit held by the Fire Chief shall be refunded either
personally to the permit holder or by certified mail to the permit holder; provided, however, that
if the permit holder shall fail to keep the Fire Chief informed of a current mailing address then
said cash deposit shall be forfeited to the City after one attempt by the Fire Chief or his designee
to refund the bond by certified mail.
Subsection 8. Fireworks shall be possessed, kept, stored, held for sale, distributed sold,
discharged, and/or delivered subject to the following additional restrictions:
(a) Fireworks shall not be stored or kept for sale or offered for sale at any location
unless there are two (2) approved chemical fire extinguishers readily available and
equipped for use in extinguishing fires.
(b) Over each entrance to any room where fireworks are stored or kept for sale or
offered for sale there shall be designated a sign in conspicuous type:
CAUTION - FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING.
(c) No smoking shall be allowed and no person shall smoke within any structure or
room where fireworks are stored or kept for sale or offered for sale. In addition,
smoking is prohibited and no person shall smoke within twenty-five feet (25') of
any location where fireworks are stored or kept for sale or offered for sale.
(d) Fireworks shall not be exposed in windows where the sun shines through glass on
the merchandise displayed, except where such fireworks are in the original
package, and all fireworks kept for sale on front counters must remain in original
packages; provided, however, that fireworks in open stock may be kept in
showcases or in counters out of reach of the public.
(e) No fireworks shall be stored, kept, sold, held for sale or offered for sale or
discharged by any person within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any gasoline
pump or gasoline bulk station or in any building in which gasoline or volatile
liquids are sold or present in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in retail
stores where cleaners, paint, and oils are handled in sealed containers only.
(f) No firework shall be discharged by any person within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of any location where fireworks are sold, held for sale, distributed or offered for
sale or within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any gasoline pump or gasoline bulk
station or in any building or location at which gasoline or volatile liquids are
present.
(g) No person shall ignite any firework in any motor vehicle or throw a firework from
a motor vehicle nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of firework
into or at a motor vehicle or at or near any person or group of people.
(h) Fireworks shall not be sold to nor purchased by minors under the age of 16-years
unless the minor is under the immediate supervision of a responsible adult.
(i) Fireworks shall not be sold to nor purchased by any intoxicated person or person
who appears to be intoxicated, nor to any person who is otherwise so diminished
in capacity such that it reasonably appears that he creates a danger to himself or
others by the use of fireworks.
(j) There shall be at least two exits from each permanent booth, room, or building
and shall be more than one means of exit from each temporary structure from
which fireworks are sold, held for sale, distributed, or offered for sale.
(k) At each location where fireworks are sold, held for sale, distributed or offered for
sale there shall be a sales clerk who is at least 18-years of age on duty to serve
consumers at the time of purchase or delivery.
(l) No firework shall be discharged upon any public street, alley, parking lot,
sidewalk or public way, upon any property owned by the United States, the State
of Illinois or other state or any municipality or other political subdivision or
agency thereof or upon any property, including privately owned property, which is
open to or held out for use by the public, except a display subject to the provisions
of Subsection 12 herein which has been authorized in writing by the owner of the
public or private property.
(m) Each permit holder, his employees, and agents are each subject to the restrictions
within this Section and, in addition, said permit holder and his employees and
agents shall strictly enforce all smoking and discharge prohibitions described
within this Ordinance upon any property owned or controlled or in the possession
of the permit holder.
(n) Except as provided herein, fireworks shall be sold only from a permanent
non-residential structure; during the period from May 1 through July 11 of
each year fireworks may be sold from a temporary non-residential structure
situated upon the property of a business that maintains an inventory of
consumer fireworks and offers consumer fireworks for sale during each month
of the twelve months preceding said May 1. In no event shall fireworks be sold
from a motor vehicle, any temporary structure except as permitted above, or a
private residence.
(o) No AConsumer Firework@ shall be sold to nor possessed by any person unless such
person holds a valid permit issued by the City complying with the Illinois
Fireworks Use Act. Each, the seller and purchaser, shall have committed a
violation upon sale of a AConsumer Firework@ to any person not possessing the
required permit.
Subsection 9. The Fire Chief or his designee, the Chief Building Inspector or his designee, and
the Mt. Vernon Police Department may at reasonable hours enter and inspect the location or
premises of any permit holder to determine compliance with this Ordinance. If any permit holder
or his agent or employee has in his possession any firework in violation of this Ordinance the
permit shall be revoked and all such fireworks seized and the fireworks shall be kept to be used
as evidence. If any person is observed to have in his possession any fireworks or to be using or
possessing any fireworks in violation of this Ordinance such fireworks may be seized and the
fireworks shall be kept to be used as evidence. Upon conviction of the offender or with the
permission of the offender, the fireworks shall be destroyed. If an alleged offender is determined
to be innocent of any violation, permissible fireworks shall be made available for return to the
person in whose possession they were found, although said person must arrange for delivery of
same within 30-days from date of notice to said person.
Subsection 10. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the Fire Chief for
good cause after notice and opportunity to be heard. The Fire Chief shall afford to the permit
holder an opportunity to present evidence bearing upon the question of revocation or suspension
of the license. Cause for revocation or suspension shall include the violation of any provision of
this Ordinance or of any federal law or statute of the State of Illinois by the permit holder or by
any employee or agent of the permit holder or that the permit holder has made a false statement
on any application for permit under this Ordinance or for reason that the permit holder has
refused to permit any police officer or member of the Fire Department of the City or Inspector of
the City to inspect the premises or the activities of the premises at reasonable times. The decision
of the Fire Chief suspending or revoking a license shall be in writing and shall be subject to
review by the City Manager upon written request of the permit holder.
Subsection 11. If any person possesses or offers for sale or makes sale of any fireworks without
first having obtained a permit under this Ordinance, the Mt. Vernon Fire Department at the
direction of the City Manager may hold such fireworks or fireworks inventory of the person until
he/she obtains the required permit. If the property is held by the City of Mt. Vernon for more than
60-days and the person whose property is being held does not obtain the permit under this
Ordinance, the City may petition the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois for an order for
the sale of the property being held. If the court finds that the person whose property is held has
not obtained a permit under this Ordinance prior to the filing of the Petition the court may order
and authorize the City to sell the property or may order the destruction of the property by the
City. The proceeds of sale of the property less reimbursement to the City of the reasonable
expenses for the storage and sale of the property shall be deposited in the general corporate fund
of the City.
Subsection 12: Display of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to
be displayed Consumer Fireworks and/or Display Fireworks (as defined within the Illinois
Fireworks Use Act) within the corporate areas of the City of Mt. Vernon without a permit.
(a) Pyrotechnic Displays
Pyrotechnic displays of Display Fireworks in the City of Mt. Vernon shall be permitted
upon compliance with the following conditions:
(1) All persons shall file an application for a pyrotechnic display permit at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display.
(2) The application for a pyrotechnic display permit shall contain identifying
information for the person sponsoring the display, the exact location of the
display, the exact date and time of the display, and identifying information
for the individual who is the licensed lead pyrotechnic operator
supervising the display.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance from an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois
evidencing a minimum of $1,000,000 in liability coverage.
(4) The application shall also be accompanied by a current and valid copy of
the State issued lead pyrotechnic operator=s license.
(5) The application shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.
(6) After the permit has been granted, the possession, use and display of
Display Fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferrable.
(7) No permit shall be required for supervised displays of State or County fair
associations.
(8) Applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00.
(9) Provided that the application requirements have been met by the applicant,
a Pyrotechnic Fireworks Display Permit shall be issued by the Fire Chief.
(b) Consumer Displays
(1) All persons shall file an application for a consumer display permit at least
15 days in advance of the date of the consumer display.
(2) The application for a consumer display permit shall contain identifying
information for the person sponsoring the display, the exact location of the
display, the exact date and time of the display, and identifying information
for the consumer operator handling the display who shall have received
training from a Consumer Fireworks training class approved by the State
Fire Marshall.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance from an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois
evidencing a minimum of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) in liability
coverage.
(4) The application shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.
(5) The applicant shall also be subject to a criminal background check as a
condition of issuing a permit.
(6) After the permit has been granted, the possession, use and display of
Consumer Fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferrable.
(7) Applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00.
(8) Provided that the application requirements have been met by the applicant,
a Consumer Fireworks Display Permit shall be issued by the Fire Chief.
Subsection 13: Adoption by Reference. The rules and regulations as may from time to time be
amended, for the administration of the Fireworks Use Act (425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.), by the
State Fire Marshal, including, but not limited to, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
1123 guidelines for outdoor displays, NFPA 1126 guidelines for proximate audience displays,
audience proximity distances for consumer Display Fireworks, and the list of approved
Consumer Fireworks are adopted herein by reference.
Subsection 14. Any person that violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200.00 for each violation; each consumer firework in the possession of the
person shall constitute a separate violation and each day that any firework is sold or offered for
sale without a permit or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
In addition, if a person is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance
said person shall be subject to the other remedies and provisions of this Ordinance in addition to
the imposition of a fine.
Any person who is convicted (including a no contest or supervision plea) of any violation
of this Ordinance by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be ineligible to receive a permit
under this Ordinance for a period of 2-years from the date of the conviction.
SECTION 9.9. Deleted Pursuant to Ordinance 2006-27 B 06/2006
SECTION 9.10. FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS
(a) No person, firm, or corporation shall install, maintain, or use any fire alarm
system and/or component in violation of the regulations set forth in this Article and the Standards
thereby adopted by reference.
(b) There is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, as though set forth
in full herein, the provisions of the National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72), as recommended by
the National Fire Protection Association, at least one copy of which such regulations is filed in
the Office of the Fire Inspector of the City of Mt. Vernon. Such regulations shall be kept by the
Fire Inspector available for public use, inspection, and examination. In the event of a conflict
between the specific provisions of this Article and NFPA 72, the specific provisions of this
Article shall control.
(c) No person, firm, or corporation shall attach, install, connect, or maintain any fire
alarm system or component unless same shall comply with the provisions of this Article and the
regulations adopted thereby; and no person, firm, or corporation shall attach, install, connect, or
maintain any fire alarm system to the City property or to Central Dispatch within the Fire
Department or Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon unless same shall be approved by
the Fire Chief and shall be installed, maintained, and used in the manner prescribed by this
Article and the regulations adopted thereby. No alarm, component, equipment, device, or system
shall be installed upon or in City property shall he owned, maintained, and controlled by the City
or its employees unless for fire protection to City property only, and the City shall have or
assume no liability for the maintenance or use thereof or for damage thereto.
SECTION 9.11. AUXILIARY PROTECTION SIGNALING SYSTEMS FOR FIRE
ALARM SERVICE
(a) Auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service within the City
Limits of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be installed only in compliance with NFPA 72 and upon
the following terms and conditions:
1. Complete information regarding the system, including specifications,
wiring diagrams, floor plans, and zones, shall be submitted to the City of Mt. Vernon for
approval prior to installation of equipment or wiring.
2. All devices, combinations of devices, and equipment constructed and
installed in conformity with these standards shall be UL/FM approved for the purpose for which
they are intended.
3. Upon completion of the installation of the system, a satisfactory test of the
entire installation shall be made in the presence of a representative of the Mt. Vernon Fire
Department.
4. Auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service shall be
installed and operate on its own separate individual line or lines. It shall not be combined with or
utilize the lines of any burglar alarm or other alarm system.
5. Permission for the connection of the auxiliary system; the applicant shall
submit a written request on forms supplied by the City for connection to the Fire Department or
Central Dispatch alarm panels. Such connections shall not be completed until approval is
granted.
(b) System Operation.
1. The actuation of any approved device shall cause its respective zone alarm
lamp on the main fire alarm control panel to illuminate and cause the alarm signals to sound an
audible signal throughout the protected premises. Operating an alarm acknowledged push button
(reset) on the main panel shall silence the alarm signals. However, a subsequent alarm from
another zone shall automatically resound the signals and illuminate the corresponding zone lamp
until it is acknowledged. This shall continue until all actuated devices are restored and the system
is reset. Systems without the automatic resound features are forbidden.
2. In addition, the following shall occur upon the actuation of the alarm
devices: (a) the initial operation of any manual station shall cause the alarm signal to be
transmitted over the telephone lines to the remote alarm panels located at the Police Station; (b)
the initial operation of any automatic alarm initiating device shall cause the alarm signal to be
transmitted first to a remote dispatch center which services the alarm system, which remote
dispatch center shall manually cause the alarm system to be transmitted over the telephone lines
to the remote alarm panels located at the Police Station; (c) the transmitter shall be of the reverse
polarity type.
3. Power failures, open ground, or any disarrangements of the system wiring
or components shall be indicated by an audible trouble signal and a visual signal. The audible
trouble signal may be silenced; however, the trouble lamp shall remain lighted until the system
has been returned to normal operating condition. Each new fault shall resound the trouble signal
even though a previous trouble signal may have been silenced.
4. The system shall operate from a source of 120 VAC and automatically
transfer to standby batteries should the main power fail. Batteries shall be rated at sufficient
capacity to operate the system for 60 hours with the main power source disconnected and then, at
the end of that period, operate all alarm systems in an alarm condition for 15 minutes.
Disconnecting the batteries, low battery voltage, or high battery voltage shall sound a system
trouble on the main control panel. Failure of the 120 VAC system and an automatic transfer to
batteries shall indicate and sound a system trouble at the remote alarm panels.
(c) Auxiliary Generator.
An auxiliary generator will be considered as a standby power supply (in lieu of Section
9.14(b)(4)), subject to the following:
1. The generator shall be completely automatic in change over from the
normal power source to generator operation, or a specifically trained operator shall be on duty at
all times.
2. Standards for the installation and operation of said generator shall be
governed by NFPA 72.
3. In the event that an auxiliary generator is utilized in lieu of an approved
battery standby, attention is specifically called to NFPA 72, Section 1-5.2.5 which provides that a
storage battery shall be provided that shall have a sufficient capacity for operation of the alarm
system for at least four hours.
(d) Control Panel.
1. The control unit shall be UL/FM approved, along with all necessary
components required to provide a complete fire alarm system. The control shall contain all
components necessary to provide a complete system. The control shall contain features to
accomplish a trouble and/or alarm signal and shall provide the necessary supervised detection
circuits, supervised alarm circuits, and supervised audible alarm circuits. Lamps shall be
provided on the cabinet face to indicate AC power on, Alarm, and Trouble Conditions.
2. Disconnect Transmitter Signal - A disconnect switch shall be provided
behind a locked cabinet door to disable the transmitter panel. The transmitter disconnect shall be
used when the system is tested or serviced and shall not allow transmission of the alarm signal to
the remote panel. When operated, the disconnect shall provide a means to deter transmission and
shall operate an AOFF NORMAL@ lamp and sound a trouble alarm. During such periods as the
disconnect circuitry is in operation, a trouble condition will be indicated at the remote panel.
When the system is reset and restored, the disconnect shall reset and return to the normal
condition. The disconnect switch shall be under the sole control of the alarm user, and the
disconnect of an alarm transmitter shall be made only by the alarm user; upon an alarm user
placing a disconnect switch into the off position and disconnecting the alarm transmitter, the
alarm user shall provide 24-hour fire watch for the premises served by the alarm system, which
fire watch shall include regular and repeated inspections and patrols, the frequency and nature
of which shall be documented in writing by the alarm user and maintained as a permanent record
by the alarm user.
(e) Installation and Design.
1. All systems shall be installed in a workmanlike manner and in accordance
with the specifications and standards approved by this Department.
2. Devices shall be so located and mounted that accidental operation will not
be caused by vibration or jarring.
3. All systems shall test free of grounds except parts of circuits or equipment
which are intentionally and permanently grounded to provide ground, fault detection, emergency
ground signaling, or circuit grounding. All systems shall be so designed that they do not depend
upon the effectiveness of any ground connection or normal operation.
4. A system shall be so designed and installed so that it shall be capable of
performing its intended function at 85 percent and at 110 percent of the rated voltage.
(f) Monthly Tests.
1. The system shall be tested at least once each month as provided within
Section 9.15(e) herein to verify the reliability of the system.
2. A different component of the system (detector, pull box, etc.) shall be used
each month as a means of activating the system.
3. The City's Central Dispatch, the Fire Department, and the Police
Department shall be notified at least one (1) hour prior to the test.
(g) Approval.
Applications for permission to install and connect auxiliary systems shall be made to the
City Building Inspector and to the Fire Department. The Fire Department shall, when necessary,
obtain the advice, inspection, or other assistance of the Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector,
or other appropriate department. Final Action of any such application shall be made by the Chief
of the Fire Department or his duly authorized representative.
SECTION 9.12. ALARM SYSTEMS IN GENERAL, INCLUDING FIRE ALARM
(a) Definitions.
AAlarm business@ shall mean any business operated for profit, which engages in the
activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, or
responding to a burglary or holdup alarm system or fire alarm, or which causes any of these
activities to take place.
AAlarm equipment suppliers@ shall mean any person, firm, or corporation that sells,
leases, or installs signaling devices which, upon activation, either automatically or manually, will
transmit an alarm.
AAlarm systems@ shall mean any signaling device which is electronically operated which
automatically sends visual and audible signals over a signal line to be registered by indicators at a
monitor panel in a receiving terminal of the City's Central Dispatch and/or alarm companies'
receiving location.
AAlarm user@ shall mean any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
with the City of Mt. Vernon.
ACity of Mt. Vernon alarm contractor@ shall mean the alarm company contracted by the
City of Mt. Vernon for the installation and maintenance of the Police or Fire Department
monitoring systems.
ACity's Central Dispatch@ shall be the Dispatch Station at the Mt. Vernon Police Station.
AFalse alarm@ shall mean the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system
or of his employee or agents. AFalse alarm@ does not include alarm signals activated by violent
conditions of nature, telephone line interruptions, acts of God, or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business installer or alarm user.
AFire Chief@ shall mean the Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department.
ALocal alarm system@ shall mean a system which produces a signal at the premises
protected.
APolice Chief@ shall mean the Chief of the Mt. Vernon Police Department.
(b) Monitoring System.
The City of Mt. Vernon may contract for the installation of a uniform monitoring system
to receive visual and audible signals over a line or lines at a central location. Such system shall
have a capacity to meet present needs and the ability to expand for future needs and shall be
available to any subscriber who meets the requirements for a permit for connection as defined in
this Section.
(c) Application for Permit by Alarm Users.
Each person within the City of Mt. Vernon who wishes to install in his home, place of
business, or other premises an alarm system subsequent to September 1, 1987 which is connected
to the Police Department or Fire Department through the City's Central Dispatch or which
automatically directly dials the City's Central Dispatch or which produces an audible signal at the
premises, other than a single station smoke detector, shall obtain an installation permit for each
separate alarm system he/she wishes to connect.
Application for each separate fire alarm system shall be submitted to the Fire Chief, and
permits for each separate police alarm system shall be submitted to the Police Chief and shall be
subject to the approval of the respective Chief. Provided, however, that application for alarms in
conjunction with new construction may be submitted to the Building Inspector, although such
application shall be subject to the approval of the respective Chief. No application fee shall be
charged for a permit.
The application for an alarm system user permit shall include the following: name,
address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user; and the type of business organization
(individual, partnership, or corporation); if a partnership, the names and addresses of the
partners; and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers and the state
where incorporated. The application shall also include the name and address of an authorized
individual who shall be available during any hour of any day. The issuance of a permit shall in no
way constitute a warranty of the signaling device involved, and issuance of said permit shall be
specifically subject to the City of Mt. Vernon's disclaimer of liability as detailed in this Section
and further detailed in the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.
The alarm user applicant shall provide a Ahold harmless@ statement with the application.
The hold harmless statement will contain the following wording:
AIn consideration of the issuance of a permit for the installation of the requested
direct police and/or fire alarm connection to the Police and/or Fire Department,
the owner-applicant herein on behalf of himself and his co-workers, if any, his
heirs, administrators, executors, and assigns hereby releases the City of Mt.
Vernon, a municipal corporation, its officers, employees, and alarm monitoring
contractor from any and all liability, suits, judgments, claims of any kind or
nature, including attorney fees and court costs arising or which may arise from the
use, utilization, or maintenance of said alarm system upon the premises at
(address), whether such claim is brought by the applicant or any third party or
entity, and the applicant further agrees to defend any legal action, whether it is
based on an allegation jointly or severally, against the City of Mt. Vernon, a
municipal corporation, its officers, employees, and alarm monitoring contractor
for any action or nonaction on their parts.@
(d) Subscriber Charges.
The permit holder shall pay the alarm equipment installer for all equipment charges and
connection fees to the monitoring system, and maintenance charges necessitated by the
installation, operation, and maintenance of signaling devices in the monitoring system. The
company supplying and maintaining the monitoring system shall have the right to charge
subscribers or their equipment installer a reasonable fee for connection to, and maintenance of,
the system.
(e) Direct Connection Alarms.
Revocation of permit. The respective Fire Chief or Police Chief may revoke or suspend
any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section, after giving written notice to the
holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to effect compliance within 72 hours, if it is
determined that the alarm system under said permit has been installed, maintained, or operated in
violation of the provisions of this Section or of any terms or conditions of said permit or in
violation of any law.
Right of inspection. The City of Mt. Vernon shall have the right to inspect any alarm
system on the premises where it is intended to be used, both prior to and subsequent to the
issuance of a permit, at reasonable times, to determine whether a permit should be granted and
whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and in conformity with the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, the Statutes of the State of Illinois, and
all codes and regulations adopted or issued relating thereto.
No charges shall be made by the City for a routine inspection conducted by the City upon
the City's own initiative. A charge of Ten Dollars ($10.00) each for all other inspections shall be
charged, except that each alarm user who has a new alarm system installed shall be entitled to
three inspections by the City without charge during the sixty (60) days after the initial installation
of the alarm system.
Testing. There shall be no testing or demonstrating alarm systems without first
notifying the City of Mt. Vernon, in accordance with procedures established by the city, prior to
such test or demonstration, and obtaining permission of the respective Fire Chief or Police Chief
or such person delegated by each. Any activation due to a test of demonstration without said
notice and permission shall be deemed a false alarm. The respective Fire Chief or Police Chief
shall be notified in writing by the alarm installer of the expected completion date of the initial
installation, major alteration, or addition of an alarm system prior to completion of said work. All
fire alarms shall be tested at least once a month on either the first or third Monday between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m; or if the first or third Monday falls on a holiday, then testing shall occur on
the first Monday following the holiday.
Maintenance. Each person, firm, or corporation holding a permit for the operation and
maintenance of an alarm system shall be responsible to maintain, repair, and keep in good
working order the alarm system; and each shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by
the device which they operate or maintain. The failure to maintain, repair, or keep in good
working order the alarm system as required herein shall, subject to the hereinafter provisions for
notice and opportunity to be heard, be cause to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder
and shall be cause for removal of the alarm system. The City of Mt. Vernon shall maintain a
record of all false alarms and, subject to the hereinafter provisions for notice and opportunity to
be heard, may revoke or suspend any permit for the operation of the alarm system involved in the
transmission of two (2) false fire alarms or four (4) false police alarms in any one calendar year.
Charges. In addition to any other penalty herein provided, the City of Mt. Vernon shall
charge a fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per false fire alarm to the owner or occupant of
the premises for each automatic alarm transmitted to the City of Mt. Vernon by activation on the
premises of an automatic or manual alarm system, in excess of two (2) fire alarms in each
calendar year from the said premises, and a fee of Twenty five Dollars ($25.00) for each false
police alarm in excess of four (4) in any calendar year. Charges shall be payable to the City of
Mt. Vernon by the user permit holder upon receipt of a statement for such charges. Activation of
an alarm by an act of God or by an independent cause not within the control or responsibility of
the alarm user shall not constitute a false alarm for purposes of imposition of the charges herein.
No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for sixty (60) days after initial installation of
thirty (30) days after major alterations or additions, nor shall false alarms during that period be
counted toward the false alarms allowed per calendar year provided written proof satisfactory to
the City of such major alterations is submitted to the respective Fire Chief or Police Chief by the
permit holder within five (5) days after receiving a billing of charges for the false alarm, provided
only one such waiver of charges shall be permitted each calendar year.
Hearings. Every alarm user shall upon written request be entitled to a hearing before
the City Manager and Police Chief and Fire Chief, or designated agents of each of said officers,
upon receipt of a billing of charges for false alarms or upon receipt of notice of suspension or
revocation of any permit. Said hearing must be requested by the alarm user within five (5) days
after receiving a billing of charges for the false alarm or after receiving notice of suspension or
revocation of the permit. At the hearing, the alarm user will be given the opportunity to present
evidence and argument to show that the permit should not be suspended or revoked, or that the
alarm activation was not false, or that the alarm activation comes within one of the permissible
exceptions or that the permit should not be suspended or revoked.
Liability. The City of Mt. Vernon shall take reasonable precaution to assure that alarm
signals received by the City of Mt. Vernon are given appropriate attention and are acted upon
with dispatch. However, the City of Mt. Vernon and the alarm contractor shall not be liable for
any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and operation of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, and the relaying of such signals. In the event that
the City of Mt. Vernon finds it necessary to disconnect a defective signaling device, the City of
Mt. Vernon shall incur no liability by such action.
Automatic dialer-type alarms. The procedures and requirements for automatic
dialer-type alarms shall be the same as for direct connection alarms, except as herein provided.
The City of Mt. Vernon shall provide a distinct and separate trunk line(s) apart from emergency
telephone trunk lines for the use of automatic dialer-type alarms, and only those lines may be
used to automatically transmit a signal to Central Dispatch. Under no circumstances shall the
automatic dialer-type equipment be permitted to automatically connect to the emergency
telephone lines. Automatic dialer-type fire alarms shall be subject to the provisions of Section
9.14(b)(2).
Local alarm system. The procedures and requirements for local alarm systems shall be
the same as for direct connection alarms, except as hereinafter provided. Every local alarm
system installed subsequent to the effective date of this Section shall be constructed, equipped,
and installed in such fashion as to be incapable of sounding for more than thirty (30) minutes
after a signal activation thereof. A fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed to the
owner or occupant of the premises whose local alarm system activates to sound for a period in
excess of thirty (30) minutes after the City's Central Dispatch is notified of said alarm. All single
station smoke detectors that are installed in a home, place of business, or other premises shall
be exempt from this Section.
Resetting the Alarm. The alarm user shall be solely responsible for resetting the alarm
system after activation. If the alarm system is in good working order, the resetting of the alarm
system shall occur as soon as the condition giving rise to the alarm, activation permits; or, in the
case of a false alarm, the resetting of the alarm system shall occur immediately.
Penalties. Except as otherwise provided, whoever violates any provision of this
Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than Five Dollars ($5.00) or more than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
SECTION 9.13. FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD.
Fire apparatus access roads (i.e. fire lane) shall be provided and maintained as required
within Section 503 of the International Fire Code.
Subject to the provisions of Section 503 of the International Fire Code, each fire lane
shall be twenty (20) feet wide and shall completely encircle the structure. In the event there is a
sidewalk adjacent to the structure, the fire lane shall extend eighteen feet from the curb. In the
event there is an awning or other overhang attached to and projecting from the structure, the fire
Lane shall extend twenty (20) feet from the edge of the awning or overhang. All curbing affected
shall be painted yellow, and each lane shall be striped with yellow lines diagonal to the lane at
eight-foot intervals, or each lane shall be clearly marked by an approved sign.
The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle within any fire lane designated by
this ordinance, or the blocking or obstructing of any fire lane designated by this Ordinance, or the
blocking of access to any fire lane is hereby prohibited, except by authorized emergency vehicles
as defined in Article 18 of the Revised Code, except by attended delivery vehicles, and except
within designated areas approved in writing by the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of
Police. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this paragraph shall be punishable by a
penalty of $20.00 if paid within 72 hours of the violation, which offense shall be charged by
means of a citation or Ahang-on@ ticket; failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours shall subject
the violator to the penalties stated within Article 22, Section 22.6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
SECTION 9.14.
In addition to other applicable requirements, premises receiving gas service shall be
subject to the following Amanual shutoff valve@ requirements:
a. Valves Controlling Multiple Systems:
Accessibility of Gas Valves: Main gas shutoff valves controlling several gas piping
systems shall be readily accessible for operation and shall be installed so as to be protected from
physical damage.
Shutoff Valves for Multiple House Lines: In multiple tenant buildings or buildings
adjacent to each other supplied through a master meter or meters or where meters are not readily
accessible from the equipment location, an individual shutoff valve for each apartment or tenant
line shall be provided at a convenient point of general accessibility.
In a common supply system serving more than one building, exterior shutoff valves shall
be installed at each building.
b. Equipment Shutoff Valves and Connections:
Any gas utilization equipment connected to a piping system shall have an accessible,
approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of any connector and within six (6) feet of the
equipment it serves.
SECTION 9.15. Hazardous Materials.
The Mt. Vernon Fire Department is hereby authorized to control and eliminate hazardous
materials and hazardous material emergencies. The Fire Department shall have the authority to
summarily remove, abate, and remedy all hazardous material emergencies or incidents within or
without the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon which are dangerous or prejudicial to
public health or public safety. Expenses incurred by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department shall be
the joint and severable liability of the owner or owners of the hazardous material, the owner of
the means of transport, and all other persons having responsibility for or contributing to the
hazardous material emergency or incident whether resident or nonresident.
The Mt. Vernon Fire Department as determined by its Chief or his designee is hereby
authorized to seek and obtain the services of an independent hazardous material specialist or to
seek and obtain the service of a hazardous material specialist associated with the company or
companies responsible for the removal, abatement or remedy of a hazardous material emergency
or incident. The expenses of removal, abatement or remedy shall include but be limited to
charges for all materials used; a charge for all firefighting services including equipment and
manpower; charges for experts, specialists or other consultants; and all other charges associated
or related to the hazardous material emergency or incident.
The Fire Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department shall ascertain the expenses incurred in
removing, abating or remedying the hazardous material emergency or incident and shall notify
the responsible party informing said party that all expenses and charges are due and payable
within 30-days from date of notice of the charges. Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the
expenses of removal, abatement or remedy shall be responsible for all attorneys= fees, collection
costs and other collection costs and other expenses incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon in
effecting collection of the amounts owing. Monies collected hereunder as expenses for removal,
abatement or remedy of any hazardous material emergency or incident shall be used by the City
of Mt. Vernon to purchase materials, training and programs for controlling and containing
hazardous material emergencies and incidents.
ARTICLE 10
HOUSING CODE SECTION
SECTION 10.1 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
ordinance:
(a) Apartment shall mean a self-contained unit with private bath and cooking facilities.
(b) Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less
than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
(c) Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
(d) Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as
hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
(e) Dwelling Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
(f) Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents and other
pests.
(g) Garbage shall mean the vegetable and animal waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
(h) Habitable Room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet,
compartments, laundries pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and
storage spaces.
(i) Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents, or other pests.
(j) Multiple Dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
(k) Occupant shall mean any person over 1 year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or eating
in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or morning unit.
(l) Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
(m) Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, who
(1) shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof or who
(2) shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the
estate of the owner.
(n) Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer, or gas lines.
(o) Rooming House shall mean any building or portion of a building in which sleeping
accommodations not constituting an apartment are furnished at a fee for four or more
persons ordinarily renting such accommodations at a specified rate for a specified
time, and occupying the premises as a permanent place of abode rather than on a
transient basis for a short term period of occupancy.
(p) Rooming Units shall mean any room or group of rooms to be used for living or
sleeping, but not for cooking purposes.
(q) Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke,
and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, etc.
(r) Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of, the
owner or operator.
(s) Temporary Housing shall mean any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground,
to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30
consecutive days.
(t) Meaning of Certain Words. Whenever the words Adwelling@, Adwelling
unit@,@premises@, are used in this ordinance, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words Aor any part thereof@.
SECTION 10.2
The Housing Inspector and his designated agents are hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises. All persons residing within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon shall permit
the Housing Inspector or his designated agents to enter upon premises owned or occupied by then
for the purpose of making such inspections during regular business hours or weekdays.
SECTION 10.3 ENFORCEMENT
(a) Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Article, he shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall be in
writing, stating the reasons for its issuance. It shall state a reasonable time for the performance of
any act it requires and shall be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or
upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this State.
(b) Said notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. Failure to comply with the requirements of such notice shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance.
(c) Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Failure to comply with the requirements of such order shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 10.4 MINIMUM BASIC STANDARDS
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system.
(b) Every dwelling unit shall contain a toilet room which affords privacy to a person within
said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system. The
toilet cannot be within a room intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or
eating purposes.
(c) Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person
within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly
connected to a water and sewer system.
(d) Every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, and bathtub or shower shall be properly
connected with hot and cold water lines.
(e) Every dwelling shall have water-heating facilities which are properly installed and
connected with the hot water lines required under the preceding paragraph, and are
capable of heating water to such temperature as to permit adequate amount of water
to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, tub or shower at a
temperature of not less than 120oFahrenheit.
(f) The occupants of every dwelling unit shall supply adequate rubbish storage facilities,
adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers.
(g) Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and
open space at ground level.
(h) The windows, doors and other openings to external air shall be equipped with adequate
springs or other appliances so attached or arranged as to prevent the ingress of files,
mosquitoes and other winged insects to the interior from April 15 to November 15 of
each year and as to prevent the ingress of rodents to the interior.
(i) No cellar space shall be used for human habitation.
SECTION 10.5 MINIMUM LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING STANDARDS
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or sky light facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum total window area for every habitable room shall be at least
ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of
structures are located less than 3 feet from the window and extend to a level above
that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to
the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window is the sky light type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such sky light shall equal at least 12 % of the total
floor area of such room.
(b) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or sky light which can easily be
opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of
openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the
minimum window area size or minimum sky light type window size, as required in
the previous paragraph, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the Building Inspector.
(c) Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for applicable rooms contained in the previous paragraph,
except that no window or sky light shall be required in adequately ventilated systems
which are kept in continuous operation and approved by the Building Inspector.
(d) Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained
in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit
located therein to a temperature of at least 70oFahrenheit, at a distance of 3 feet above
the floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions.
(e) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing 5 or more
dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in
structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than 4
dwelling units, may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full time
lighting.
SECTION 10.6 MINIMUM SAFETY AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Every floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weather-tight, water-tight, and
rodent-proof; and shall be kept in reasonably sound working condition and good
repair.
(b) Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(c) Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with electricity and have at least two electric
outlets in each habitable room. Electric wiring and fixtures shall be properly installed
and maintained in safe working condition.
(d) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and
obstructions.
(e) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this
ordinance shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and
effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
(f) No owner shall occupy or let to another occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is
clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy conforming with the requirements of this
ordinance.
(g) Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor shall be constructed
and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
SECTION 10.7 MINIMUM SPACE AND USE REQUIREMENTS
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet floor space for the first
occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every
additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
(b) In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain
at least 50 square feet of floor space per each occupant thereof.
(c) No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such
room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet intended for use by
occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room or a bathroom or closet compartment; nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping
room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
(d) At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height
of at least 7 feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is
less than 5 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total
floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof.
(e) No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface
run-off water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total of the window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum
window area sizes required under Section 10.5.
(3) The clear inner height is at least 7 feet and no pipes and beams are below 6 feet
from lower level.
SECTION 10.8 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
(a) Every occupant of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public area
of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(b) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he
occupies and controls.
(c) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean
and sanitary manner.
(d) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any
other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary
manner.
(e) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Whenever infestation is
caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonably
insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(f) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the
proper use and operation thereof.
(g) Every owner or operator of a building, who permits to be occupied any dwelling unit, or
rooming unit herein under an agreement, express or implied, to the occupants thereof,
shall supply heat adequate to maintain therein from September 15 through May 30 of
the following year, a minimum inside temperature of 70oFahrenheit at 3 feet above
floor level based on outside design temperature in all habitable rooms, bathrooms,
shower rooms, and toilet rooms or compartments, between the hours of 6:30 A.M. and
11:00 P.M. and not less than 60oFahrenheit between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:30
A.M. in all such rooms. Provisions of this section shall not apply where the failure to
maintain minimum requirements is caused by a general shortage of fuel, neglect, or
malicious act to the occupant, necessary repairs or alteration, or any cause beyond the
control of the owner or occupant.
SECTION 10.9 ROOMING HOUSES
(a) No persons shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another for
occupancy any rooming house, except in compliance with provisions of every section
of this Article, except the provisions of Section 10.4, paragraphs (a) through (g) and
all parts of Section 10.8.
(b) No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming house permit
issued by the Housing Inspector in the name of the operator and for the specific
dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the City Clerk for such permit
which shall be issued by the Building Inspector upon inspection and upon compliance
by the operator with the applicable provisions of this ordinance and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The annual fee for such permit shall be $2.00
per sleeping room.
Each permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all
times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall
give notice in writing to the Housing Inspector within twenty-four hours after having
sold, transferred, or otherwise disposed of ownership or interest in or control of any
rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming permit
shall expire on January 1 of the year following the year of issuance unless sooner
suspended or
revoked as hereinafter provided. Permits not renewed by January 31 of each year shall
be charged a penalty of $1.00 per month for each month overdue.
(c) Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house has been denied
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals
under the procedure set out in this Article.
(d) Whenever the inspection of any rooming house indicates that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of any provision of this ordinance or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto or of any code previously or subsequently adopted
by this Council, the Inspector shall give notice in writing to the operator of such
rooming house that unless conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period, the operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Housing Inspector shall reinspect such rooming house and if he finds that
such conditions and practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to
the operator that the operator's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of
suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such rooming house and
no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
(e) Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended, or who has
received notice from the Housing Inspector that his permit is to be suspended unless
existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are corrected, may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals referred to herein;
provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within 30 days following the day on
which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been
automatically revoked.
(f) At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly
connected to a sewer and water system approved by the Housing Inspector and in good
working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing
within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they
share the use of said facilities. Provided it is a rooming house where rooms are let only
to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 2 of the required number
of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be
reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval
of the Housing Inspector.
(g) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
(h) Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and
open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the State of Illinois and
ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(i) The owner or operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and the maintenance of a sanitary
condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he shall further be responsible
for the
sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is
leased or occupied by the operator.
(j) Every provision of this ordinance which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to
hotels and motels except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict
with the laws of the State of Illinois or with the lawful regulations of any State Board or
Agency.
(k) The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linens and towels
therein at least once every week and prior to the letting of any room to an occupant. The
operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary manner.
SECTION 10.10 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLING AND PROCEDURE FOR
PROSCRIPTION
The designation of dwelling or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the
procedures for the proscription and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be
carried out in compliance with the following requirements:
(a) Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following
defects shall be proscribed as unfit for human habitation or required to be brought up
to standards of this Article and shall be so designated and placarded by the Housing
Inspector or his designated agents.
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin
infested that it creates a serious hazard to health or safety of the occupants or to
the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to
protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(3) One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or
otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(b) Any dwelling or dwelling unit proscribed as unfit for human habitation, and so
designated and placarded shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the
Housing Inspector. Failure to comply with such vacation order shall be deemed a
violation of this ordinance.
(c) No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been proscribed and placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is
secured from and such placard is removed by the Housing Inspector. The Housing
Inspector shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
proscription and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
(d) No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which
has been proscribed as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as
provided in the preceding paragraph.
SECTION 10.11 VIOLATIONS
Any person who maintains as occupant or owner any dwelling, dwelling unit or premises
which does not comply with the requirements of Section 10.4 through 10.9 of this Article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this Article.
SECTION 10.12 APPEALS
An appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board of
bureau of the City from any decision of the Housing Inspector under the terms of this Article. An
appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a written notice to appeal within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision appealed. Such notice shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals
created under the terms of Section 21.24 of this Revised Code of Ordinances and shall specify
the grounds of appeal, except that in the case of a building or structure which in the opinion of
the Building Inspector, Housing Inspector, Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Inspector, may in his
order limit the time for appeal to a shorter period. The Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit
to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken
when notified of the appeal by the Board of Appeals.
The term ABuilding Inspector@ as it is used within Article 10 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances shall be and is hereby amended to read AHousing Inspector@ in any other place in
which it appears in Article 10.
ARTICLE 10A
HOUSING CODE
FOR NON-OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLINGS
10-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT:
It is hereby found and declared there exists in the City, premises used, designed, or
intended for human habitation which are, or may become in the near future, substandard
with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, and further that such conditions
together with inadequate provisions for light and air, insufficient protection against fire
hazards, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding constitute a
menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of its citizens. It is
further found and declared that the existence of such conditions, factors, or characteristics
has created and will continue to create, slum and blighted areas requiring large scale
clearance, and further that in the absence of corrective measures, such areas will
experience a deterioration of social values, a curtailment of investment and tax revenues,
and an impairment of economic values. It is further found and declared that the
establishment and maintenance of minimum housing standards are essential to the
prevention of blight and decay and the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
10-2: PURPOSE OF HOUSING CODE:
The intent and purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Mt. Vernon. These general objectives
include, among others, the following specific purposes:
1. To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the City of
Mt. Vernon.
2. To provide minimum standards for heating and sanitary equipment
necessary to the health and safety of occupants of buildings.
3. To provide facilities for light and ventilation, necessary to health and safety
of occupants of buildings.
4. To prevent additions or alterations to existing dwellings that would be
injurious to the life, health, safety or general welfare of the occupants of
such dwellings or neighboring properties.
5. To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential
buildings to prohibit unsuitable residential housing.
6. To preserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City.
7. To fix responsibility and duties of owners, operators, agents, and occupants
of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings, and
rooming units unfit for human habitation.
8. To fix penalties for the violations declared to be remedial and essential to
the public interest.
It is the intent of this Article that each provision of this Article shall be liberally
constructed to effectuate the purposes as stated above.
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City
of Mt. Vernon or its officers or agents relating to the removal or demolition of any
buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary or the abatement of any
nuisance.
10-3: APPLICABILITY TO ALL DWELLINGS:
Each building or premises, or any part thereof, used, designed, or intended to be used for
any non-owner occupied dwelling purpose, except temporary housing, shall, subject to the
provisions of Section 10-11 C and D, comply with the provisions of this Article,
irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and
irrespective of any permit or license which shall have been issued for that construction or
repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or of the facilities prior
to the effective date of this Article. This Article establishes minimum standards (except as
provided in section 10-4 of this Article) required to be met at all times for the use of
dwellings, building facilities, and equipment.
10-4: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or regulation of
the City regulating existing buildings, the provision which established the most restrictive
standard shall prevail, except that the provisions of this Article 10A shall, with regard to
non-owner occupied dwellings, supersede the provisions of Article 10.
10-5: CONFLICTS OF PERMITS AND LICENSES:
All departments and officials of the City having the duty or authority to issue permits or
licenses in regard to the construction, installation, or repair of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming houses, rooming units, multiple dwellings, equipment, or facilities, shall conform
to the provisions of this Article and no such permit or license shall be issued, if such
would be in conflict with this Article. Any permit not authorized to be issued shall be
subject to revocation.
10-6: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached structure which is not used and not intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on the same
premises as a principal structure and the use of such accessory structure is incidental to the
principal structure.
APPROVED: Approved by the Building and Inspection Department of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partly underground by having more than half its
clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM: Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and
which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof to
form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals or property. The word "building"
shall be construed, when used herein as though followed by the words "or parts thereof"
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used, designed, or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that "temporary housing" as
hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a
single habitable unit with facilities which are used, designed, or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, working, and eating.
EGRESS: Arrangements and openings to assure a safe means of exit from buildings.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: Open spaces on the premises and vacant open space on
adjacent premises.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by
eliminating their harborages; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve
as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and
legal pest elimination methods approved by the proper authorities.
FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area of habitable space.
GARBAGE: Anything that may decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health,
including, but not limited to waste products resulting from the handling, storage,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level. In case walls are
parallel to and within five feet (5') of a sidewalk, the said finished ground level shall be
measured at the sidewalk.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, and utility rooms of less than fifty (50)
square feet, foyers, or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and
workshops, hobby and recreation areas below ground level or in attics.
HOT WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F) at the outlet.
HOTEL AND MOTEL: See definition of Rooming House.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, multiple dwelling, rooming unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin and other
pests.
KITCHEN: Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or any area of a
room within three feet (3') of such equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove
or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cold storage of food, cabinets
or shelves for storage or cooking equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food
preparation.
LEAD BEARING SUBSTANCE: Any paint, plaster, or other material or substance
containing more than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) by weight (calculated as lead metal)
in the total nonvolatile content of liquid paints, or in the dried film of paint previously
applied.
LET: Any lease, agreement or arrangement permitting occupancy or use; and also any
contract for deed, or agreement to purchase, or unrecorded deed permitting occupancy or
use of a dwelling unit which is not actually receiving the General Homestead Exemption
from taxation under 35 ILCS 200/15-175 during said occupancy or use.
MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS: Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling units",
"rooming units", "premises", "structure" are used in this Article, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". Words used in the singular
include the plural, and in the plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the
feminine and the feminine the masculine.
MOBILE HOMES: A factory-assembled, movable dwelling designed and constructed to
be towed on its chassis, comprised of frame wheels, to be used without a permanent
foundation, and distinguishable from other types of dwellings in that the standards to
which it is built include provisions for its mobility on that chassis as a vehicle. Removal of
the tongue, wheels, or hitch, or placement of the structure upon a permanent foundation
shall not be considered in determining whether or not a structure is a mobile home.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling units
and/or rooming units.
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming units.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple dwelling, hotel,
motel or rooming house, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for
occupancy.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS: Means a temperature 15° F (-9.4°C) above the
lowest recorded temperature in the City for the prior 10-year period.
OWNER: Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial interest in
the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a reversionary leasehold interest in
the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a capacity to manage the subject
real estate or any improvements thereto pursuant to an Order of Court, power, or
agreement.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING: All of the following facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning
equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar equipment and fixtures, and the installation
thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
POTABLE WATER: Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any buildings or structures thereon.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewerage system operated by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and
available for public use.
RENTAL DWELLING: Any dwelling or dwelling unit which is occupied pursuant to a
lease or other agreement or arrangement including a contract for deed or agreement to
purchase or unrecorded deed permitting occupancy in exchange for any consideration.
Rental Dwelling does not include a dwelling unit which is occupied by a named grantee
within a deed recorded within the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, Jefferson County,
Illinois.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling or part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming
units in which space is rented by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who
are not the husband and wife, father or mother, son or daughter, grandparent or grandchild,
brother or sister, uncle or aunt, nephew or niece or cousin of the first degree, of the owner
or operator.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms intended to be used for living or sleeping
but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage.
SEWAGE: Waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry
machine, or the water carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or machine.
STRUCTURE: A combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming
construction, including buildings. The word structure shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or part or parts thereof".
SUPPLIED FACILITIES: Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the
control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, recreational vehicle as defined by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or, to any utility
system for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days or 30 days during any calendar year.
VENTILATION: Supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or
mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL: Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks with wind-driven devices.
VERMIN HARBORAGE: Any place where rats, mice, raccoon, opossum, groundhog,
stray cats or other animals that are pests can live, nest or find shelter.
VERMIN PROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of
vermin to or from a given space or building, or gaining access to food, water, or vermin
harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in foundations,
basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk
gratings, sidewalk openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by vermin
by climbing, burrowing or other methods, by the use of materials impervious to vermin
gnawing and other methods approved by the appropriate authority.
10-7: STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit which does not comply with the following requirements;
A. Free From Hazards: Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which might
create a health, accident or fire hazard, or which might endanger the public welfare,
including but not limited to holes and excavations, sharp protrusions, barbed wire (unless 6
feet above the ground atop a chain link, solid, or other approved fence), sheer
embankments, inoperative or abandoned vehicles or machinery, unused household goods
or appliances and other objects or materials. Walks, steps, and driveways that contain
holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired, or replaced as necessary. Open wells,
cesspools, septic tanks or cisterns shall be kept securely closed if in approved use. If they
are not in approved use, they must be filled with natural soil. No unlicensed, inoperable,
junk, or nuisance motor vehicle nor other nuisance as defined within Article 13 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances shall be permitted on the premises.
B. Free From Rubbish And Garbage: Disposal of rubbish and other refuse shall be done in
accordance with all regulations of the City. The property shall be free of accumulating
rubbish and garbage.
C. Fences: All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/or all fences
erected by an occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood,
masonry or other material. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition. Wood
materials, other than decay-resistant wood, shall be protected against decay by use of paint
or other preservative. Any paint or other protective material must be maintained free of
deterioration, in sound condition and good repair. The permissible height and other
characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances and
regulations of the City and State. Wherever any egress from the dwelling opens into the
fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any public way adjacent
thereto.
D. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or
tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, and be
maintained in good repair and free from insects and rats, or such structures shall be
removed from the premises. The exterior of such structure shall be made weather resistant
through the use of decay-resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. Paint
or other protective coverings must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound condition
and good repair.
E. Sewage: Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer system or if otherwise
permitted by the Revised Code of Ordinances into an approved septic tank. Discharge of
inadequately treated sewage shall not be permitted upon the surface of the ground or into
any natural or artificial drainage way.
F. Noxious Weeds: Exterior property areas shall be kept free of all weeds which are
detrimental to the public health, including, but not limited to ragweed, poison ivy, poison
oak, and poison sumac.
G. Insect And Vermin Harborage: Where insect or vermin breeding areas, harborage, or
infestation exist, the same shall be eliminated.
H. Storage Of Materials: In the event that occupancy usages would result in stacking or
piling materials, the materials shall be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a vermin
harborage area. Such shall be accomplished by orderly stacking and elevating so that there
will be at least a twelve inch (12") opening between the material and the ground level. No
stacking or piling of material shall take place against the exterior walls of the structure.
I. Water shall not be permitted to accumulate or stand on the premises so as to create any
stagnant condition, mosquito breeding ground, offensive smell, unsightly condition, unsafe
or hazardous condition or other condition potentially harmful to the public health or safety.
J. All outdoor spas, and hot tubs must be securely enclosed in a solid, chain link, or other
approved fence not less than four feet in height with a self closing and self latching gate or
locked gate. Fencing or barriers for swimming pools and wading pools shall comply with
the applicable building and residential Codes adopted by the City.
10-8: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING
UNITS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Foundations, Floors, Walls, Ceilings And Roofs: Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling
and roof shall be reasonably weather tight, and vermin proof, shall afford privacy, and
shall be kept in good repair. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building
at all points; floors shall be free of hazard; every exterior wall shall be free of holes,
breaks, loose or rotting boards and timbers, and any other condition which might admit
vermin, rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls, or the interior spaces of the
dwelling; all exterior surface materials shall be protected from the elements and decay by
paint or other protective covering or treatment, when required to prevent deterioration.
Any paint or other protective materials must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound
condition and good repair. Every interior wall shall be free of holes and large cracks, loose
plaster and other structural material. The roof shall be tight and shall have no defects
which admit rain. All openings for pipes, conduits and other utility services accessible to
vermin shall be closed solidly for the full thickness of the wall, floor, roof, etc., with an
approved vermin proof material or fitted with a collar or shield, securely fastened to the
wall or floor, of not less than twenty four (24) gauge galvanized sheet metal or other
approved materials, extending at least three inches (3") beyond all sides of the opening.
B. Lead Bearing Substances: No person shall sell, use, or apply any substance in which the
total nonvolatile ingredients contain more than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) of lead, by
weight, calculated as metallic lead in or upon any exposed interior surface of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, or temporary housing, nor in or upon any fixture or other object used,
installed or located in or upon such surface or intended to be so used, installed or located.
Upon notice from the City of the existence of any such substances herein prohibited, it
shall be the responsibility for the owner to remove or to securely and permanently cover
such surfaces within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of such notice, unless the Building
Inspector shall, for good cause shown, grant in writing an additional period of time to
complete such removal or covering.
C. Windows, Exterior Doors And Basement Hatchways: Every window, exterior door, and
basement hatchway shall be reasonably watertight, and vermin proof; and shall be kept in
good working condition and good repair. Every opening located at or within one and onehalf
feet (1 1/2') of ground level which might provide an entry for vermin, shall be
adequately covered with screening or some other device so as to effectively prevent the
entrance of vermin, but so as not to prevent emergency egress where such egress is
appropriate.
D. Stairs And Porches: Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
to any of the foregoing shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal
use may cause to be placed thereon, and all of the aforesaid shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers
and uniform treads.
E. Handrails: Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing five
(5) risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and balusters spaced no more than
six inches (6") apart shall be provided. Porches and balconies located more than three feet
(3') higher than the adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective handrails thirty
inches (30") to thirty six inches (36") high and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no more
than six inches (6") apart shall also be provided.
F. Chimneys, Flues, And Vents: All chimneys, flues, and vents on every structure used for
human habitation shall be structurally sound, free from defects and capable of performing
the function for which the same are designed or used. Each shall have sufficient draft to
develop the rated output of the equipment. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports
shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke tight and capable of withstanding the action of
flue gasses or shall be rendered functionally unusable by interior fireplaces and all other
heating facilities as provided within the Fire Code of the City.
G. Rubbish And Garbage: The interior of every structure used for human habitation shall
be maintained free from rubbish and garbage that might become a health, accident or fire
hazard.
10-9: STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit intended for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
A. Kitchen Equipment: A room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared
and/or cooked, such room or portion thereof having adequate circulation area and being
equipped with the following minimum equipment:
1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and
sewerage system in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the City and the
statutes of the State.
2. Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking equipment
and utensils and of food that does not under ordinary summer conditions require
refrigeration for safekeeping;
3. A counter or table for food preparation.
All of the foregoing equipment shall be of sufficient size and design so as to be
adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling or dwelling unit and all
shall have surfaces that are easily cleaned and that will not impart any toxic or
harmful effect to food.
4. A stove or similar device for cooking food and a refrigerator or similar device for
the safe storage of food at temperatures less than fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F)
but more than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) under ordinary maximum
summer conditions must be provided by the owner or occupant. All must be
properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient
operation. No stove, refrigerator or similar devices aforesaid need be installed,
however, in any dwelling unit that is not occupied if sufficient space and adequate
connections are provided so that the same may be installed immediately by owner
or occupant upon any occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit.
B. Toilet Facilities: A room affording privacy to a person within said room and which is
equipped with a flush water closet and lavatory basin, both in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewage system in accordance with the applicable
ordinances to the City and the statutes of the State.
C. Bathing Facilities: A room which affords privacy to a person within said room and
which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly
connected to a water and sewage system in accordance with the applicable ordinances of
the City and Illinois statutes. The room containing the toilet facilities required by
subsection B above and the room containing the bathing facilities required by the
provisions of this subsection may be one and the same room.
D. Water Supply: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under
the provisions of this Article shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water
lines.
E. Water Heating Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which
are properly installed and connected and are capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, tub or shower at a temperature of not less that one hundred
twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
F. Garbage Storage Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage
containers. Garbage shall be placed in containers with tightly fitted lids. Containers shall
not be located in such a manner to be a visually offensive, health threat, or nuisance due to
the blowing of debris from containers by the wind, odors from the container or for any
other reason. Containers, except on the day of pick-up shall be situated within an enclosed
building or shall be situated immediately adjacent to a building; containers shall not be
placed or situated adjacent to any street or alley or within any yard, except as herein
provided. In the event, a dumpster or other community container is provided for the
temporary storage of garbage prior to disposal such dumpster or community container
shall be enclosed within a building, or shall be enclosed by a solid, six foot screening
device such as a fence or wall so as to be completely concealed on three sides, with only
one side open for accessibility by a garbage collection crew.
G. Rubbish Storage: No rubbish shall be stored or placed upon any premises or within
dwelling unit, except rubbish may be temporarily placed within containers with tightly
fitted lids or inside an accessory structure in a manner such that the rubbish creates no
nuisance, fire hazard, vermin harborage, or other danger.
H. Egress Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have at least one unobstructed means
of egress that leads to a public street or alley either directly or through a court or yard.
Every dwelling unit located on the second or higher story shall have at least two such
exits. An emergency escape ladder placed upon each second or higher story shall be
considered an acceptable second means of egress as long as it is UL Underwriters
Laboratory listed and approved; the requirement to provide an approved emergency escape
ladder shall be the sole responsibility of the owner unless the written lease of the owner
with a tenant requires the tenant to obtain and place said approved emergency escape
ladder during the entire term of the lease; in the event it is the tenant’s primary
responsibility to provide and place an emergency escape ladder, then said emergency
escape ladder shall be obtained and placed within 48 hours of the tenant entering into
possession of the dwelling unit. The following language within a lease shall be sufficient
to place primary responsibility upon the tenant to provide an emergency escape ladder:
“Within 48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises, tenant shall
place, and shall thereafter maintain during the lease term, an approved emergency escape
ladder upon each second or higher story floor of the leased premises”. Passage to a
dwelling unit’s exit(s) shall not lead through any other dwelling unit or through a space
that might reasonably be locked by anyone who is not a member of the household.
Provided, that dual egress shall not be required in structures that are of fireproof condition
as defined in the adopted Building Codes of the City. Any basement bedroom shall have a
minimum of two exits, if one exit is a window it shall be at least 5.7 square feet of clear
opening and no more than 44 inches above the floor.
I. Medication and Poison Storage Facilities: Each dwelling unit shall provide for the safe
storage of medications and household poisons. Each cabinet or storage facility used for
medications or household poisons shall have an improved child resistant locking device if
any part of the storage area of said cabinet or storage facility is less than four feet in height
above the floor. The requirement to provide approved child resistant locking devices shall
be the sole responsibility of the owner unless the written lease of the owner with a tenant
requires the tenant to obtain, install and maintain said approved child resistant locking
devices during the entire term of the lease; in the event it is the tenant’s primary
responsibility to provide approved child resistant locking devices, then said locking
devices shall be installed within 48 hours of the tenant entering into possession of the
dwelling unit. The following language within a lease shall be sufficient to place the
primary responsibility upon the tenant to provide child resistant locking devices: “Within
48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises, tenant shall install, and
shall thereafter maintain during the lease term, approved child resistant locking devices for
each cabinet or storage facility used for storage of medications or household poisons
having any storage area less than four feet in height above the floor.”
J. Locks: No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling units
unless all exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functional
locking devices, and are further made secure as set forth in Section 10-13 of this Article.
K. Smoke Detectors: All dwellings and dwelling units, shall have an operable smoke
detector in the immediate area of the bedrooms. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped
with a properly installed smoke alarm on each story of the dwelling unit and within fifteen
feet of each sleeping room area, which detector shall comply with the applicable Codes of
the City and with the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
L. Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a properly
installed carbon monoxide detector on each story of the dwelling unit and within fifteen
feet of each sleeping room area, which detector shall comply with the applicable articles of
the City and with the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
M. Plumbing: Every dwelling unit shall have properly installed sewer lines, water lines,
plumbing fixtures, vents, and drains all of which shall be maintained free from
obstructions, leaks, or defects so as to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards.
All plumbing shall comply with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code and the applicable
Ordinances of the City.
N. Stairway and Porches: Every stairway, inside or outside a dwelling, and every porch
shall be kept in a safe condition, free of deterioration, and in sound repair. Every open
stairwell and every flight of stairs and every porch shall comply with the applicable
Building Code of the City.
10-10: STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit intended for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Lighting: Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
outdoors or artificial lighting capable of producing at least an average illumination of six
(6) foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of thirty inches (30") above the floor
(3 foot-candles minimum requirement in bathrooms), excepting that such rooms that are
connected to another room or area and such other room or area is used only seasonally
(such as, but not limited to, porches) and adequate daylight enters the said habitable room
through the interconnection, are not required to have such windows or skylights. The
minimum total window or skylight area shall be measured between stops and shall be, for
every room where required, equal to at least eight percent (8%) of the floor area of the
room in which located. No window shall be deemed to be facing outdoors if any lightobstructing
structures are located less than three feet (3') from such window and extend to
a level above that of the ceiling of the room in which such window is located, and the
same shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Every public hall and every stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted
by natural or electrical light at all times, so as to provide in all parts thereof at least ten
(10) foot-candles of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and every stairway in
structures containing not more than two (2) dwelling units or not more than two (2) rooms
used as rooming units shall comply with the provisions of this subsection relating to
multiple-dwellings, or in the alternative, shall be supplied with conveniently located light
switches controlling an adequate lighting system to be turned on when needed with fulltime
lighting not being required.
B. Ventilation: Every habitable room, excepting those connected to another room or area
that is used only seasonally and adequate ventilation is provided through such
interconnection and further excepting those rooms ventilated by some other approved
device, shall have at least one window or skylight facing outdoors which can be easily
opened, or provided mechanical exhaust of sixty (60) cfm, exhausted to the atmosphere
above the roof line or secured into a vented sofit area and away from openable windows
into which foul air might be blown. The total of openable window or skylight area
required shall be equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor area of the room in which
it is located.
C. Bathroom Ventilation: Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply
with the ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as provided in subsection B of this
Section.
D. Electrical Service: The electrical service within each dwelling, dwelling unit, and
accessory structure shall comply with the applicable electrical, fire, residential, and other
Codes adopted by the City, including but not limited to the following requirements:
Where there is usable electrical service available from power lines which are situated not
more than three hundred feet (300’) from a dwelling, every dwelling unit situated in such
dwelling and all public and common areas of such dwelling shall be supplied with
electrical service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be
maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of
electrical power in a lawful manner and in accordance with applicable Codes. Under no
circumstance shall temporary wiring for electrical service within a dwelling unit or for any
accessory structure be permitted. The minimum capacity of such service and the number of
outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
1. Every habitable room shall have electrical service and outlets and/or fixtures
capable of providing at least three (3) watts per square foot of total floor area. Outlets
should be distributed reasonably evenly around the room. Extension cords may not be used
for more than their UL rated capacity; no extension cord shall be used as a receptacle for
another extension cord.
2. Every habitable room and every non-habitable room used for food preparation
shall have at least one floor-type or one wall-type electrical convenience outlet for each
sixty (60) square feet or fraction thereof total floor area, and in no case less than two (2)
such outlets.
3. Every Bathroom, water closet compartments, kitchen or kitchenette, laundry
room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one ceiling- type or one wall-type
electrical light fixture.
No dwelling shall have less than a 100 amp service. No dwelling or electric service upon
any dwelling premises shall utilize or have knob and tube wiring; upon removal of knob
and tube wiring the entire electric service, outlets, and fixtures shall comply with the
Electrical Code of the City.
E. Heating Facilities: Every dwelling shall have permanent heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition with proper safety
devices, and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein, to a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) at a distance of thirty six
inches (36") above floor level under ordinary winter conditions. Permanent, heating
facilities are not capable of being readily moved around the dwelling and are generally
affixed directly to the building. Examples of permanent heating facilities include but are
not limited to oil, gas, electric and coal furnaces or boilers; electrical heat pumps; wood
furnaces or stoves; electric baseboard heaters, active or passive solar devices; or devices
connected to a district heating system. Permanent heating facilities can be used singly or in
combinations to meet the performance standards contained herein. Any auxiliary heater
shall be UL approved and equipped with automatic shutoff. All auxiliary heaters must be
used in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Auxiliary heaters are intended to
supplement the permanent heating facilities. Auxiliary heating devices include but are not
limited to portable electric space heaters and portable kerosene or oil heaters. The capacity
of auxiliary heaters shall not be counted in determining whether the performance standards
for heating are met in a dwelling.
F. Insect Protection: During that portion of each year between May 1 and October 1, both
dates inclusive, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to
outside space that is used for ventilation and every window and other device with openings
to outside space that is used or capable of being used for ventilation shall have properly
fitted screens having at least sixteen (16) mesh so as to afford protection against
mosquitoes, flies, and other flying insects. Screens must be on premises and available for
inspection from October 2 through April 30, both dates inclusive. Also between May 1 and
October 1 all hinged screen doors shall be equipped with self-closing devices. Provided
however, that if a dwelling unit has fully functioning and operating central air conditioning
which services the entire dwelling unit then the screening requirements herein are not
applicable.
10-11: STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, intended for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Minimum Space In Dwelling Units: The minimum habitable room space of any
dwelling unit shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the
first occupant and not less than an additional one hundred (100) square feet of floor area
for every additional occupant.
B. Minimum Space In Sleeping Rooms: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant shall have a minimum floor area of at least seventy (70) square feet. Every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty
(50) square feet of floor area for each occupant.
C. Access To Bathrooms And Sleeping Rooms: Any dwelling or dwelling unit containing
two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement so as to provide access
to a bathroom or water closet compartment so as to permit persons using each of such
sleeping rooms to have access to a bathroom or water closet compartment without the
necessity of passing through another sleeping room and shall further have such room
arrangement so as to provide access to each sleeping room so as to permit persons using
such sleeping room to have access thereto without the necessity of passing through another
sleeping room or through any bathroom or water closet compartment. Provided however
that if a dwelling, constructed in full compliance with the applicable Codes on the date of
its construction, because of its structural design is noncompliant with the provisions of this
subsection, such nonconformity may continue but shall not be expanded.
D. Height Requirements: At least one-half (1/2) the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet (7'). The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered as a part of the
floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the
minimum permissible occupancy thereof. Provided however that if a dwelling,
constructed in full compliance with the applicable Codes on the date of its construction,
because of its structural design is noncompliant with the provisions of this subsection,
such nonconformity may continue but shall not be expanded.
E. Rooms Below Grade: Basements may be used as dwelling units if they meet the light,
ventilation, heating, egress and all other applicable portions of this Article. No basement
space shall be deemed fit for or used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor
and walls thereof are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and
dampness.
10-12: STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES:
Notwithstanding anything in this Article to the contrary, no person shall operate a rooming
house or occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming house except in compliance
with all applicable provisions of this Article and unless such rooming house complies with
the following requirements:
A. Bathing And Toilet Facilities: At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower, in good working condition and properly connected to sewer and water
system in accordance with the applicable articles and ordinances of the City and the laws
of the State shall be supplied for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a
rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of
said facilities; provided, however, that in the case where rooms are rented only to males,
flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) of the required number of
water closets. Such bathing and toilet facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to
be reasonably accessible from a common hallway or passageway to all persons sharing
such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times. No such facilities as aforesaid that are located in a basement shall be
considered to meet the aforesaid requirements unless the same shall conform to the
provisions of subsection 10-10E of this Article.
B. Bed Linen And Towels: Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or
operator shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall furnish clean
bed linen and towels at least once each week and in any event prior to the renting of any
room to any occupant.
C. Rooming Unit: Every room constituting or being a part of a rooming unit that is
occupied for sleeping purposes shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection B of
this Section, and shall, in addition, contain not less than four (4) square feet of closet space
per occupant.
D. Means Of Egress: Every rooming unit shall have immediate access to not less than two
(2) safe, unobstructed means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet four inches
(6'4") leading to safe and open space at ground level.
E. Maintenance: Every rooming house shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition
and full compliance with those standards set forth in Section 10-8 of this Article and each
subsections thereof of Sections 10-1 through 10-16 of this Article.
F. Hotels And Motels: Every provision of this Article applicable to rooming houses shall
apply equally to hotels and motels, provided, that the provisions of subsection 10-10 A
entitled "Lighting" does not apply to hotels and motels if said hotels and motels meet the
requirements of subsection 10-10 B entitled "Ventilation".
G. Mobile Homes: Every provision of this Article applicable to rooming houses shall
apply equally to mobile homes used for rooming houses.
H. Hot Air Heating System Returns: Where hot air heating systems are used, no return air
shall be circulated directly from one unit or sleeping room to another.
10-13: STANDARDS FOR SECURITY:
A. Scope: All dwelling units within the City shall meet the minimum requirements as set
forth herein except structures which, although providing sleeping accommodations, are
primarily used for:
1. Medical care or other treatment of individuals suffering from physical or mental
illness, disease or infirmity;
2. The care of infants, convalescents, or the elderly;
3. Penal or corrective purposes; and
4. Hotel or motel purposes and which provide temporary sleeping accommodations
for hire used by transients with or without meals.
B. Alternative Materials And Methods Of Construction: The provisions of this section are
not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of structural design or analysis
not specifically prescribed herein, provided any such alternate is substantiated by suitable
evidence.
C. Approval Of Alternate Material Or Method: The Building and Inspection Department
may approve any such alternate material or method provided the proposed design is
satisfactory and the material or method of work offered is, for the purposes intended, at
least equivalent of that prescribed in this section.
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CYLINDER: The part of a lock set that has an entrance for the key which thereby activates
the locking mechanism.
CYLINDER GUARD: A hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock
cylinder or other device which is so fastened as to protect the cylinder from wrenching,
prying, cutting or pulling at attack tools.
DEAD BOLT LOCK: A locking device with a bolt that has no automatic spring action and
which is operated manually by a key cylinder on its exterior side and by a knob, thumb
turn, or lever on its interior side, and a bolt that is positively held fast when in the
projected position (also known as deadlock).
DORMITORY: A building, not open to transients, where lodging is provided for ten (10)
or more non-family persons, and no kitchen facilities other than one central kitchen
facility, are provided any dwelling unit occupied by persons other than management
personnel.
FLUSH OR SURFACE BOLT: A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that is
attached to the top and bottom and/or side of the door and engages in the frame and/or
base of the door.
HOOK OR EXPANDING BOLT: A dead bolt lock in which the bolt or bolts interlock
with the strike plate into which the bolt or bolts are projected.
LOCKING DEVICE: A mechanical implement or combination of mechanical implements
attached to the door, window or other access points of a building or structure which is
designed to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the building or structure through
the door, window, or other access point on which the locking device is activated.
SINGLE CYLINDER LOCKING DEVICE: A bolt that is activated on its exterior side by
a key and on its interior side by a knob, thumb turn, lever or similar mechanism.
THROW: The outward movement of a bolt or spring bolt which is measured by the
distance which such a bolt travels, i.e., when the bolt or spring bolt is moved from the
open position to the locked position (extended), it is said to have been thrown.
E. Security Standards: Except as otherwise herein provided, exterior doors serving as the
required means of egress to the exterior of a multiple dwelling, dormitory and rooming
house shall comply with the provisions of the edition of the International Building Code
which has been adopted by the City of Mt. Vernon. All other doors to individual dwelling
units shall comply with the following provisions:
1. Doors to individual dwelling units shall meet the following security standards:
a. Single doors shall be secured with a single cylinder locking device. In
addition, if requested in writing by a tenant, each single door shall also be
secured with a deadbolt lock having a minimum throw of one inch or a hook
or an expanding bolt with a throw of 3/4 inch provided that the type of lock
shall be at the election of the landlord with the cost of the lock and
installation thereof to be paid by the tenant and provided that upon
installation of such additional locking device the locking device shall
become the property of the landlord and shall thereafter remain installed and
be maintained by the landlord so that it is functional. All locking devices
required herein shall have bolts that contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt.
b. On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type lock
required for single doors in subsection E1a of this section. The inactive leaf
shall be equipped with flush or surface bolts protected by hardened material
with a minimum throw of three-fourths inch (3/4") at the head and foot of
the door. Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf and
complying with subsection E1a of this section and the requirements herein,
may be used in lieu of flush bolts.
c. Exterior doors to individual dwelling units shall have rabbeted jambs
which are reinforced at the point where the required lock engages the jamb.
d. Firmly secured metal strike plates are required on the jambs of all doors
and are to be located at the point when the required lock engages the jamb.
e. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they bear
any numbers or letter which would reveal a combination from which the key
or similar control device could be fashioned or selected which could
deactivate the locking device.
2. All patio type of sliding doors opening onto patios or balconies which are
accessible from the outside shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Patio type or sliding doors shall not be used or installed as exterior doors
for the main entrance of any individual dwelling unit.
b. All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of the door
sliding on the inside of the fixed portion of the door, except as provided in
subsection B of this section.
c. Dead bolt locks shall be provided on all single sliding patio doors. If the
lock is operable from the outside, it shall be activated by a key utilizing a
cylinder of pin tumbler construction. Mounting screws for the lock case shall
be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be of hardened steel or
have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable of withstanding a force of
three hundred (300) pounds applied in any direction. The lock bolt shall
engage the strike sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged by any possible
movement of the door within the space or clearances provided for
installation and operation. The strike area shall be reinforced to maintain
effectiveness of bolt strength. In lieu of providing a dead bolt lock that
meets the requirements of this subsection, a single sliding patio door may
utilize a removable physical barrier (such as a rod or pipe of substantial
construction) of suitable and functional length that is manually placed within
the tract of the sliding patio door to securely block the patio door closed.
d. Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet the
locking requirements as specified in subsection E1b of this section.
e. Alternate methods for securing doors with movable sections of the door
sliding on the outside of the fixed portion of the door must be approved by
the building official.
3. Any exterior door and any garage door or other inside door leading to the
common areas of any multiple dwelling, dormitory or rooming house or to a garage
attached to any dwelling unit, which has outside hinge pins shall be secured by a
minimum of two (2) safety hinge studs or hinges having non-removable hinge pins,
one hinge above and one below the center of any locking device.
4. Parking facilities either under or within the confines of the perimeter walls of any
dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling, dormitory, or rooming house which are
equipped with any garage door shall be so equipped that such doors are capable of
being locked. Specific locking devices to be employed shall be of one or more of
the following types: a) throw bolt or flush bolt, b) dead bolt, c) cylinder type lock,
d) padlock and hasp, e) or an electronic power operated mechanism with automatic
locking capabilities. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or
hasp and shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of hardened
steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when the door is closed and
the padlock is activated.
5. All exterior windows other than fixed windows or those designed not to be
opened, less than twelve feet (12') off ground level or any other accessible exterior
level shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it cannot
be lifted from the frame.
b. All windows shall be equipped with a locking device which shall be
capable of withstanding a force of one hundred fifty (150) pounds applied in
any direction, and all locks should fully engage.
10-14: PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this Section to establish primary responsibilities in certain areas
of compliance with the provisions of this Article. Each owner or occupant shall have
responsibility for compliance with this Article and be subject to enforcement,
notwithstanding any agreement assigning primary or other responsibility to the other or to
a third person.
B. Primary Responsibilities Of Occupants: Every occupant above the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be primarily responsible as to that part of any building, structure or premises
over which such occupant shall have a right to possession or control, for the following:
1. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a
vermin harborage.
3. To dispose of rubbish, garbage and other material in the manner provided by City
ordinances.
4. The extermination of insects and vermin, after twenty one (21) continuous days
of occupancy where: a) the dwelling contains only one dwelling unit, or only the
occupant's dwelling unit of a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is
infested, and b) infestation has resulted from some cause other than the failure of an
owner to maintain the dwelling in a vermin proof or reasonably insect proof
condition prior to the commencement of the occupancy.
5. To not do anything to cause intentional interruption or disconnection of any
utility for which the occupant is liable.
6. To maintain and replace required screens after the owner has fulfilled all his
primary responsibilities regarding the same as hereinafter set forth in subsection C
of this Section.
7. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery owned by the
occupant as provided by City ordinance.
C. Primary Responsibilities Of Owners: Every owner shall be responsible as to that part of
any building, structure or premises over which such owner has the right to possession or
control, including but not limited to areas used by the public or used in common by
occupants of two (2) or more dwelling units, as hereinafter set forth (such responsibilities
shall likewise apply to any other part of a building, structure or premises where the content
of any such responsibility so implies) as follows:
1. To provide and install all required screens once each calendar year.
2. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
3. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a
vermin harborage.
4. To provide adequate and suitable containers for rubbish, garbage or other waste
materials where the premises in question contains three (3) or more dwelling units.
5. "Vermin proofing" as defined in section 10-6 of this Article.
6. The extermination of insects and vermin in all instances excepting those
instances where the occupant is primarily responsible therefor as herein above
provided in subsection B of this section.
7. To keep and maintain all supplied facilities in good and proper condition and
operation.
8. To provide and maintain in working order a permanent heating system as
specified in subsection 10-10 E of this Article. In structures in which the permanent
heating system supplies heat to two (2) or more dwelling units, or rooming units,
the owner shall be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the standard in
subsection 10-10 E of this Article. Where compliance is not reasonably possible
because of general shortage of fuel or because of some act of an occupant, the
provisions of this subsection shall not apply until such causes have been corrected.
9. To not do anything to cause an intentional interruption or disconnection of any
utility for which an owner is liable.
10. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery not owned by
the current occupants from the premises as provided by City ordinance.
11. To keep and maintain all accessory structures in good and proper condition.
10-15: ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement Officer Duties: The Chief Building Inspector of the City and Inspectors
of the Fire Department or authorized designees of each, are hereby authorized and directed
to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article. This broad responsibility
encompasses, but is not limited to, the following specific duties:
1. To inspect dwellings, accessory structures, and residential premises in
accordance with this Article;
2. To take appropriate actions to correct violations of this Article;
3. To review and issue applications for occupancy permits and temporary
occupancy permits;
4. To maintain up-to-date records of all matters pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this Article;
5. To periodically review the provisions of this Article to determine whether
revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these matters to the
City Manager.
6. To provide information to the general public on matters related to this
Article;
7. To attend the applicable meetings of the City Council, any Court hearings
concerning this Article, and to cooperate with the corporate authorities,
including the City Attorney’s Office;
8. To prepare an occupancy permit application form, inspection checklist, and
Certificate of Occupancy;
9. To make surveys in any area of the City to determine the general condition
of structures used for human habitation, the extent of any deterioration, lack
of facilities and maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, the extent of
overcrowding and land use, and any other matters relating to the provision
and requirements of this Article.
10. To perform such other duties as the corporate authorities may from time to
time prescribe.
B. Inspections: In order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public,
inspectors of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department are hereby
authorized to make exterior and interior inspections of all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming houses, rooming units, hotels, motels, multiple dwellings and premises, when the
same shall appear necessary to determine the condition thereof and the compliance or
noncompliance with the provisions of this Article. Immediate access to and entry to any
such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, hotel, motel, multiple dwelling
or premises, shall be afforded any such inspector in the case of an emergency determined
by the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department to exist. No such access
and entry shall be required, however, unless such inspector shall first identify himself and
request entry; and exhibit his badge or other visual identification to any person entitled to
the same who requests said identification. Every owner, owner's agent, an occupant of a
rental dwelling(s) shall provide access to the rental dwelling(s) as required by section 10-
16 of this Article. If any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit fails or refuses to permit
free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof,
with respect to which an inspection authorized by this Article is sought to be made, the
Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department may petition and obtain an
Administrative Search Warrant as provided within Section 5.8 of Article 5 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances. Whenever inspections of any rental dwelling units are made by the
Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department and there are no violations, a
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued to the property owner or owner's agent and shall
be made available by the owner or the owners' agent to tenants and prospective tenants. If
upon subsequent inspections, violations of this Article are found, the Certificate of
Occupancy shall be surrendered to the City, and if not surrendered it may be revoked.
C. Notice Of Violations: Except as otherwise provided in this Article, in those instances
where the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department shall determine that
there exists a violation of this Article, written notice of such violation shall be given the
person alleged to have committed the violation or to be responsible for the violation. In the
case of rental dwellings, notice of violation shall be given to the owner or the owner's
agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit. Such written notice shall state the
alleged violation and a legal description or local address of the structure in violation. It
shall state that such violation must be corrected within a reasonable time period specified
by the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department based on the nature and
severity of the violation. Such notice may be personally served on the person to whom
addressed or may be sent by first class, registered, or certified mail, to the last known
address of the addressee; such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the
time of the deposit in the mail thereof. Service shall also be made by posting a placard
copy of such notice in a conspicuous place in or about the building, structure or premises
in question. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, notice may be given in any other
manner permitted by law in the service of process in civil cases.
D. Unfit Dwelling Units: In addition to any other rights and powers granted the Building
and Inspection Department and Fire Department under the provisions of this Article, the
Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department may designate and find unfit for
human habitation any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, hotel, motel, rooming unit,
multiple dwelling or premises and may so placard the same, in the manner described in
subsection C of this section upon determining that one or more or all of the following
conditions exist:
1. The building, structure or premises lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation,
heat or other facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
of the public;
2. The building, structure or premises is damaged, decayed, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin infested in such a manner and to such extent as to create a serious hazard to
the health and safety of the occupants or of the public;
3. The building, structure or premises, because of the location thereof, the general
conditions existing, the state of the premises or number of occupants, is so
unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to the health and safety
that it creates a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or of the
public.
E. Notice Of Intent To Vacate: Whenever the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or
multiple dwelling, is unfit for human habitation as provided in Subsection D of this
section, it shall include such findings within the notice of violations provided for in
subsection C of this Section, and it shall also include a statement of its intent to vacate and
placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling, if
compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not been secured.
F. Order To Vacate: Whenever a notice of violation, as provided for under Subsection C of
this Section, has not been complied with the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department may order the dwelling to be vacated. A copy of such notice to vacate shall be
served on the owner, agent, operator or the occupant, as provided in subsection C of this
section.
G. Vacating An Unfit Dwelling: Any dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, or multiple dwelling designated as unfit for human habitation pursuant to Subsection
D of this section and ordered vacated as provided in Subsection G of this section, shall be
vacated within such reasonable time as the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department may specify in the order. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or
multiple dwelling shall again be used for human habitation and the placard removed until
written approval is secured from the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department.
H. Removal Of Placard: No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling which has been
designated as unfit for human habitation.
I. Vacated Dwellings Made Secure: The owner, agent, or operator of any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling shall make such
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling safe and
secure in whatever manner the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department
shall deem necessary. Any vacant building open at a door or window or other unenclosed
opening shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of
this provision.
J. Power To Act In Emergencies: Notwithstanding the notice of violation provisions of this
section, as provided by subsection C of this section, whenever the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department, at any time, shall determine that a violation of this Article
exists and that such violation is of such a nature as to require immediate action to abate a
hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of any
building or structure or of the public, the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department may issue an order citing the violation and ordering the immediate abatement
or removal or correction of such hazard or danger as to the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department appears necessary and proper. Such order may include, but
is not limited to, an order to vacate the building, structure or premises in question. Any
order issued under the provision of this subsection shall be and become effective
immediately upon the issuance thereof. The powers granted by this subsection shall be in
addition to any and all other rights and powers granted by law.
K. Transfer Of Interest In Certain Property: No person having any interest in any property
that is described in any notice of any violation of this Article or any order issued under this
Article shall sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of any such
interest in said property so long as any such violation continues to exist, unless such
person having the right to sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of such interest in said property shall first furnish to the intended purchasee,
transferee, grantee, donee, mortgagee, lessee or other intended recipient of such property
interest a true and exact copy of such notice or order, and concurrently therewith furnish
the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department with the names and
addresses of all such parties.
L. Records: All requests to inspect and/or copy records or documents prepared, maintained
and under the control of the City shall be made in accordance with Illinois Freedom of
Information Act.
10-16: MANDATORY RENTAL DWELLING INSPECTION PROGRAM:
A. Inspection Required: Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall lease, let, or
otherwise permit occupancy of any rental dwelling within the City, unless the rental
dwelling has been inspected by the Building and Inspection Department and Fire
Department and an Occupancy Permit has been issued for the property. Any person who
leases to another any rental dwelling on or before the effective date of this Article may
continue leasing said rental dwelling without an inspection and a Certificate of Occupancy
for a period of one year from the effective date of this Article. In addition, any owner who
converts the usage of an owner occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling during the five year
period subsequent to the effective date of this Article may lease said rental dwelling
without an inspection and a Certificate of Occupancy for a period of one year from date of
conversion of the owner occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling.
B. Inspections Authorized:
1. The Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department are hereby
authorized to conduct inspections of any and all rental dwellings, or units thereof,
within the City to determine compliance with the Revised Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mt. Vernon, including this Article.
2. The employees and agents of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire
Department are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all rental dwellings
within the City. All inspections shall occur at reasonable hours except in emergency
situations where the life, health, and/or safety of any individual is threatened.
C. Frequency, Access For And Notice Of Inspection:
1. All rental dwellings shall be inspected by the employees or agents of the Building
and Inspection Department and Fire Department at least once every three (3) years.
Inspections may occur more frequently provided there is:
a. Reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists within such rental
dwelling conditions which present a threat to the health, safety, welfare or
general comfort of the resident(s) of such rental dwelling; or
b. A complaint lodged by the resident(s) of the rental dwelling to be
inspected; or
c. A request made by a prospective resident accompanied by the consent of
the owner (or owner's agent) of the rental dwelling to be inspected; or
d. A request made by the owner or owner's agent.
2. Every owner or owner's agent of any rental dwelling shall provide access to such
rental dwelling, or any unit thereof, to the employees or agents of the Building and
Inspection Department and Fire Department for purposes of inspecting the rental
dwelling or unit thereof for compliance with all applicable standards and
regulations set forth in Mt. Vernon City Code, as amended. Either the owner, the
owner's agent, or the occupant shall be offered the opportunity to accompany the
inspector during the inspection.
3. Notice shall be given to the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant of the
rental dwelling or unit thereof at least five (5) days in advance of such inspection
except in those situations described in subsection C1a, C1b, and C1d of this
Section.
4. Notice of inspection shall be provided to both the owner or owner's agent and
occupant and may consist of a letter sent by first class mail, personal service,
telephone call, email upon an owner’s or occupant’s request or, for occupants only,
the posting of a door hanger upon the door knob of the rental dwelling or unit
thereof. The form of notice shall given be at the City's sole discretion provided the
form used substantially achieves the purpose of this "notice" requirement. Where a
rental dwelling or unit thereof is occupied by more than one person, notice to one
occupant of each dwelling unit shall be deemed notice to all occupants of a
dwelling unit.
5. Notice of Inspection to which an owner or occupant is entitled may be waived
by said owner or occupant or agent thereof.
D. Identification Of Rental Dwelling And Designation Of Owner's Agent:
1. Any person owning, managing, or supervising any rental dwelling shall within
ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof or within thirty (30) days of assuming
ownership, management or supervision of any rental dwelling, whichever date is
later, inform the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department on a
form approved by the City of such rental dwelling.
2. Every owner of any rental dwelling, or unit thereof, who does not reside on the
premises of such rental dwelling shall appoint and designate an individual to act as
an agent in his behalf. Every owner shall notify, in writing, the Building and
Inspection Department, the Fire Department, and each occupant of the rental
dwelling, of the name, address and telephone number of the agent. Such written
notice shall contain the signature of the agent accepting appointment and
designation as agent of the owner.
3. Any individual, who is appointed and designated as agent of the owner, shall
reside within Jefferson County, Illinois, or within a county which adjoins Jefferson
County, Illinois. An owner of a rental dwelling may act as his own agent provided
he meets the residency requirements set forth herein.
E. Occupants To Provide Access For Inspections And Compliance With Article:
1. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, his
agent, or employee or agents of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire
Department access to the rental dwelling, or unit thereof under their control, to
conduct inspections authorized by this Article.
2. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his
agent or his employees, access to any part of such rental dwelling at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this Article or with any standard regulation set
forth in the Mt. Vernon City Code, as amended.
F. Fees:
1. A fee as provided within Section 10-16 I, shall be assessed against the owner by
the Building and Inspection Department for inspection of any rental dwelling unit
pursuant to this Article. Notice of Assessment of the fee shall be served upon the
owner by regular mail.
2. Any inspection fees assessed by reason of an inspection initiated by the Building
and Inspection Department and/or Fire Department remaining unpaid after thirty
(30) days shall be a debt due and owing the City and shall be a lien upon the real
estate and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. In the
event a lien is filed with the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, a reasonable
attorney fee, an administration fee for preparation of the lien and the cost of
recording shall be assessed and included as part of the lien. In the event the City
incurs any attorney fees in enforcing any lien or in otherwise collecting any fee, all
such reasonable attorney’s fees shall be paid by the party against whom collection is
made.
G. Occupancy Permit: Except as provided under temporary occupancy permits and as
except provided within Section 10-16 A herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
occupy and unlawful for any owner or agent to allow another person to occupy any rental
dwelling unit unless the Building and Inspection Department has issued a valid occupancy
permit. The Building and Inspection Department shall not issue an occupancy permit until
an inspector of the Building and Inspection Department and the Fire Department have
inspected the dwelling unit and the dwelling unit conforms to the requirements of this
Article. However, if an inspection is performed by another agency or financial institution
and is submitted in writing to the Building and Inspection Department, if the Building and
Inspection Department and Fire Department deem the outside inspection to be sufficient to
comply with the requirements of the Article, the Building and Inspection Department can
issue an occupancy permit based upon said outside inspection. An occupancy permit shall
be valid for three years from date of issuance unless sooner revoked; the existence of an
occupancy permit for a dwelling unit shall not prevent inspection of a dwelling unit.
H. Temporary Occupancy Permit: A rental dwelling or unit therein not in full
compliance with this Article may be occupied while repairs are being made if the Building
and Inspection Department has issued a temporary occupancy permit. No temporary
occupancy permit shall be issued until the Building and Inspection Department and Fire
Department have inspected the dwelling unit and determined that the occupancy thereof
does not constitute a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants as indicated by
the inspection checklist. A temporary occupancy permit shall be valid for up to thirty
days, and may be renewed once upon written request.
I. Application for Permits: Every application for an occupancy permit or a temporary
occupancy permit shall be filed with the Building and Inspection Department on a
prescribed form. The application filing fee (which includes the initial inspection fee and
one (1) subsequent re-inspection if required) for each occupancy permit or for the
temporary occupancy permit, for each the initial permit or its renewal shall be Fifty
Dollars ($50) per dwelling unit except that dwelling units sharing a common roof and
foundation (e.g. multiple dwelling) shall pay a fee in accordance with the following
schedule: 2-10 dwelling units: $38.00 per unit; 11-20 dwelling units: $35.00 per unit;
and 21 units and above: $30 per unit.
An inspection fee of Twenty Five (25) Dollars per dwelling unit shall be paid and assessed
for each inspection by the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department for
each inspection subsequent to the initial application inspection to and to one (1) reinspection.
All application fees shall be paid at the time of the application. Inspection
fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days after assessed. Any fee not timely paid may be
collected as provided within Section 16 F herein.
Every application for any occupancy, temporary, or renewal permit shall include the name,
address, and telephone number of the applicant and applicant’s relationship to property
(i.e. tenant, owner, occupant); name, address, and telephone number of the owner; the
address and general description of the premises to be occupied; and such other necessary
information as may be required by City.
J. Revocation of Permits: The Building and Inspection Department, upon 5-day
notice to the owner and occupant in writing, may revoke any occupancy permit or
temporary occupancy permit if:
1. The Building and Inspection Department determines that material
information contained in the application for said permit is false;
2. The occupant refuses to allow an authorized inspection of the premises at
any time;
3. The work authorized by a temporary occupancy permit is not proceeding; or
4. The occupant or owner fails to comply with a corrective action order or fails
to maintain the property in compliance with this Article.
5. The permit was issued in error by the Building and Inspection Department.
The 5-day Notice of Revocation shall be served in the same manner as required for a
Corrective Action Order. During the 5 day period the applicant or current permit holder
may provide such information as desired by the applicant or permit holder to the Building
and Inspection Department and Fire Department for consideration by the Building and
Inspection Department in the decision to revoke.
K. Utilities Not to be Provided: No utility company shall provide gas, or electric
service until a valid occupancy or temporary occupancy permit is presented to said utility.
The City of Mt. Vernon may refuse to provide and/or may disconnect water, sewer, and
garbage service until or unless a valid occupancy or temporary occupancy permit is
obtained and presented by the owner to the City’s Billing Services Department.
L. Corrective Action Order: Whenever the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department determines that any occupancy or any dwelling unit, accessory structure, or
other portion of premises is in violation of this Article, it shall so notify the owner and/or
occupant in writing, and order appropriate corrective action.
1. Contents of Order. The order to take corrective action(s) shall include the
following information:
a. A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
b. A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
c. A statement of the remedial action (repairs, reduced number of
occupants, etc.) necessary to effect compliance;
d. The date (at least 5-days unless an emergency condition) by which the
violation must be corrected;
e. Statement that if the violation is not corrected, the occupancy permit
may be revoked, a complaint for violation issued, and/or the property
may be declared unfit for human habitation with attendant
consequences. If a Corrective Action Order has been served s
provided herein, no additional Notice of Revocation is required to be
given.
2. Service of Order. The corrective action order shall be deemed properly served
upon the owner, agent, or occupant if it is:
a. Served upon each personally or sent by registered or certified mail to
the last known address of each with service be effective upon deposit
in the mail.
AND
b. Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the dwelling or premises
3. Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling who has been served a corrective action order to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or
otherwise dispose of the dwelling or its ownership interest until he/she has either: (i)
effected compliance with the provisions of this Article; or (ii) furnished the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a true copy of the corrective action order, and has given
the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department a signed and notarized
statement from said grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee that acknowledges receipt of
such corrective action order and unconditionally accepts responsibility for making the
required repairs.
4. Access by Owner or Operator. The occupant(s) of every dwelling unit shall give
the owner or operator, or his agent or employee, free access thereto at any reasonable time
in order to allow him to make any inspection, alteration, maintenance, or repair necessary
to effect compliance with this Article.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or let or hold out to another for occupancy any
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, where such dwelling unit does not comply
with the steps required by the corrective action order.
10-17: UNLAWFUL INTERRUPTION OF TENANT OCCUPANCY:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any landlord or any person acting at their direction to
knowingly oust or dispossess or attempt to oust or dispossess any tenant from a dwelling
unit without authority of law, by plugging, changing, adding or removing any lock or
latching device; or by blocking any entrance into said unit; or by removing any door or
window from said unit; or by interfering with the services to said unit, including, but not
limited to, electricity, gas, hot or cold water, plumbing, heat or telephone services; or by
removing a tenant's personal property from said unit; or by the use of force or threat of
violence, injury or force to a tenant's person or property; or by any other act rendering a
dwelling unit or any part thereof or any personal property located therein inaccessible or
uninhabitable.
B. The following shall constitute a valid defense to any prosecution by City of a complaint
alleging violation of Subsection A above (although nothing herein shall authorize any
landlord or other person to take any action or to commit any act otherwise prohibited by
state or federal law):
1. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to forcible
entry and detainer and engages the Sheriff of Jefferson County to forcibly evict a
tenant or his personal property; or
2. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to distress for
rent; or
3. A landlord acts pursuant to court order; or
4. A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as necessary to make
needed repairs or inspection and only as provided by law; or
5. The tenants with a right to possession of the dwelling unit have been absent
therefrom for thirty (30) consecutive days without advising the landlord of such
absence or their intent to return, and the current rent is thirty (30) or more days
overdue, and after diligent inquiry the landlord has valid reason to believe that
tenants have abandoned the premises and do not intend to return; or
6. After diligent inquiry the landlord has valid reason to believe that the tenants
identified within a written lease have surrendered possession of the premises and do
not intend to return, and by the express language of said lease document the lease
term has expired for at least ten days, and the landlord has not accepted any rental
or other payment after expiration of the lease term for rental for periods after
expiration of the lease term.
10-18: NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICIALS;
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally liable for any damage to
persons or property resulting from any act required or permitted in the discharge of the
duties of such officer, agent, or employee under the provisions of this Article. Any lawsuit
of any nature brought against such officer, agent, or employee as a result of any act,
requirement or permitted function in the discharge of the official duties of such officer,
agent, or employee aforesaid shall be defended at the sole expense of the City until a
complete and final determination of such lawsuit.
10-19: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provisions of this Article,
shall, upon a finding of guilt, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, said persons shall be subject to an
action for injunction to eliminate or to prevent violations of this Article or of any other
applicable Code of the City related thereto.
10-20: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this Article shall be effective beginning January 1, 2011.
ARTICLE 10-A
BUREAU OF INSPECTION
SECTION 10-A.1
There is hereby created within the City of Mt. Vernon a Bureau of Inspection. The Bureau shall
consist of Director of the Bureau of Inspection, who shall be appointed by the City Manager, and such
other employees as shall be authorized by the City Council from time to time and appointed by the City
Manager.
SECTION 10-A.2
The Bureau of Inspection shall coordinate the enforcement of all ordinances of the City and statutes
of the State of Illinois calling for public inspection, including without limitation all ordinances and statues
relating to buildings, electricity, health, weed control, housing, plumbing, sewer and other similar activities.
The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall have the responsibility for enforcement of all ordinances and
statutes relating to housing, health, and weed control.
SECTION 10-A.3
The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall be ex officio the Housing Inspector as defined and
provided in Article 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon. He shall also be ex
officio Health Inspector and shall be charged with the investigation, inspection, and enforcement of
ordinances and regulations of the City and the State of Illinois relating to health and sanitation, and also
relating to any alleged violations under the provisions of Division 20 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal
Code.
The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall further have full control and responsibility
for weed control under the provisions of Section 13.13 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon and of the State Statutes applicable thereto.
ARTICLE 11
LICENSES
SECTION 11.1
All license authorized or required to be issued by the City of Mt. Vernon shall be issued
only upon written application from the applicant to the City Clerk, which application shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, the license applied for, the term of the license and
conditions thereof, and all other facts necessary to be stated under terms of ordinances or articles
governing the issuance of such license, and such application shall be accompanied by the license
fee provided therefor.
All license shall be granted for a period of one year only, ending on the thirtieth (30th )
day of April next succeeding, except as otherwise expressly provided by ordinance, and shall be
signed by the City Clerk and sealed with the official seal of the City. Such license as are required
to be approved by any other person, such as the Liquor Control Commissioner for Dram Shop
license, shall be so approved prior to licensing. The City Clerk shall keep a register of all license
issued by the City.
In the event any applicant for any license shall have previously been licensed on an
annual basis and shall apply for renewal thereof; and by reason of the terms hereof shall have to
apply on or before April 30 for renewal of a license which does not by its term expire until June
30 or some other date after April 30, applicant shall be required to pay only a pro-rated license
fee based on the number of months from the expiration date of his current license to April 30 of
the next year.
SECTION 11.2 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to exercise or engage in the business,
trade or vocation of an auctioneer, to sell or vend at public auction any goods, wares,
merchandise or real estate without first having obtained a license therefor, provided that this
section shall not apply to sales made by any public official by virtue of any judicial order or
process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in any mortgage or security instrument.
The fee for each license issued hereunder shall be for one year, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
for six months, sixty dollars ($60.00); for one month, thirty dollars ($30.00); and for one day,
six dollars ($6.00). Each applicant for a license hereunder shall execute and deliver to the City
Clerk a bond payable to the City in the penal sum of $500.00, conditioned upon the strict
observance of ordinances of the City regulating auctions and auctioneers. It shall be unlawful for
any auctioneer or any agent or employee thereof to sell or offer for sale at public auction any
goods, wares, or merchandise upon a street, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground.
SECTION 11.3 BARBERS AND BARBER SHOPS
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a barber shop within the City limits
without first having obtained a license therefor. Each applicant therefor shall present proof that
the applicant and each person who shall be employed as a barber in such barber shop, shall hold a
certificate of registration issued by the Department of Registration of the State of Illinois and a
statement upon the application for license as to the number of chairs to be used in the shop. The
fee for such a license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each barber
chair operated or intended to be operated in such barber shop in addition to one.
(b) Every barber or person in charge of such barber shop shall maintain the shop in a
clean and sanitary condition. Every barber shop shall be kept well lighted and ventilated. No
barber shall work in or operate a barber shop while suffering from any contagious or venereal
disease. No barber shall serve any person with a communicable or contagious disease of the face
or scalp.
(c) The license issued hereunder to a barber or barber shop may be revoked for cause
in the violation of any terms of this ordinance by any barber operating herein.
(d) No person shall keep open any barber shop within said City for business before
the hour of 8:00 A.M. and after the hour of 6:00 P.M. of each week day, except Saturday, on
which day the hour shall be 8:00 P.M., nor shall any barber shop be open for business on any
Sunday or on any of the following legal holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and Armistice Day.
SECTION 11.4 BILLPOSTING, DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISEMENTS, AND
BILLBOARDS
(a) No person shall carry on the business of posting handbills, posters, cards, signs,
circulars, or advertisements of any kind (hereinafter called billposting), or distributing handbills,
cards, circulars, samples of merchandise or advertisements of any kind within the City without
first having obtained a license therefor. Each applicant shall pay the annual license fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) for a license for billposting. Each applicant shall pay the license fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) for a license for distributing handbills, cards, circulars, samples of merchandise
and advertisements of any kind except that the fee for a license for one day shall be three dollars
($3.00).
Applications for such license shall be made to the City Clerk and shall contain a
statement of the nature of the article, merchandise, card, or advertisement to be distributed or
posted and the name of the applicant and the name of the manufacturer or distributor of such
article or service advertised.
No person, whether licensed hereunder or not, shall post or place any handbill, sign,
poster, circular, advertisement, or any other thing upon any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public
place, nor shall he post or place any article upon any lamp post, telegraph, telephone, or electric
light pole, fire hydrant, or any tree, private wall or door, or any private structure or property
without the consent of the owner in writing thereof.
(b) The term Abillboard@ is hereby defined to mean, and for the purpose of this section
shall be construed to mean, any structure the sole or primary purpose of which is to be used for
the display of advertisements or notices.
No billboard shall be erected in the City of Mt. Vernon by any person unless a license
shall first have been obtained therefor from the City Clerk. Each application shall state the
location for such billboard and if same is to be located on private property. The fee for each such
license for each billboard shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year.
No billboard shall be permitted to become unsightly by reason of the accumulation of old
bills thereon or dilapidated or in lack of repair; nor shall any billboard be constructed or located
in violation of any other provision of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon;
nor shall any billboard be constructed or maintained so as to constitute a health, fire, or safety
hazard.
SECTION 11.5 DANCING AND DANCE HALLS
A. No person shall hold or conduct any dance or dances or operate or maintain a
dance on either public or private property or whether for profit or not, without first obtaining a
license therefor. The fee for such license shall be $200.00 per annum; provided, however, that no
license shall be required for dancing in any private lodge or club and no fee shall be charged for
license for any dances for charitable purposes only.
B. Any person desiring a license under the foregoing paragraph shall make
application to the City Clerk, which application shall be accompanied by the annual license fee as
herein provided. Such application shall be referred to the Mayor who shall approve or reject such
application. In the event such application is approved by the Mayor, a license shall be issued by
the Clerk to such applicant, signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, who shall keep
a complete record of all such licenses issued.
C. No person licensed by virtue of Subparagraph A herein above shall permit his
establishment to be open for the above purposes except between the following hours, which will
be the permitted hours of opening:
(1) Monday-Thursday
Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 1:00 a.m. of the succeeding day of each
day from Monday through Thursday inclusive.
(2) Friday and Saturday
Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 2:00 a.m. of the succeeding day of each
day from Friday through Saturday inclusive.
(3) Sunday
From 12:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, but such opening on Sunday shall be permitted
only for those establishments which are also a restaurant as defined within Section 6.9(p) 3 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
(4) Christmas Day
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no licensee shall permit his establishment to
be open on Christmas Day of each year.
(5) New Year's Day
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, a person licensed by virtue of Subparagraph
A herein may permit his establishment to be open for the above purposes between the hours of
6:00 a.m. on New Year's Eve and 8:00 a.m. on New Year's day or until normal permitted hours
as provided above for said day, whichever is later; provided, however, that entry to the licensed
establishment shall be denied to all persons at 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day, and no person shall
be permitted to enter or reenter the establishment after said time until the licensed establishment
thereafter opens for normal permitted hours as provided above. All persons or patrons within the
licensed establishment at said 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day shall be permitted to remain and to
be a patron of the establishment, although no person shall be permitted reentry upon exiting or
leaving the licensed establishment until the establishment thereafter opens for normal permitted
hours as provided above.
(6) General Provisions.
Each licensee shall require and have all customers off and out of the premises within
twenty (20) minutes after the closing times provided herein, which twenty (20) minutes shall be
considered a grace period to allow time for closing and for all customers to leave the premises,
but any and all dance or dances shall cease at the closing hours herein specified.
SECTION 11.6 HOUSE MOVERS
(a) No person shall remove or move any buildings along public streets, alleys, or
public places within the City, unless he shall first have obtained a license of a house mover. The
fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum and each applicant shall
first execute and deliver to the City Clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the
applicant's curing and paying for any and all damages which shall be sustained to any streets,
alleys, sidewalks, or other public places or any telegraph, telephone, or electric light pole, or wire
within the City.
The applicant shall further furnish to the City a policy of public liability insurance, issued
by a company or companies approved by the City Clerk, which shall protect and indemnify the
City from all judgments, costs, and expenses which may accrue against said City in consequence
of the granting of such license, in the amount of not less than $50,000.00 for each person and
$100,000.00 for each occurrence.
(b) No person shall move or remove any building or structure along public streets,
alleys, or other public places of the City, even though he may be licensed as a house mover
hereunder, without having first obtained a building permit therefor from the City Clerk under the
Building Code. Such licensed house mover shall make application for such permit upon forms
supplied by the City Clerk and shall state thereon the building proposed to be moved, its present
location and proposed location, the route to be taken, and the time required therefor. No permit
shall be issued for moving or removing of any structure which, because of size or description
would not be permitted upon the location where it is proposed to be moved, and in particular, no
building shall be moved to any place within the fire limits which shall not comply with the
Building Code.
Such application for permit shall be referred by the City Clerk to the City Manager, City
Engineer, and Building Official, and shall determine whether such permit may be issued under
provision of ordinances of the City, and whether the route and proposed method of moving is
feasible and safe, considering public welfare.
(c) Each licensed house mover who shall have a permit to move any building or
structure shall, during such move, keep and maintain adequate warning devices upon such
structure, including red flashing lights or other similar warning devices during the hours of
darkness. Any such house mover shall declare any damage or injury to any public street,
sidewalk, or public place caused or occurring during such move.
SECTION 11.7 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
(a) ATransient merchant@ shall mean any person who is engaged temporarily in the
retail sale of tangible personal property or in the solicitation of retail orders or sales for future
delivery of tangible personal property or in the solicitation of orders or commitments for sale of
services, whether for future delivery or not, within the City and who, for the purpose of
conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any kind, or vacant
lot. However, this Ordinance does not apply to any person selling goods, wares, or merchandise
which are raised, produced, or manufactured by him; to any person selling vegetables, fruit, or
perishable farm products at an established City market; to any person operating a store or
refreshment stand at a resort; to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property
owned by him or upon which he resides; to any person operating a stand or booth at a State or
County Fair; or to any person operating a stand or booth at a trade show, exposition, convention,
or similar event.
AItinerant vendor@ shall mean any person within the City who transports tangible personal
property for retail sale or who solicits retail orders or sales for future delivery of tangible
personal property or who solicits orders or commitments for sale of services, whether for future
delivery or not, and who does not maintain in the City an established office, distribution house,
sales house, warehouse, service center, or residence from which such business is conducted.
However, this Ordinance does not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property
within the City who is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail,
the internet, or other similar means. The term Aitinerant vendor@ shall not include a person who
makes sales of tangible personal property within the City during each week during the calendar
year or a person who makes sales of tangible personal property within the City not less than five
days of each week during a consecutive 120-day period.
APerson@ shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm, association, or
other entity.
(b) It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person, either as principal or agent, to
conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor within the City without first
complying with Section 2a of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2a) as may be
required, including obtaining a certificate of registration, and without first having obtained a
license under this Ordinance. The license obtained hereunder shall be prominently displayed and
visible at all times when selling or when soliciting orders for tangible personal property and shall
be presented to each customer or solicitee, prior to any solicitation, for review when soliciting
orders or commitments for sale of services. Each license shall be returned to the office of the City
Clerk upon expiration of the license or upon the transient merchant or itinerant vendor ceasing
sales or solicitations, whichever occurs first. Each license issued herein shall state in prominent
and visible language the following: The holder of this License is not affiliated with nor endorsed
by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(c) Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor shall file a written license application with the City Clerk. The license application shall be
under oath and shall include the applicant's name, permanent business address (which must
include a street address), residence address of the principal (and if the applicant is a corporation,
the residence addresses of its officers), the location at which the applicant intends to do business,
the nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant's certificate of
registration under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, a complete inventory of the goods the
applicant intends to offer for sale, a complete list and description of the service or services the
applicant intends to offer for sale, a list of all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant
or an itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in the City of Mt. Vernon in the 12 months
preceding the date of filing of the application, and copies of any license issued by the State of
Illinois held by the applicant related to the goods or services subject of the application. In
addition, the applicant shall provide a copy of a written lease or other written evidence from the
owner of the location where the applicant proposes to sell indicating permission of the owner to
use the location.
(d) Prior to issuance of the license, each applicant shall file with the City Clerk a cash
deposit in the amount of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), unless waived by the City Clerk in
accordance with this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall waive the cash deposit requirement unless,
within the 12-month period preceding the application, there has been filed with the City Clerk
either a certified copy of a Court Judgment against the applicant or three written complaints from
consumers or other persons describing a loss or damage as the result of the purchase of
merchandise or services from the applicant or as the result of the negligent or intentionally
tortious act of the applicant or as the result of conducting business or making sales or providing
services within the City as transient merchant or itinerant vendor without a license. The City
Clerk shall hold the cash deposit for two years for the benefit of any person who suffers loss or
damage as the result of the purchase of merchandise from said person licensed under this
Ordinance or as the result of the negligent or intentionally tortious act of the person licensed
under this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall pay any portion of the cash deposit to any person in
accordance with a Judgment or other Order of the Jefferson County, Illinois Circuit Court
without making an independent finding as to the amount of the cash deposit that is payable to
that person; any balance of the cash deposit held by the City Clerk two years after the expiration
of a license of a person under this Ordinance shall be refunded by certified mail to the person;
provided, however, that if the person shall fail to keep the City Clerk informed of a current
mailing address that said bond shall be forfeited to the City after one attempt by the City Clerk to
refund the bond by certified mail.
(e) Except as hereinafter provided, each transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall
pay a licensing fee at the rate of $75.00 per day, payable prior to issuing of the license, which
license shall state the specific dates (month, day, and year) that the license is valid.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, transient merchants or itinerant vendors who are leasing
floor space within a commercially zoned building or other retail space at a mall or shopping
center for a period of more than 30 days but less than 120 days, shall pay a licensing fee of
$150.00 for a license which shall bear the same expiration date as the lease term; provided,
however, (1) that a copy of the written lease must be filed with the City Clerk at the time the
license application required within Paragraph (c) herein is filed; (2) the license application must
also be signed by the person stated as lessor within the lease; and (3) the license shall be issued in
the joint names of the lessor (owner) and lessee (transient merchant or itinerant vendor), and the
license shall state the location subject of the license.
(f) If any person makes retail sales or makes solicitations as a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor without having obtained a license under this ordinance, the Mt. Vernon Police
Department, as the direction of the City Manager, may hold the inventory, vehicle, or other
personal property of the person until he obtains a license to conduct business as a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor. If the property has been held by the City of Mt. Vernon for more
than 60 days and the person whose property is being held has not obtained a license under this
Ordinance, the City may petition the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois for an Order for
the sale of the property being held. If the Court finds that the person whose property is held has
not obtained a license under this Ordinance, the Court may order and authorize the City to sell
the property. The proceeds of the sale of the property less reimbursement to the City of the
reasonable expenses for the storage and sale of the property shall be deposited in the General
Corporate Fund of the City.
(g) It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor under this Ordinance if the person does not transact business from a fixed location or if
the person does not own or lease for a term of at least six months the property from which
business is conducted.
(h) Each transient merchant or itinerant vendor immediately upon expiration of his
license shall remove all temporary buildings and structures erected by him or by his benefit and
shall place the location at which he makes sales in a clean and neat condition. No transient
merchant or itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent, or hold forth the sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise as an insurance, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor,
administrator, receiver, wholesale, manufacturer's wholesale, closing-out sale, or any sale of
goods damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, unless he shall as part of the description of
his inventory in his application for license under oath state the facts supporting such description
of such sale.
(i) The Mt. Vernon Sweet Corn and Watermelon Festival, the Cedarhurst Craft Fair,
and any other event designated by the City Manager as a community-sponsored event shall
constitute a trade show, exposition, convention, or similar event; no person participating in and
sanctioned by the authorizing body sponsoring the Mt. Vernon Sweet Corn and Watermelon
Festival, the Cedarhurst Craft Fair, or other community-sponsored event shall be deemed to be a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor. Provided, however, that in the event any person shall be
exempted from complying with the licensing statutes or regulations of another governmental
entity by reason of holding a valid license issued under this Ordinance, then the designation of
the Mt. Vernon Sweet Corn and Watermelon Festival and the Cedarhurst Craft Fair hereunder
and the designation of any other event as a community-sponsored event by the City Manager
shall constitute a license to engage in the retail sales described within this Ordinance.
SECTION 11.8 JUKEBOXES
No person shall place or operate any jukebox or other similar amusement device or
combination thereof, from which music or other amusement may be obtained by the deposit of
money or other token in any public or private place for operation by or the amusement of the
general public without first having obtained a license therefor. The license fee for each such
jukebox or other amusement device shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. Each application for
license shall include, in addition to other information required on all such licenses, a description
of each such jukebox or other such amusement device, including the factory model or other
identification number, and the denomination of coin or coins required for its operation.
Each license issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the machine or
in the room in which the juke box or other amusement device is operated. No such juke box or
other amusement device shall be operated by any person in such a manner as to cause a
disturbance or breach of peace.
SECTION 11.9 PAWN BROKERS
(a) Any person within the City who loans money on deposit of personal property, or
deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back
again to the pledger or depositor, or loans money on deposit of pledge or personal property,
bonds, notes, or other valuable things or securities, or who loans or advances money on personal
property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon and takes or receives such personal property
into his possession, is hereby declared to be a pawn broker.
No person shall exercise or carry on the business of a pawn broker within the City
without first having obtained a license therefor. The fee for each license shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per annum and each applicant shall, prior to receiving such license, deposit a
bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with the City Clerk.
(b) Every pawn broker shall keep a written record in which shall be entered in ink at
the time of each loan or taking of pledge, an accurate account and description of all goods or
other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money or valuables owned thereon, the time of
such pledge, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person
making such pawn or pledge. No person shall change, erase, or destroy any original entry in such
written record. Each pawn broker shall at the time of each loan, deliver to the person pawning or
pledging any article or thing, a memorandum signed by the pawn broker and containing the
substance of the entry required to be made in such written record, kept by such pawn broker. No
charge shall be made by any pawn broker for the giving of such memorandum or making of such
written record. The written record required hereby shall be open to the inspection of any police
officer or law enforcement official at all reasonable times.
(c) No pawn broker shall purchase any second-hand goods, articles, or things offered
to him as a pawn or pledge.
(d) Each pawn broker required to be licensed hereunder shall deliver to the Police
Department of the City before 12:00 noon each day a true copy of the written record required
herein to be kept, showing all personal property and other things received by or pawned to him
during the preceding day. No pawn broker licensed hereunder shall receive in pawn or pledge any
article from any minor, intoxicated person, or person under any legal disability.
SECTION 11.10: POOL AND BILLIARDS, PIN-BALL, BOWLING ALLEYS,
SHOOTING GALLERIES, AND COIN-OPERATED
AMUSEMENT DEVICES (EXCLUDING VIDEO GAMING
TERMINALS)
DEFINITIONS
(a) ACoin Operated Device@, shall mean any amusement device or machine
(excluding video gaming terminals licensed under Section 11.16 of this Article) operated
by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement
or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged; provided said term shall not include
a merry-go-round, a rocking horse or other similar rides designed and operated for use
only by minors. No device which awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or switch
capable of removing and recording the removal of credits when the award of credits is
dependent upon chance shall be permitted nor licensed as a Acoin-operated amusement
device,@ as such devices are prohibited by Section 35 of the Illinois Video Gaming Act
(230 ILCS 40/35).
(b) ADevice@ shall mean each pool, billiard or similar table, each pinball
machine, each alley of a bowling alley, each gallery of a shooting gallery, and each
coin-operated amusement device. ADevice@ shall not include video gaming terminals
licensed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and Section 11.16 of this
Article. No device which awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable
of removing and recording the removal of credits when the award of credits is dependent
upon chance shall be permitted nor licensed as a Adevice,@ as such devices are prohibited
by Section 35 of the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/35).
(c) AOperator@ shall mean any person, owner, firm, corporation partnership,
association or club which sets up for his or its own operation or for operation by another or leases
or distributes for the purpose of operation by another, any device herein defined whether such
setting up for operation, leasing or distributing, be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of
receipt of or a division of the income derived from such a device or otherwise.
(d) AProprietor@ shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or
club which, as owner, lessee, or otherwise has under his, or its, control any establishment, place,
or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the
purpose of use or play.
(e) APool Hall@ or ABusiness where a principal business activity is pool or
billiard tables@ shall mean:
(1) any premises where there is situated more than six (6) pool or billiard
tables or similar tables; or
(2) any premises where there is situated more than one(1) but less than seven
(7) pool or billiard tables or similar tables and where pool or billiard or
similar tables are a principal business activity upon the premises; pool or
billiard or similar tables shall be considered a principal business activity if
(i) said pool, billiard or similar tables represent more than one-third of the
total number of devices licensed under Section 11.10 of the Revised Code
upon the premises, or (ii) the floor space occupied by the pool, billiard and
other similar tables and the space within three feet of each table exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total floor space of the room where the tables are
situated; or (iii) the premises derives a significant or substantial portion of
its gross revenue from pool, billiard or other similar tables; significant or
substantial being twenty percent (20%) or more.
License Required.
No operator or proprietor, or other person shall place, have, operate, maintain or keep any
pool, billiard or similar table or any pin-ball machine or any bowling alley or any shooting
gallery or any coin-operated amusement device upon any premises within the City of Mt. Vernon
without a license first having been obtained for each table, machine, alley, gallery, and
coin-operated amusement device (hereinafter called Adevice license@).
Application.
An application for device license(s) shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be in
writing and under oath signed by the operator or proprietor as above-described.
The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the
address of each premises where a device will be placed; the name, address, and telephone
number of each the proprietor of each premises; and the name, address, and telephone number of
each operator for each table, machine, gallery, or coin-operated amusement device; and the name,
description, State of Illinois license tag tax number, and serial number of each device proposed to
be licensed.
The primary responsibility to submit an application and obtain a license shall be that of
the operator for the licensed devise, but if said operator shall fail to comply with the provisions
of this Section then the proprietor shall submit the application and obtain the license(s).
No license shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to the City including
but not limited to any licensing fees under this Section or any Article of the Revised Code, any
other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any tax imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or
any charge for water, sewer or garbage services or to any person in default on any loan agreement
or contract with the City.
Terms of License.
The license fee for each licensed device placed at or upon any premises licensed under
Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be Seventy-five
Dollars ($75.00) per annum for each device; the license fee for each licensed device at any other
premises shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per annum for each device. The license fee shall be
non-refundable and shall be non-proratable, and no license shall be transferable to any other
device, except as specifically herein provided. Each licensed device shall have a separate license
(which shall consist of a numbered sticker issued by the City Clerk). If a licensee desires to place
additional devices or if a licensee desires to substitute an unlicensed device for a previously
licensed device then a new application for license shall be filed; a licensing fee for each
additional device shall be assessed but no fee shall be assessed for substituted devices. In
addition, if any licensee moves a licensed device from one premises to another, the licensee shall,
prior to the relocation, advise the City Clerk in writing of the relocation of the licensed device
and shall provide such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
Display of License.
The device license for each licensed device shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on
the licensed device and the licensed device shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of
any person who may frequent or be upon any premises where such device is kept, placed or used.
Inspection.
Each premises where a licensed device is placed and each licensed device shall be subject
to inspection by agents of the City of Mt. Vernon, including but not limited to law enforcement
officials at all times; consent to said inspection is a condition of and requirement of the license
issued hereunder and of the placement of a licensed device within a premises, and said consent
shall be deemed to be irrevocable permission for such inspection. Refusal of any operator,
proprietor or any employee or agent of same to allow or permit inspection shall be deemed
grounds for revocation of all licenses for any devices situated upon the premises subject of the
refusal and denial of any license for any device to be placed upon said premises for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the refusal.
Gambling Prohibited.
No operator, proprietor, employee or other agent of same or other person shall allow or
permit any gambling upon any premises where any device is placed, except video gaming
terminals licensed and permitted under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and
Section 11.16 of this Article.
No person, nor any entity in which same has any interest, who has been convicted
(including a no contest or similar plea) of any gambling offense as prescribed by any criminal
code, statute, ordinance, or regulation of the United States or of any State or of any political
subdivision of either shall be eligible to hold any device license issued hereunder for a period of
one (1) year from date of the conviction for a single offense, three (3) years from date of
conviction for a second offense, and permanently in the event of a conviction for a third offense.
If any gambling offense involving a device resulting in a conviction of any person
(including a no contest or similar plea) shall occur at any premises, all licenses for any devices
placed upon the premises may be revoked and if said license or licenses are revoked, no license
shall be granted to any person for a period of one (1) year from date of revocation for the
placement of any device upon the premises if said premises shall continue to be owned, leased or
subject to the control of the owner of the premises as of the date of the gambling offense or
subject to the control of any person related thereto; ARelated@ means being employed by, owning
stock in, being a partner in, having any interest directly or indirectly in or being related by blood
or marriage in the following relationships: spouse, parent, step-parent, grandparent,
step-grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild, step-grandchild, brother, step-brother, sister,
step-sister, uncle or aunt.
Additional Regulations.
No owner, proprietor, employee or other agent of same or other person shall permit any
disturbance or disorderly conduct upon any premises where any device is placed.
No Apool hall@ or Abusiness where a principal business activity is pool or billiard tables@
shall allow any minor under 16-years of age to enter upon the premises, to remain upon the
premises, to engage in any game or to use any such device. Any premises also licensed under
Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinance shall not permit any person under 18-years of age to
enter upon the premises, to remain upon the premises or to engage in any game or to use any
such device, except as expressly and specifically authorized by said Article 6. Each pool hall or
business where a principal business activity is pool or billiard tables shall have an unobstructed
view of the interior of the room from the front exterior or from the front sidewalk or street
adjacent to the premises where such device is located. No pool hall or business where a
principal business activity is pool or billiard tables shall be open to business on Sunday except
between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. nor shall same be open to business between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day; provided that premises licensed under Article 6 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances shall be subject to the hours of operation as provided within said
Article 6.
No business or premises (excluding a pool hall or business where a principal business
activity is pool or billiard tables) whose primary business is coin-operated devices shall be open
to business on Sunday except between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., nor shall same be
open to business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday or from 12:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday.
Liability of Operator or Proprietor for Acts of Agent.
Every act of or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any provision
of this Section by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any operator or
proprietor as herein defined shall be deemed to be the act of the operator or proprietor and the
operator or proprietor shall be punishable and shall be ineligible to hold a license in the same
manner as if the act or admission had been done or admitted by the operator or proprietor
personally.
Penalties.
Any operator or proprietor or any other person found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall each be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each
device not displaying a proper license; and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed on each day on which such violation occurs or continues.
In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violations of this Section, the City Clerk
may revoke any license for any violation of this Section after affording the licensee due notice
and opportunity to be heard in his own defense.
SECTION 11.11 SHOWS, THEATRICALS, AND AMUSEMENTS
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on any show, theatrical, or amusement
without first having obtained a license therefor. The license fee for such show, theatrical, or
amusement shall be as follows:
(a) Circus or circus parade: sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day.
(b) Carnivals and like amusement companies: seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day.
(c) Performances in theaters, tents, rooms, halls, or on the streets, other than circuses
or carnivals, which are advertised more than six days, sum of forty dollars
($40.00) per day; where advertised less than six days, the sum of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) per day; provided, however, that the licensee of any theater, hall,
or any place for giving of entertainment may procure an annual license for the
sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year; provided, further, that if any such
licensee has more than one such place or location for the giving of entertainment,
then such licensee may procure a license for each additional place for the sum of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per annum.
(d) Skating rinks: sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum.
(e) Performances and exhibitions not otherwise enumerated herein: rate of twenty
dollars ($20.00) per day.
SECTION 11.12 TERMITE AND OTHER PEST CONTROL CONTRACTORS OR
EXTERMINATORS
No person shall engage in business in the City as a termite or other pest control contractor
or exterminator without first having obtained license therefor. Any person who shall apply any
solution, compound, or method to any structure or land for the purpose of controlling, killing, or
exterminating any termite or other pest, shall be deemed to have engaged in the business of
termite or other pest control extermination. Each application for license hereunder shall, in
addition to information required on all license applications in the City, state his previous
experience in such business and any other places where the applicant has previously rendered
pest control service, and in the event the applicant shall be a corporation or firm, then it shall
state the name and address of the Manager or Supervisor.
The fee for each such license shall be fifty dollars ( $50.00) per-annum and every license
issued hereunder shall bear a legend conspicuously printed at the top:
AThe granting of this license does not imply or infer approval of the holder or of this
ability by the City of Mt. Vernon@.
Prior to treating any structure or performing services on any premises within the City of
Mt. Vernon, each licensee shall first present to the City Clerk a certificate of liability insurance in
a company or companies approved by the City Clerk in the amount of not less than fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury by reason of any accident or occurrence, and twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for any property damage and such licensee shall first give bond to
the City in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned upon and indemnifying
the City against damages to any person to whom the City may be or claimed to be liable by
reason of:
1. Failure of the licensee to observe ordinances of the City;
2. Failure of the licensee to observe any rule or regulation promulgated under the
authority of any ordinance regulating licensee;
3. Negligence of the licensee in performing services.
Such certificate of insurance shall be furnished annually by the person prior to any license
issued hereunder.
SECTION 11.13 VEHICLES FOR HIRE
The term Avehicle for hire@ shall mean and include any vehicle used to transport, haul, or
carry passengers or property for a fee or charge.
No person shall charge, receive, or demand any pay or thing of value for the hauling or
transporting of passengers or property within the City without first having obtained a license
therefor. The fee for each such license shall be:
(1) For each automobile, taxi, or other vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers, thirty dollars ($30.00) per annum.
(2) For each other vehicle for hire, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per annum.
SECTION 11.14 REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND
MASSAGE SERVICES
A. Definitions
For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
(1) Administrative Official: The City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois or
his authorized representative.
(2) Employee: Any and all persons other than masseurs or masseuses who render any
service for the licensee and who receives compensation directly from the licensee
but has no physical contact with customers or clients.
(3) Licensee: The operator of a massage establishment.
(4) Massage: Any method or pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of external soft parts of the
body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptic oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations
commonly used in this practice.
(5) Masseur or Masseuse: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of massage as above defined.
(6) Massage Establishment: Any establishment having its place of business where any
person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be
engaged or carried on, any of the activities mentioned in subparagraph (4) hereof.
(7) Massage Services: The providing of a massage or massages by any person, firm,
association, or corporation.
(8) Massage Therapist: A person who is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation under 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.
(9) Person: Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company,
corporation, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
(10) Sexual or Genital Area: The sexual or genital area of any person shall include the
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or
breasts of a female.
B. Massage Establishment License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, to conduct or carry on, or to permit to be
engaged in, conducted, or carried on, upon any premises in the City of Mt. Vernon, the operation
of a massage establishment as herein defined without first having obtained a massage
establishment license from the City Clerk, after the approval of the Administrative Official.
No masseur or masseuse require to obtain a permit under this Ordinance shall give a
massage or provide any massage service upon any premises in the City of Mt. Vernon except at a
massage establishment licensed hereunder.
C. Application and Fee
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment
shall file an application in duplicate, under oath, with the City Clerk upon a form provided by the
City Clerk, and pay a non-refundable filing fee of $100.00. The City Clerk shall, within five days
thereafter, refer copies of such application and all additional information to the Inspection Bureau
and the Administrative Official, The Inspection Bureau shall within 30 days inspect the premises
proposed to be operated as a massage establishment, and make recommendations to the
Administrative Official concerning compliance with the Codes of the City of Mt. Vernon. Upon
receipt of the recommendations of the Inspection Bureau, the Administrative Official shall notify
the applicant as to whether his application has been granted, denied, or held for further
investigation.
The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The Administrative Official shall advise the applicant in
writing as to whether the application has been granted or denied. If the application is denied or
held for further investigation, the Administrative Official shall advise the applicant in writing of
the reason for such refusal.
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application, or the refusal or failure of applicant to appear at any reasonable
time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or the refusal of applicant
to submit to or cooperate with any inspection required by this Section, shall be grounds for denial
of the application.
D. Application Information for License For Massage Establishment
The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact
nature of the massage to be administered and the proposed place and facilities therefor.
In addition thereto, any applicant for a license, and each partner or limited partner of an
applicant, if a partnership applicant, and each officer and director of a corporate applicant and
any stockholder of a corporate applicant holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporate
applicant, shall furnish the following information.
(1) Written proof that each individual is at least 18 years of age.
(2) All residential addresses for the past three years.
(3) The business, occupation, or employment of each individual for the three years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(4) The previous experience of the individual in massage or similar business.
(5) Whether the individual has had any license or permit denied revoked, or
suspended in the City of Mt. Vernon or in the State of Illinois or any other state or
City for a massage establishment, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation of the individual subsequent to such suspension, revocation, or denial.
(6) Any conviction, forfeiture of bond, or plea or nolo contendere upon any criminal
violation or City ordinance violation (except minor traffic violations), within a
five year period.
(7) If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of any partnership is a corporation,
then the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in the Articles
of Incorporation, together with the state of incorporation, and proof of authority to
do business in the State of Illinois.
(8) If the applicant is licensed as a massage therapist, a copy of the current license
issued by the State of Illinois, Department of Professional Regulation.
E. Massage Establishment License
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Inspection Bureau and with the information
contained in the application, together with all additional information provided therein, the
Administrative Official shall direct the issuance of a license by the City Clerk to the applicant to
maintain, operate, or conduct a massage establishment, unless the Administrative Official shall
find:
(1) That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the applicant, if
permitted, would not comply with the applicable laws of the State of Illinois and
the City of Mt. Vernon, including but not limited to the building, health, planning,
housing, fire prevention, and zoning codes of the City of Mt. Vernon; or
(2) That the applicant or any other person who shall be directly or indirectly engaged
in the management and operation of the massage establishment has been
convicted of:
a. a felony,
b. an offense involving sexual misconduct with children,
c. any provision of Article 11 of Illinois Criminal Code (720 ILCS 511-1 et
seq); or
(3) That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the applicant, if
permitted, would violate the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The applicant or any person described within paragraph 11.14 (D) has had a
massage establishment license or masseur or masseuse permit revoked within the
immediately preceding 5-years by the City, the State of Illinois or any other
government entity.
The license provided herein shall be for a initial term ending April 30 next, following the
issuance of the license, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Such license must be renewed
annually, and any renewal shall be for a term of one year from May 1 to April 30.
F. Revocation or Suspension of Massage Establishment License
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the
Administrative Official after a hearing, for a good cause. The Administrative Official shall give
to the licensee at least ten (10) days written notice of the charges and an opportunity for a public
hearing before the Administrative Official, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question. Cause for revocation or suspension shall include the violation of the
provisions of this ordinance or of any criminal statute of the State of Illinois by the applicant, or
by any employee of the licensee or any masseuse or masseur employed by the licensee; provided
that the violation of this ordinance or any criminal law of the State of Illinois shall not be a cause
for revocation or suspension unless the licensee shall have had actual or constructive knowledge
of such violations in the exercise of due diligence.
It shall also be cause for revocation or suspension that the applicant has made a false
statement on any application for permit under this ordinance, or in the event that the licensee
shall refuse to permit any authorized police officer or authorized member of the Inspection
Bureau or of the Fire Department of the City of Mt. Vernon, to inspect the premises or the
operations thereof at reasonable times.
Upon a license being revoked, the person to whom the license was issued shall be
prohibited from receiving a license or permit under this Ordinance for a period of 5-years from
date of revocation.
G. Necessary Facilities for Massage Establishments
No massage establishment shall receive a permit or be operated, established, or
maintained, unless the establishment shall comply with each of the following minimum
regulations:
(1) All massage tables, bath tubs, shower stalls, bath areas and floors shall
have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
(2) Separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall
be provided for female and male patrons, so that female and male patrons
may be served simultaneously in the event that patrons of both sexes are
permitted.
(3) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(4) Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient 1ocations. When five or
more employees or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. Lavatories or wash
basins shall be provided with both hot and cold running water and shall be
installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins
shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
(5) Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean linens,
towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or
cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas.
H. Operating Requirements for Massage Establishments
(a) Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus,
shall be kept clean and operated under sanitary conditions.
(b) Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a
location available to all prospective customers.
(c) All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall wear clean,
non-transparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas, and such
outer garments shall be restricted in use to the massage establishment.
(d) A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises, with
individual lockers for each employee, masseuse and masseur.
(e) Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
(f) All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and
towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and
stored in a sanitary manner.
(g) The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with towels, cloths, or
undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur, or masseuse.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or her
hand upon, or to touch with any part of his or her body, or to fondle in any
manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any person.
(i) No masseur or masseuse, employee or licensee, shall perform, offer, or agree to
perform any act which shall require the touching of the patron's genital area.
(j) All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths and steam rooms and any
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(k) Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering massages shall
be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
(l) No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any
skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin eruption, unless a physician
duly licensed by the State of Illinois shall certify in writing that such person may
be safely massaged, describing the conditions under which such massage may be
performed.
(m) Each masseur or masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using
the proper soap or disinfectant before administering any massage to any patron.
I. Inspection
The Inspection Bureau and the Fire Department shall, from time to time, and at least
twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this ordinance for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this ordinance
are complied, with. Such inspection shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the
premises or to hinder such inspection officer in any manner.
J. Employment
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, proprietor, manager or other person in charge
of any massage establishment, to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age.
K. Transfer of License
No license for the operation of a massage establishment shall be transferable except with
the written consent of the Administrative Official; provided, however, that upon the death or
incapacity of the licensee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable
period of time to permit an orderly transfer of the license to the personal representative of the
licensee or to a transferee of the license.
L. Display of License or Permit
The massage establishment and each masseur or masseuse shall display a valid current
license or permit in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the same may
be readily seen by persons entering the establishment.
M. Permit for Masseur or Masseuse
Any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined shall file an
application for a permit as a masseur or masseuse, which application shall be filed with the City
Clerk upon the form provided by the Clerk, and shall pay a non-refundable filing fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the original application and ten dollars ($10.00) for each renewal
application.
Persons who shall be licensed as a physical therapist by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation under 225 ILCS 90/1 et seq and persons who shall be licensed as a
massage therapist by the Illinois Department of Professional Regulations under 225 ILCS 57/1 et
seq shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance requiring a permit for masseur or
masseuse.
N. Application for Masseur or Masseuse Permit
The application for a permit for a masseur or a masseuse shall contain the following:
(1) Name and residence.
(2) Social Security Number
(3) Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(4) Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for 3 years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere
to, or suffered a forfeiture of bond on a charge of committing any violation
of the City Ordinances or State Statute (except minor traffic violations). In
the event any answer is in the affirmative, then the applicant shall state the
place and court in which such conviction, plea, or forfeiture was had, the
specific charge, and the sentence imposed as a result thereof.
(6) Whether the applicant has within the immediately preceding 5-years had a
permit for a masseur or masseuse or license for a massage establishment
revoked by the City, by the State of Illinois or other governmental entity;
such revocation shall make the applicant ineligible to receive a permit.
(7) The applicant shall further undergo a physical examination and present the
written results thereof for contagious and communicable diseases which
shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a
test or tests which will demonstrate freedom from tuberculosis, and each
test shall have been made by a licensed physician and all laboratory tests
shall be in laboratories approved by the City of Mt. Vernon. The applicant
shall then present a certificate with the results of each such examination
signed by a physician licensed in the State of Illinois stating that the
person examined is either free from any contagious or communicable
disease or is incapable of communicating any of such diseases to others.
Each applicant shall undergo the physical examination provided herein and
present to the City Clerk the certificate required herein prior to the
commencement of employment and at least once each 12 months
thereafter.
O. Issuance of Permit for Masseur or Masseuse
The Administrative Official shall direct the issuance by the City Clerk of a permit for a
masseur or masseuse within 21 days following the application and the providing of all
information required by this ordinance, unless the Administrative Official finds that the applicant
for a permit has been convicted of a felony, an offense involving sexual misconduct with
children, or any violation of Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code (750 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq), or
unless he finds that the applicant has failed to provide all the information and certificates
required by this ordinance or fails to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
Each permit for a masseur or masseuse, pursuant to this ordinance, shall terminate on
April 30 following its issuance, and any renewal shall be for a one year term commencing May 1
and ending April 30 thereafter.
P. Revocation of Permit for Masseur or Masseuse
A permit for masseur or masseuse may be revoked or suspended where it appears that the
masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial or a
permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or
has committed an act in violation of this ordinance. The Administrative Official shall give the
permit holder a written notice specifying the grounds for suspension or revocation. The permit
holder may, within ten (10) days from the date of such revocation or suspension, file a written
request for public hearing, which hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after the filing of
request for same, and at which time the permit holder may present evidence bearing upon the
question. The Administrative Official shall then issue a written order as to whether the permit
shall be revoked or suspended within five (5) days after the date of hearing.
Upon a permit being revoked the person to whom the permit was issued shall be
prohibited from receiving a license or permit under this Ordinance for a period of 5-years from
date of revocation.
Q. Exceptions as to License
No massage establishment license nor masseur or masseuse permit shall be required for
hospitals, nursing homes, sanitara, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice
medicine under the laws of the State of Illinois, or to persons working under the personal
direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this ordinance apply to
barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their profession and holding a valid unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois.
R. Advertising
No massage establishment, no masseur or masseuse, nor any other person, shall place,
publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that
any services are available other than those services permitted by this ordinance, or which would
reasonably suggest that employees, masseurs, or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than
that permitted by this ordinance.
S. Out Call Massage and Registration
Any person who provides any massage or masseuse services at any hotel or motel must
first register his or her name and his or her State license number with the owner, manager, or
person in charge of such hotel or motel. No out call massage service may be operated other than
by a massage therapist licensed by the State of Illinois, Department of Professional Regulation,
and each out call massage or massage service is subject to the provisions this ordinance.
T. Prohibited Massages and Massage Services
No person (including but without limitation any person licensed hereunder or any
massage therapist) shall:
(a) provide a massage or massage services unless all masseurs and masseuses and all
employees shall wear a clean non-transparent outer garment covering their sexual
and genital areas.
(b) provide a massage or massage services unless the sexual or genital areas of
patrons are covered with towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of
an employee, masseur or masseuse.
(c) provide a massage or massage services in such a manner or in such a way as to
place his or her hand upon, or to touch with any part of his or her body, or to
fondle in any manner, or to massage, the sexual or genital area of any person.
(d) perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of a
patron=s genital area.
U. Violation and Penalty
Each person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty provisions of Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mt. Vernon, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon
each day that a violation shall continue. In addition, each person who shall violate the provision
of this Ordinance shall be subject to suit for an injunction.
V. Severability
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, or part of this ordinance is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any final court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
SECTION 11.15 REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
(Adopted by Ordinance 2003-55 which identifies information reviewed by and findings of
the City Council all of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto, the same as if
set out verbatim herein.)
SECTION 11.15.1 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of Section 11.15 to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the City, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from
such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of Section 11.15 have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of Section 11.15 to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment,
or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of the Section to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene materials.
SECTION 11.15.2 Definitions.
The words and phrases defined herein shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them
unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context.
(1) Adult Cabaret means any commercial establishment, except an adult theater,
semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter center, including but not limited to a
nightclub, bar, restaurant, or gentlemen=s club, which regularly features any one or more
of the following:
(a) persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity;
(b) live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon
exposure of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas.@
(2) Adult Motel means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which
offers private accommodations to the public, for any form of consideration,
which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of Aspecified
sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ and which advertises the
availability of such sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible
from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising
including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio
or television, and which (i) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less
than ten hours or (ii) allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room
for a time period of less than ten hours.
(3) Adult Store means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
(a) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations that are characterized by the depicting or describing of
Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas;@ or
(b) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with Aspecified sexual activities.@
(c) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matters exhibiting or describing Aspecified sexual activity@ or Aspecified
anatomical areas@ and which are shown within a viewing room as hereinafter
defined on still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines
or computers or other image producing machines.
A principal business purpose exists if the establishment has a significant or substantial
portion of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
or devotes a significant or substantial section of its sales or display or floor space to the
sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the items described above.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing Aspecified sexual
activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ and still be categorized as an adult store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from
being categorized as an adult store so long as one of its principal business purposes are
characterized by the depiction or description of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified
anatomical areas.@
(4) Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which has a room(s) for viewing or viewing areas, each of which are 150
square feet or greater in size and which for any form of consideration regularly features
any one of the following:
(a) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ are
regularly shown for any form of consideration;
(b) persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity or live
performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
Aspecific sexual activities@ or Aspecific anatomical areas@.
(5) Building and Zoning Official means Building Official (also known as the Chief
Building Inspector) established under Article 5 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(6) Dancer or performer means an employee who dances or otherwise performs in an
adult cabaret or adult theater.
(7) Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis Upon means the dominant or
principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase
refers to films Awhich are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical area,@
the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description Aspecified anatomical areas@ or Aspecified sexual activities.@
(8) Employ, Employee, and Employment describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a business, on a full time, part time, or contract
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent, or otherwise. A person who performs a service shall be considered a employee,
regardless of whether said person receives a fee, tips, or other form of consideration or no
payment or consideration of any kind. Employee does not include a person exclusively on
the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
(9) Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie for another person.
(10) Escort Agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee,
tip, or other consideration.
(11) Establishment means and includes any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of a sexually oriented business as a new
business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in Section
11.15;
(c) The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
(d) A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented
business is located.
(12) Hearing Officer shall mean the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon or his
designee; if the City Manager is unavailable, and in absence of any other designation by
the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager shall be the hearing officer.
(13) Knowledge or With Knowledge means: A person knows or acts knowingly or with
knowledge of the nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct, which constitutes the
violation, when he is consciously aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such
circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that such fact exists. A person also knows or acts knowingly or with
knowledge of the result of his conduct, which constitutes the violation, when he is
consciously aware that such result is practically certain to be caused by his conduct.
(14) Licensee means a person in whose name a license has been issued.
(15) Nude or State of Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or anal cleavage with less than a fully opaque and
non-transparent covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
and non-transparent covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(16) Operate or Cause to Operate or Operator shall mean to cause to function or to put
or keep in a state of doing business. AOperator@ means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the
business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A
person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented
business whether or not that person is an owner, or has an ownership interest in the
business.
(17) Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
(18) Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and the structure and buildings thereon, including,
but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or
supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant
to subsection 11.15.7 of this Ordinance.
(19) Public Park or Recreation Area means public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature
trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths or similar public land open to the public within the City of Mt.
Vernon which is under the control, operation, or management of the City or other
governmental, charitable, or not-for-profit authority.
(20) Public Place means any location frequented by the public or where the public is
present or likely to be present or any location where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public or any location that is readily visible to the
public or any location where the public has a right to go or is invited.
(21) Regularly Features means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such
that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or
performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the establishment.
(22) Religious Institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, regular place
of worship or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
(23) Residential District or Use means the R-1, Low Density Residential; R-2,
Medium Density Residential; R-M2, Medium Density and Mobile Home; R-3, High
Density Residential; and R-MH, Planned Mobile Home Districts described within Article
21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Residential Use means any dwelling or structure
used or occupied for living quarters of any person or property upon which there is situated
a residential structure, dwelling unit or other living quarters.
(24) School means any public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergarten, elementary schools,
primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, high schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities.
School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
(25) Semi-Nude or Semi-nudity means a state of dress in which non-transparent and
opaque clothing covers from view no more than the human buttocks, anus, anal cleft and
cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, vulva and the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point and the human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breasts, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse,
shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola and nipple are not
exposed in whole or in part.
(26) Semi-nude Model Studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears
in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be viewed
or observed or sketched or drawn or painted or sculptured or photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons. Semi-nude Model Studio shall not include a modeling class
operated: (a) By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or (b) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or (c) In a structure: (i) which has no
sign visible from the exterior of the structure and other advertising that indicates a
semi-nude person available for viewing and (ii) where, in order to participate in a class a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and (iii) where no more
than one model is on the premises at any one time.
(27) Sexual Encounter Center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(a) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex; or
(b) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one or more of the persons is in a state of semi-nudity.
The requirement of a raised stage within Section 11.15.26 (3) is not applicable to sexual
encounter centers, but each and every other provisions of Section 11.15.26 shall apply. A
principal business purpose exists if the services offered are intended to generate business
income.
(28) Sexually Oriented Business means an adult store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult theater, sexual encounter center, escort agency, or semi-nude model studio.
(29) Specified Anatomical Areas means and includes any of the following:
(a) the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely
covered;
(b) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(30) Specified Sexual Activities means and includes any of the following:
(a) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
(b) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;
(c) masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(d) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in (a) through (c) above.
(31) Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Business means and
includes any of the following:
(a) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(b) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
(c) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or
other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or
control.
(32) Viewing Room shall mean a room, booth, or area having less than 150 square
feet of floor space where a patron of a sexually oriented business is positioned or would
ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video
reproduction.
SECTION 11.15.3 Classification of Businesses Regulated.
Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as follows:
(1) Adult store
(2) Adult cabaret
(3) Adult motel
(4) Adult theater
(5) Escort agency
(6) Semi-nude model studio
(7) Sexual encounter center
SECTION 11.15.4 Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(1) The establishment of a sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in the
Light Industrial District (I-1) as described within Article 21 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
(2) The sexually oriented business shall not be operated within 400 feet of
(a) a religious institution;
(b) a school;
(c) a public park;
(d) the boundary of any residential district;
(e) any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized for residential use,
whether zoned residential or not;
(3) A sexually oriented business shall not be operated in the same building, structure
or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business classified pursuant to
Section 11.15.3 herein or containing any business or premises licensed under Article 6 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances or containing any business or premises licensed under
Article 11, Section 11.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. In addition, a sexually
oriented business shall not be operated within 800 feet of another sexually oriented
business classified pursuant to Section 11.15.3 herein or within 800 feet of any business
or premises licensed under Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or within 800
feet of any business or premises licensed under Article 11, Section 11.4 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances. The sexually oriented business shall be situated within a single
structure upon the premises or, if situated within more than one building each of said
buildings shall be connected one to the other by an enclosed walkway, hall, or other
similar manner (which shall be deemed to be part of the interior of the licensed premises)
so that no patron or employee nor any other person is required to exit a building to the
exterior of the sexually oriented business to enter another building.
(4) For the purposes of this subsection measurements shall be made in a straight line
without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building
or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted
to the nearest property line of the premises of a business or use described within Section
11.15.4 (2).
(5) For purposes of this subsection the distance between any two businesses described
within subparagraph (3) above shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which
each business is located.
(6) The distance requirements and provisions of this subsection shall not be subject to
variance.
SECTION 11.15.5 Non-conforming Use for Sexually Oriented Business; Compliance.
(1) Any sexually oriented business lawfully established, lawfully located and lawfully
operating on the date of passage of Section 11.15 that is in violation of 11.15.4 is a
non-conforming use. A non-conforming use will be permitted to continue at its existing
location for a period of one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily
discontinued for a period of thirty days or more; however, such non-conforming sexually
oriented business shall during said one year period be required to comply with each
provision of Section 11.15 except the location restriction and except any provision
requiring structural remodeling or alteration of the premises. Such non-conforming use
shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed
to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 800 feet of
one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which
was first established and continually operating at the particular location is the conforming
use and the later established business is non-conforming.
(2) A sexually oriented business lawfully established, lawfully located and lawfully
operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business license, of a business or
use described within Section 11.15.4(2) within 400 feet of the sexually oriented business.
This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. No
business described within Section 11.15.4(3) is permitted to locate within the distance
restriction for sexually oriented businesses described within Section 11.15.4(3).
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, any establishment or any person subject to the
provisions of Section 11.15 shall comply with the provisions and regulations of Section
11.15 immediately upon its effective date, including without limitation Section 11.15.13,
11.15.19, 11.15.23, 11.15.24, 11.15.25, 11.15.26, 11.15.27, and 11.15.28. Any
establishment existing prior to the effective date of Section 11.15 shall apply for the
license provided for by subsection 11.15.7 within thirty days of the effective date of
Section 11.15. Any person employed by an establishment prior to the effective date of
Section 11.15 shall apply for the license provided for by subsection 11.15.8 within thirty
days of the effective date of Section 11.15. Any establishment existing prior to the
effective date of Section 11.15 with regard to a provision requiring alteration to its
structure or to its premises in order to comply with Section 11.15 shall fully comply with
said provision within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of Section 11.15
unless said establishment is a non-conforming use which will terminate under Section
11.15.5.
(4) A sexually oriented business not lawfully established, not lawfully located or not
lawfully operating by reason of any ordinance, statute, or code in effect immediately prior
to the effective date of Section 11.15 shall immediately cease operation and shall cease
conduct of business as Section 11.15 shall not be construed so as to allow any illegal use
or use established in violation of law, including without limitation 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5, or
55 ILCS 5/5-1097.5 or Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, to continue as a
non-conforming use.
SECTION 11.15.6 License Required.
(1) No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the City.
(2) No person who operates a sexually oriented business shall employ a person to work
and/or perform services on the premises of a sexually oriented business, if such employee
is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such
employee by the City.
(3) No person shall obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such
person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued
to such person by the City.
SECTION 11.15.7 Application for Sexually Oriented Business License.
(1) An application for a sexually oriented business license, whether original or
renewal, must be made by each operator or operators of the sexually oriented business on
a form provided by the City. The application must be submitted to the City Clerk and
shall be marked by the City Clerk with the date and time of receipt. The application
shall be subject to approval or denial by the Building and Zoning Official of the City.
The application form shall request and the applicant shall be required to provide
information described within subparagraph (2) herein. The application form, upon filing
with the City Clerk must be accompanied by the application fee and by each of the
following described diagrams or drawings:
(a) a drawing showing the internal and external configuration of the premises,
including all doors, entrances, exits, and the fixed structural internal features of
the premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas,
hallways, restrooms, dressing rooms, and other rooms and showing each
designated area where a patron(s) is not permitted access; and also a diagram or
drawing which includes the information needed to determine off-street parking
and lighting requirements set out within Section 11.15.22. The drawings or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated
scale or drawn with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
(b) a current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty days
prior to the application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines
and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 800
feet of the premises to be certified and any premises licensed under Article 6 of
the Revised Code within 800 feet of the premises to be certified and any premises
licensed under Article 11, Section 11.14 of the Revised Code within 800 feet of
the premises to be certified; and the property lines of any established business or
use described within Section 11.15.4(2) within 400 feet of the premises to be
certified. For purposes of this subparagraph (b), a use shall be considered
existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is filed with
the City Clerk.
(2) The application for a sexually oriented business license and the applicant shall be
required to provide the following information:
(a) The name and current mailing address of the applicant(s);
(b) Written proof of age in the form of a birth certificate or picture
identification issued by a governmental agency of person signing application;
(c) The single classification of license as found in Section 11.15.3 for which
the applicant is filing;
(d) The street address and legal description of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be located;
(e) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall
exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, films, videocassettes or other video reproductions which depict specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas then the applicant (adult store) shall
comply with the additional application requirements set forth in subsection
11.15.24.
(f) An affirmative statement that the applicant(s) within the preceding
12-months has not had any license issued under Section 11.15 revoked.
(3) In the event that the sexually oriented business premises has not been constructed
or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed sexually oriented business at the time the
application is filed with the City Clerk, the Building Official shall base his approval or
denial of the license upon the diagrams or drawings submitted pursuant to Section
11.15.7(1) and 11.15.7(2). Subject to Section 11.15.5, any sexually oriented business
license issued prior to completion of the construction or reconstruction necessary to
accommodate the sexually oriented business shall be subject to the condition that the
sexually oriented business shall not open for business until the licensed premises is in
strict compliance with the diagrams submitted with the application. Prior to the sexually
oriented business opening for business the licensee shall make a request in writing to the
City Clerk for an inspection and determination that the premises is in compliance with the
diagrams. An inspection and determination by the Building Official and written notice
of the determination to licensee shall be completed within ten business days of the filing
of the written request with the City Clerk. Upon filing of the written request by licensee
with the City Clerk, the sexually oriented business may immediately open for business
but the license shall be subject to revocation if the premises is not in strict compliance
with the diagrams submitted by licensee with his application.
(4) The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with
information received subsequent to the date that the application is filed with the City.
None of the items set forth within subparagraph (1) and (2) herein, except the name and
current address of the applicant(s) shall be required for a renewal application if the
applicant states in writing under oath that the documents and information previously
furnished to the City with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain
correct and current.
(5) The approval or use of the diagrams or drawings required pursuant to subsection
11.15.7 shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute,
any other City approval otherwise required pursuant to other applicable City ordinances
and/or State law.
SECTION 11.15.8 Application for a Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.
(1) Applications for a sexually oriented business employee license to work and/or
perform services as an employee in a sexually oriented business, whether original or
renewal, must be personally submitted to the City Clerk by the person to whom the
employee license shall issue; the City Clerk shall mark each application with the date and
time of receipt. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by the
application fee. Application forms shall be supplied by the City.
(2) Each applicant for an employee license shall be required to give the following
information on the application form:
(a) The applicant's name
(b) Written proof of age in the form of a birth certificate or picture
identification issued by a governmental agency.
(c) Current mailing address
(d) An affirmative statement that the applicant within the preceding 12
months has not had any license issued under Section 11.15 revoked.
SECTION 11.15.9 Additional Application Requirements.
(1) Every application for a license under Section 11.15 shall contain a statement
under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and
correct.
(2) The person to whom an employee license shall issue shall sign the application for
the license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual he shall sign the application as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate
is other than an individual, the person signing the application shall verify that he has the
legal authority to legally bind the applicant.
(3) Personal information provided upon an application shall be confidential and shall
not be disclosed to the public except to the extent required by Illinois or Federal law.
(4) An applicant at the time of filing of an application may make written demand that
notice of decision on the application for a new license be given by personal delivery,
although in such case the applicant must provide the City Clerk with the method (of the
applicant=s choice) by which the City Clerk can promptly contact the applicant and the
applicant must present himself at the Office of the City Clerk for personal delivery; if the
applicant does not make demand for personal delivery then the applicant is not required
to provide a method of contact nor required to present himself at the Office of the City
Clerk and the City Clerk may serve the decision on the applicant by personal delivery or
by certified mail.
SECTION 11.15.10 Issuance of a Sexually Oriented Business License.
(1) If application is made for a sexually oriented business license the Building and
Zoning Official shall either approve or deny the issuance and the City Clerk shall issue
the license or issue a written denial to an applicant within 20-days of the filing of
application with the City Clerk. The Building and Zoning Official shall approve a license
and the City Clerk shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(a) The applicant has failed to provide the information requested on the
application form or has falsely answered a question or request for information on
the application form;
(b) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(c) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or an employee
license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois revoked within the 12-months
preceding the date of the application
(d) Subject to subsection (3) below, the premises to be used for the sexually
oriented business has been determined by the Building Department, Fire
Department or Zoning Department of the City as not being in compliance with
applicable Building, Zoning or Fire Codes;
(e) The license fee required has not been paid;
(f) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business does not meet
the location restrictions of 11.15.4 or the premises is physically or structurally not
in compliance with one or more provisions of Section 11.15.
(g) The applicant has refused or failed to permit inspection of the premises.
(2) A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the street address of the
sexually oriented business and the Section 11.15.3 classification for which the license is
issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(3) Failure of an appropriate City Department or employee to timely complete a
review or inspection, failure of the Building Official to approve or deny a license, or
failure of the City Clerk to issue or deny a license shall not be grounds for refusing to
issue a license within 20-days (or within the extended time period requested by the
applicant) from the date the application is filed with the City Clerk. In the event the City
Clerk fails to issue or deny a license within the time specified, the license will be deemed
to have been issued. However, the licensee and the licensed premises must still comply
with all provisions of Section 11.15 the same as if a license had been issued by the City
Clerk, as the failure of the City to render a decision on an application does not excuse
compliance by the licensee with any provision of Section 11.15, except the license
requirement. The licensee is also subject to all provisions of Section 11.15 relating to
renewal of license, suspension of a license or revocation of a license.
(4) A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as set
forth in Section 11.15.3 and for only one designated premises.
(5) In the event that the Building Official determines that an applicant is not eligible
for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing by
the City Clerk of the reasons for the denial within 20-days of the filing of the completed
application with the City Clerk, provided that the applicant may request in writing at any
time before the notice is issued that such period be extended for an additional definite
time period in order to comply with the requirements of Section 11.15.
(6) A sexually oriented business license shall be subject to annual renewal upon the
written application of the applicant. The decision whether to renew a license shall be
made within 20-days of the filing of the application with the City Clerk (unless extended
by request of the applicant). The request for renewal shall be subject to the fee as set forth
within Section 11.15.12.
(7) Denial of a new or original license, denial of renewal of a license, suspension of a
license, or revocation of a license shall be subject to the licensing and appeal procedures
as provided within subsection 11.15.17.
SECTION 11.15.11 Issuance of a Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.
(1) Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee
license, the City Clerk shall within one business hour issue an employee license, unless it
is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following
findings is true:
(a) The applicant has failed to answer or has falsely answered a question or
has failed to provide information requested on the application form; or
(b) The applicant is under the age of 18 years; or
(c) the applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or employee
license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon Illinois revoked within the twelve
months preceding the date of the application.
(2) Denial of a license shall be in writing and shall state the reason for denial. In the
event the City Clerk fails to render a written decision on an application within one
business hour, the license will be deemed to have been issued. Failure of the City Clerk to
render a decision on an application does not excuse compliance by the licensee with any
provision of Section 11.15, except the license requirement; the licensee is also subject of
all provisions of Section 11.15 relating to renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or
revocation of a license.
(3) A sexually oriented business employee license, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the person to whom it is granted and the expiration date. While engaged in
employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises an
employee shall at all times possess the license in such manner so that it is available for
immediate inspection upon lawful request. This subparagraph does not require the
employee to have the license on his or her person at all times.
(4) A sexually oriented business employee license shall be subject to annual renewal
upon the written application of the applicant. The decision whether to renew a license
shall be made within one business hour of the application being filed with the City Clerk.
The renewal of the license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in subsection 11.15.12.
(5) Denial of a new or original license, denial of renewal of a license, suspension of a
license or revocation of a sexually oriented business employee license shall be subject to
the licensing and appeal procedures as provided within subsection 11.15.17.
SECTION 11.15.12 Fees.
(1) Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new
license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $120.00
non-refundable application, inspection and license fee.
(2) Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual
$12.00 non-refundable application and license fee.
(3) All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
(4) The license fee described above shall be prorated from the date of application
based on the number of months (or part thereof) remaining in the licensing period prior to
expiration on April 30.
SECTION 11.15.13 Inspection.
(1) Each applicant, licensee, or operator of a sexually oriented business shall permit
representatives of the City, including but not limited to Building, Inspection, Zoning,
Police & Fire personnel, and representatives of State agencies and entities to inspect the
premises of and the activities upon a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business or any
period that any employee or the licensee is on or within the premises. If an application for
new license is pending and if the sexually oriented business is not open for business
inspection shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(2) Inspection of the premises under the authority of this subsection shall be limited
to visual assessment of the premises and of the activities conducted in areas to which a
patron is permitted access or a patron is allowed access or is present or areas which are
visible to a patron or to requests for inspection of any license as required under Section
11.15 and to requests related to the identification of individuals who reasonably appear to
be in violation of any provision of Section 11.15. If an application for a new license is
pending the inspection shall be for the purpose of determining whether the premises meet
the applicable licensing requirements of subsection 11.15.10(1)(d) and (f).
(3) No person who operates a sexually oriented business nor any agent or employee of
same nor any patron shall refuse to permit such lawful inspection as set forth within
paragraph (1) above, nor provide false information during the course of an inspection.
(4) Nothing herein shall require any person entitled to make an inspection under
paragraph (1) above to request the permission of a licensee or of an employee prior to an
inspection of any area to which a patron is permitted or allowed access or is present or
which is visible to a patron when a sexually oriented business is occupied or open for
business as provided within paragraph (1) above. In addition, nothing herein shall
prohibit inspection of the premises at other times or in another manner if otherwise
permitted by law.
SECTION 11.15.14 Expiration of License.
(1) A sexually oriented business license shall be an annual license and shall expire on
April 30 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in
subsection 11.15.7. Application for renewal shall be made at least twenty days before
the expiration date. No application for renewal shall be made sooner than forty-five days
before expiration.
(2) Each sexually oriented business employee license shall be an annual license and
shall expire on April 30 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as
provided in subsection 11.15.8. Application for renewal shall be made prior to the
expiration of the license. No application for renewal shall be made sooner than thirty days
before expiration of the license.
SECTION 11.15.15 Suspension.
(1) The City shall suspend a sexually oriented business license or employee license
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that the licensee has knowingly:
(a) violated or is not in compliance with any provision of Section 11.15;
(b) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by subsection 11.15.13 or given false information during an inspection.
SECTION 11.15.16 Revocation.
(1) The City shall revoke or shall deny renewal of a sexually oriented business license
or employee license if it determines by a preponderance of the evidence that any one of
the following has occurred:
(a) a licensee gave false or misleading information in the responses, drawings,
or the material submitted during the application process;
(b) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted any act which
violates Section 11.15.26(1), (2), (3), (4), (5),(6), (9), or (10);
(c) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted the possession, use,
or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(d) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted the sale, use,
possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
(e) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted prostitution on the
premises;
(f) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted gambling on the
premises;
(g) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed
premises;
(h) a licensee has with knowledge permitted a person under eighteen (18)
years of age to enter the establishment or to remain on the premises;
(i) a licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned,
or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a
non-licensee of the business;
(j) a licensee has with knowledge permitted another person to possess and use
or represent the licensee's license as his own;
(k) a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted a person or persons
to engage in Aspecified sexual activities@ on the premises of the sexually oriented
business; provided that this subsection (k) shall not apply to the erotic movements
or the erotic touching of one=s own genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or
breasts, whether covered or uncovered, by a dancer or performer during the course
of a live performance.
(l) a licensee has with knowledge operated the sexually oriented business or
has been employed by a sexually oriented business during a period of time when
the licensee's license was suspended.
(m) a cause of suspension in Section 11.15.15 occurs and the license has
previously been suspended for any reason within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
(n) a licensee failed to construct or establish the premises of the sexually
oriented business in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.15.7(3).
(o) a licensee reconstructs or alters a licensed premises after the issuance of a
license for the premises, such that the premises does not meet the location
restrictions of Section 11.15.4 or such that the premises is physically or
structurally not in compliance with one or more provisions of Section 11.15.
(p) with regard to a Alicense deemed to have issued@, failure to meet any
requirement within subsection 11.15.10 or 11.15.11, as applicable.
(2) When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and
the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license nor a sexually
oriented business employee license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. No period of any stay pending or during an appeal shall be included within the
one year revocation period.
(3) Revocation of a license deemed to have issued for a reason limited to and related
to the ineligibility of the applicant or of the premises for a license as set forth within
subsection 11.15.10 or 11.15.11 shall not constitute a revocation for purposes of the
disqualification of a license applicant on grounds that the applicant has had a license
revoked within the 12-months preceding the date of an application for license. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent a licensee from suffering a detriment arising from
the inaction or inability of the City in making or obtaining a prompt determination
regarding issuance of a new license.
SECTION 11.15.17 Licensing Procedure and Licensing Decisions.
(1) Subject to subsection 11.15.9(4), if the City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon or
his designee determines that facts exist for denial of a new license or denial of a renewal
or suspension of a license or revocation of a license under Section 11.15, the City Clerk
or his designee shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the denial
or of the intent to suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by
personal delivery or by U.S. certified mail. The notification shall include a statement of
the respondent's rights of appeal under this subsection. The notification shall be
personally served or mailed by certified mail to the mailing address on file with the City
Clerk for the respondent. Within ten business days of receipt of such notice, the
respondent may provide to the City Clerk or his designee a written response that shall
include a statement of reasons why the respondent believes the license should not be
denied, suspended or revoked. If no response is received by the City Clerk then a final
notice of denial, suspension, or revocation shall be served upon respondent by personal
service or certified mail. If a response is received, within five business days of the
receipt of the response, the City Clerk or Hearing Officer shall notify respondent in
writing of a hearing date on the respondent's denial, suspension or revocation proceeding.
Within ten business days of the receipt of respondent's written response the Hearing
Officer shall conduct a hearing at which hearing the respondent shall have the opportunity
to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, to present
evidence and witnesses on his own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses; witnesses
shall be sworn and the proceeding recorded. The City Clerk shall also be represented by
counsel and shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the
grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The Hearing Officer shall issue
and serve upon respondent by personal service or by U.S. certified mail a written opinion
within five business days after conclusion of the hearing. If applicable, respondent shall
receive a final notice of denial or suspension or revocation which shall be included in the
Hearing Officer=s Order; said final notice shall include a statement advising the
respondent of the right to appeal under this subsection. If the Hearing Officer finds that
no grounds exist for denial of the license then the City Clerk or his designee shall issue
the license to the applicant, or if the City Clerk fails to issue said license within two
business days, the Hearing Officer shall issue the license. Business day means any day
that City Hall is open to the public for the transaction of business.
(2) When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant
or licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been
suspended or revoked shall have the right to seek judicial review and to appeal or
challenge such action to any court of competent jurisdiction and proper venue. If a court
action challenging the Hearing Officer=s decision is initiated, the City shall timely and
without delay prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing.
(3) An applicant for a new sexually oriented business license, as opposed to a
renewal, may but is not required to participate in the appeal (hearing) process set forth
within paragraph (1) above. An applicant whose application for a new license has been
denied by the City Clerk and who disagrees with the decision may at the applicant=s sole
election: (i) participate in the appeal process as set forth within paragraph (1) above or (ii)
give written notice to the City Clerk after notice of denial of the license, of the
applicant=s AIntent to Open@ the sexually oriented business without a license on the tenth
calendar day after the date of the Written Notice of Intent to Open is filed in the Office of
the City Clerk; upon filing, said Notice shall be marked by the City Clerk with the date
and time of filing. If the applicant elects to give Written Notice of Intent to Open as
provided above, then the City of Mt. Vernon must within the 10-day period designated
within the Notice of Intent to Open petition the Illinois Second Judicial Circuit Court or
any Court of competent jurisdiction and proper venue and obtain injunctive relief or
other appropriate relief. The Court in which the petition for injunctive relief or other
judicial relief is filed shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements for
issuance of a sexually oriented business license under Section 11.15.10 and determine
the validity of any provision thereof that the applicant does not meet and shall in
accordance with Article XI, Part I of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure or other
applicable statute grant such relief as the Court deems necessary and appropriate. If the
City fails to petition for injunctive relief or if the Court fails to issue the injunctive relief
or grant such other relief as requested denying the license or enjoining the sexually
oriented business from opening prior to expiration of the 10-day period described within
the Notice of Intent to Open, the license shall be deemed to be issued, although the
licensee and the licensed premises must still comply with all provisions of Section 11.15
the same as if the license had been issued by the City Clerk, as a failure or inability of the
City to obtain injunctive relief or other judicial relief does not excuse compliance by the
licensee with any provision of Section 11.15, except the license requirement or such
requirement as determined by a Court not to be applicable or enforceable. The license
and licensee shall, except as provided within subsection 11.15.16 (3) also be subject to
all provisions of Section 11.15 relating to renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or
revocation of a license. If the City does not petition for injunctive relief or other judicial
relief within the 10-day period described within the Notice of Intent to Open and if the
license is deemed to be issued, the City may nonetheless petition the Court for injunctive
relief or other judicial relief or initiate proceedings under subsection 11.15.17 to suspend
or revoke the license; provided, however, that a Alicense deemed to be issued@ shall be
entitled to the same stay of proceedings to preserve the status quo as provided for a
license actually issued by the City Clerk. In addition, if an applicant elects to seek an
appeal to the City Hearing Officer of a decision of the City Clerk denying a license, the
applicant shall still retain and be entitled to exercise its rights under this subparagraph and
give the AWritten Notice of Intent to Open@ after the Hearing Officer issues a final notice
of denial.
An applicant for a new sexually oriented business employee license, as opposed to a
renewal, may but is not required to participate in the appeal (hearing) process set forth
within paragraph (1) above. An applicant whose application for a new employee license
has been denied by the City Clerk and who disagrees with the decision may at the
applicant=s sole election: (i) participate in the appeal process as set forth within paragraph
(1) above or (ii) give written notice to the City Clerk after notice of denial of the license,
of the applicant=s AIntent to Be Employed A by the sexually oriented business without a
license upon expiration of twenty-four hours from the date and time the Written Notice of
Intent to Be Employed is filed in the Office of the City Clerk; upon filing, said Notice
shall be marked by the City Clerk with the date and time of filing. If the applicant elects
to give Written Notice of Intent to Be Employed as provided above, then the City of
Mt. Vernon must within the 24 hour period designated within the Notice of Intent to Be
Employed petition the Illinois Second Judicial Circuit Court or any court of competent
jurisdiction and proper venue and obtain injunctive relief or other appropriate relief. The
Court in which the petition for injunctive relief or other judicial relief is filed shall
determine whether the applicant meets the requirements for issuance of a sexually
oriented business employee license under Section 11.15.11 and determine the validity of
any provision thereof that the applicant does not meet and shall in accordance with
Article XI, Part I of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure or other applicable statute grant
such relief as the court deems necessary and appropriate. If the City fails to petition for
injunctive relief or if the Court fails to issue the injunctive relief or grant such other relief
as requested denying the license or enjoining the applicant from being employed prior to
expiration of the 24-hour period described within the Notice of Intent to Be Employed,
the license shall be deemed to be issued, although the licensee must still comply with all
provisions of Section 11.15 the same as if the license had been issued by the City Clerk,
as a failure or inability of the City to obtain injunctive relief or other judicial relief does
not excuse compliance by the licensee with any provision of Section 11.15, except the
license requirement. The license and licensee shall, except as provided within
subsection 11.15.16(3), also be subject to all provisions of Section 11.15 relating to
renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or revocation of a license. If the City does
not petition the Court for injunctive relief or other judicial relief within the period
described within the Notice of Intent to Be Employed and if the license is deemed to be
issued, the City may nonetheless petition for injunctive relief or other judicial relief or
initiate proceedings under subsection 11.15.17 to suspend or revoke the license; provided,
however, that a Alicense deemed to be issued@ shall be entitled to the same stay of
proceedings to preserve the status quo as provided for a license actually issued by the City
Clerk. In addition, if an applicant elects to seek an appeal to the City Hearing Officer of
a decision of the City Clerk denying a license, the applicant shall still retain and be
entitled to exercise its rights under this subparagraph and give the AWritten Notice of
Intent to Be Employed@ after the Hearing Officer issues a final notice of denial.
(4) Notwithstanding any provisions of this subsection, in the event the licensee
appeals the denial of a renewal application or the suspension of a license or revocation of
a license, the status quo immediately prior to such denial, suspension or revocation shall
be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal including the hearing process within
subparagraph (1) above up to and including judicial review as provided within
subparagraph (2) above. Upon a judicial decision being entered, the stay to preserve the
status quo provided herein shall cease and the order or decision of the court shall
determine whether an additional stay is appropriate, required or permitted by law.
SECTION 11.15.18 Transfer of License.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another person, nor shall a licensee operate a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the premises
designated in the application.
SECTION 11.15.19 Alcoholic Beverages.
(1) The sale, use, possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises
of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. A business licensee shall have an
affirmative duty to deny entry to any person in possession of alcoholic liquor and shall
have an affirmative duty not to permit or allow any person in possession of alcoholic
liquor to remain on premises. Each sexually oriented business shall insure that the
attendant at each public entrance pursuant to Section 11.15.27(3) visually inspects each
person and each bag, purse, pocket, package or article in the possession of any person
desiring entry into the sexually oriented business and the business licensee shall have an
affirmative duty to monitor and patrol the entire licensed premises and to enforce against
all persons on the premises the prohibition against the sale, use, possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
(2) No licensee, employee, agent, patron or any other person shall sell, possess, use or
consume alcoholic beverage upon the premises of a sexually oriented business.
SECTION 11.15.20 Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(1) No licensee of a sexually oriented business shall allow any semi-nude employee
or the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business (except the parking,
traffic, and pedestrian access activities of patrons) to be visible from any place outside the
structure in which the sexually oriented business is situated. The licensee shall not
permit any patron or patrons or other person to stand, congregate, loiter, or to gather in
groups upon the exterior premises of the sexually oriented business or allow the vehicular
parking and traffic areas and the pedestrian access areas to be used for any purpose except
movement of traffic, parking of motor vehicles and access of patrons and other persons to
and from the sexually oriented business establishment.
(2) No licensee of a sexually oriented business shall allow the exterior portion of the
sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, search lights, spot lights, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner. No exterior portion of
the establishment shall be painted any color other than an achromatic color, although
this subparagraph does not require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion
of a sexually oriented business. AExterior portion@ shall mean any part of the physical
structure of an establishment, including a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering,
window, or similar item which is visible from the public right-of-way or from any
property adjoining the premises of the sexually oriented business or from any location off
of the premises of the sexually oriented business. AAchromatic@ means colorless, zero in
saturation, or lacking in hue; for purposes of this subsection, the definition of achromatic
shall include, without limitation, white, black, grays, tans, and light earth tones, but any
bold, vivid, neon, fluorescent, or extremely bright coloration that attracts attention shall
be excluded from the definition of achromatic.
(3) Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, Code, or regulation to the contrary, no
operator of a sexually oriented business, no sexually oriented business nor any other
person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign for a sexually oriented business except
one freestanding on-premises sign and one wall-flush mount on-premises sign, each of
which shall comply with the provisions of Section 11.15.20 and Section 11.15.21. The
display surface of each sign shall:
(a) not contain any flashing lights;
(b) be a flat plane, rectangular or square in shape;
(c) not contain any photographs, silhouette, drawing or pictorial
representation in any manner.
(d) each letter forming a word shall be of solid color and each letter shall be of
the same print type, size and color; the background behind such lettering on the
display surface shall be of a uniform and solid color.
(4) No licensee shall advertise the presentation or occurrence of an act or availability
of any service prohibited by Section 11.15.
SECTION 11.15.21 Signage.
The number of signs and the size of each sign shall be as provided within Article 21, Section
21-126.6, Schedule of District of Sign Regulations relating to the I-1, Light Industrial Zoning
District. No sign shall be a flashing sign, moving sign or constant motion sign. No
off-premises sign shall be permitted for any sexually oriented business as all signage for a
sexually oriented business within the zoning jurisdiction of the City shall be on the premises of
the sexually oriented business; in addition, the sexually oriented business premises shall not be a
location for an off-premises sign for any other sexually oriented business.
No provision relating to signage within Section 11.15.21 or 11.15.20 shall be subject to variance.
SECTION 11.15.22 Off-street Parking; Lighting.
(1) Off-street parking for sexually oriented businesses shall be provided as follows:
(a) Adult store: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, excluding
viewing rooms and one space per viewing room.
(b) Adult cabaret: one space for each table or booth or three seats at counter or
bar.
(c) Adult motel: one space per guest sleeping room.
(d) Adult theater: one space for each six seats of designated capacity.
(e) Semi-nude studio, Sexual encounter center, Escort agency: one space per
300 square feet of gross floor area.
All off-street parking areas and entrances to the premises of a sexually oriented business shall be
illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation (including grace periods) with a lighting
system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of 5 foot candles of light
on the surface of the parking areas and walkways. Illumination of the remaining external surface
areas of the sexually oriented business shall be an average maintained horizontal illumination of
not less than 2 foot candles of light or greater than 5 foot candles of light. This required lighting
level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination to the parking areas and walkway
areas serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of the patrons and employees
of the sexually oriented business and to reduce the incidents of vandalism and criminal conduct.
The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises submitted with the
application for license.
All lighting shall be shielded and arranged so that illumination is directed toward the surface
areas of the licensed premises and not onto adjoining properties or into the skyward area above
the licensed premises or the skyward area of a property adjoining the licensed premises, so that
light trespass onto adjoining properties and light pollution (sky glow and/or glare) will be
minimized. No light fixture shall be mounted or placed higher than 25 feet from the ground
surface. Illumination from the sexually oriented business shall not exceed 1 foot candle 10 feet
from the property boundary line on any property adjoining the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
All parking areas and the exterior of the sexually oriented business shall be inspected at least
once each day and all trash, debris, or other items discarded by patrons or other persons shall be
removed from the premises or placed into closed trash receptacles, which receptacles shall be
emptied at least weekly or when three-quarters full, whichever is most frequent. All trash, waste
and garbage shall be removed from the premises at least once each week by a garbage or trash
service or other lawful means.
SECTION 11.15.23 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels.
(1) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is
less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult
motel as that term is defined in this ordinance.
(2) No person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, shall rent or subrent a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or
subrent the same sleeping room again.
(3) For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the terms Arent@ or Asubrent@ means
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(4) Notwithstanding the provision of any other building or applicable code, the
sleeping room shall not have less than 150 square feet of floor space.
(5) An adult motel shall not provide closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassette slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of Aspecified sexual
activities@ or Aspecific anatomical areas@ within any room or area, except within a
sleeping room.
(6) The licensee of an adult motel shall insure that each sleeping room and accessory
room are clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the licensee (i) maintains a
regular cleaning schedule of at least one cleaning per rental of the room, documented by
appropriate logs; (ii) all garbage, trash, body fluids, and excrement discovered during
each inspection and cleaning are immediately removed and all areas where same are
present are cleaned with a disinfectant; (iii) all solid waste and debris generated within a
room are removed from the room each time that a room is cleaned and placed in closed
trash receptacles and all waste, debris and garbage generated by the adult motel is
removed from the premises of the adult motel at least once each week by a garbage or
trash service or other lawful means; (iv) not less often than once each week the entire
room shall be cleaned with a disinfectant, including at least the floors, all walls within
48-inches of the floor, and all surface areas of any furniture, fixtures or appliances; and
(v) all linen, including but not limited to towels, sheets and other similar non-disposal
personal hygiene items shall be changed and removed with each rental of a sleeping room
and shall be laundered with soap or other disinfectant prior to re-use.
(7) Neither the business licensee nor any employee of an adult motel shall be nude or
semi-nude when upon the premises of the sexually oriented business except within the
sleeping room or other room occupied as the private personal room of same when no
patron is present or during the bona fide use by same of a single sex restroom for its
intended purpose. No patron shall be nude or semi-nude when a business licensee or any
employee of the adult motel is present. No live entertainment shall be provided by a
licensee within any room rented to or occupied by a patron nor within any room or other
area upon the premises of an adult motel.
SECTION 11.15.24 Additional Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit
Films or Videos in Viewing Rooms.
(1) No sexually oriented business, except an adult store shall exhibit on the premises
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or
other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(2) An adult store having one or more viewing rooms on the premises shall comply
with the following requirements:
(a) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, specifying the location
of each viewing room, and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no
dimension greater than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas
of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The
City shall waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration
of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(b) The above-described diagram shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station or a
viewing room shall be made without the prior approval of the City.
(d) The licensee of the premises shall ensure that at least one licensed
employee is on duty for each manager=s station and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Each viewing room shall have one side completely open, with the open
side being of the same width and height as the directly opposite wall of the
viewing room. A viewing room shall have no other means or point of access
except the open side. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of
the premise shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(f) The licensee shall ensure that at all times the view area specified in
subsection (2)(e) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks, benches, chairs, or other materials or in any manner.
(g) Each viewing room must be illuminated at all times in the manner
described within subparagraph (h) below; no person shall enter or remain in any
viewing room which is not illuminated.
(h) Each viewing room and the entire premises of the sexually oriented
business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination
of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level. The
lighting control or switch shall be inaccessible to any patron or other person
except the licensee or an employee of the sexually oriented business.
(i) The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(j) No licensee or employee present on the premises shall allow openings of
any kind to exist between viewing rooms or between a viewing room and any
restroom or other adjoining room or to exist in any wall of a viewing room.
(k) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing rooms or other adjoining rooms.
(l) No door, curtain, or other covering or obstruction shall be attached,
situated, or installed on any viewing room which obstructs or may obstruct the
direct line of sight, in whole or in part, into the viewing room or any part thereof
from the manager's station. No person (including a patron) shall obstruct the
direct line of sight into the viewing room with any curtain, covering, or other
article or item or in any manner.
(m) The licensee or an employee shall, during each business day, at hourly
intervals inspect the walls within each viewing rooms to determine if any
openings or holes exist.
(n) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing rooms to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. The licensee shall
cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing rooms to be constructed of,
or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used as the exterior
surface within a viewing room within 48 inches of the floor.
(o) The licensee shall cause all walls of a viewing room to be constructed of
material not readily susceptible to breach or any opening without the aid of a drill,
saw or similar device or tool.
(p) The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall ensure that
no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to subsection (2)(a) of this Section.
(q) The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall ensure that
no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises.
(r) The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall ensure that
not more than one person is present in a viewing room at any time. No person
(including an employee) shall enter a viewing room that is occupied by another
person.
(s) A licensee or employee who discovers two or more patrons or other
persons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or attempting to make
an opening of any kind between viewing rooms shall immediately escort such
persons from the premises.
(t) A licensee or employee who discovers an opening of any kind in a wall of
a viewing room shall immediately upon discovery secure such room and prevent
entry into the room by any patron until such time as the wall has been repaired to
remove the opening. Repair of any opening in a viewing room shall be in a
manner that is as structurally substantial as the original construction.
(u) The licensee shall post a conspicuous sign at each entrance within the
interior of the sexually oriented business and within each viewing room, which
sign shall state all of the following:
(i) That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms.
(ii) That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person.
(iii) That the open side of a viewing is not permitted to be blocked or
obstructed by any covering or article.
(iv) That any specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
(v) That the making of openings between viewing rooms or any wall
of a viewing room is prohibited.
(vi) That violators will be required to leave the premises; repeat
violators will be permanently barred from the premises.
(vii) That violations of Subparagraphs (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v) of this
paragraph are unlawful.
(v) The licensee shall ensure that all seating surfaces in viewing rooms are
constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous easily cleanable material.
(w) The licensee shall ensure that each viewing room is clean and sanitary.
Such duty shall be fulfilled if the licensee complies with the following cleaning
procedures:
(i) The licensee shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at least
one thorough cleaning per day, documented by appropriate logs.
(ii) The licensee shall direct and require an employee to inspect at
hourly intervals each viewing room for garbage, trash, body fluids and
excrement and to immediately upon discovery remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be
collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal
facility at least once each week. Prior to collection, solid waste shall be
stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the
public and which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
(iii) Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of a viewing room (except
that portion four feet above the floor surface and the ceiling) shall be
done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include floors, walls, seating,
monitors, video cameras, and windows and other surfaces.
A person having a duty or required to perform an act under subsection (a) through (w) of
subsection (2) above commits a violation if he knowingly fails to perform the act or fails
to fulfill that duty.
(3) No sexually oriented business, except an adult store, shall have a viewing room
as defined within Section 11.15.2(32). No viewing room shall exhibit a live performance.
No adult store shall exhibit any film, videocassette, or other video reproduction, except
within a viewing room.
SECTION 11.15.25 Additional Regulations for Adult Theaters.
(1) Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs with arms or in
seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches, benches or any
other multiple person seating structures. The number of seats shall equal the maximum
number of persons who may occupy the adult theater.
(2) Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in
order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be visible from the aisle at all
times. Excluding any public entrance(s) from the exterior of the sexually oriented
business, each adult theater shall have its door or entryway or point of access constructed
of such material and in such manner that not less than fifty percent of its door or entryway
or point of access permits unobstructed visibility into adjoining areas from outside the
door or entryway.
(3) Each adult theater shall have a sign posted at a conspicuous place at or near each
entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum number of persons
that may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats
in the auditorium area.
(4) Each adult theater shall have an attendant on duty within each theater at all times
that a theater is occupied by one or more patrons. No attendant, licensee, nor any other
employee nor any patron upon the premises of an adult theater shall be nude or
semi-nude, except as provided within subsection 11.15.26(3).
(5) Each theater shall be inspected at the conclusion of each film or performance or
every five hours, whichever occurs more often, and any area of seating, aisle or floor
where any semen, body fluid or other foreign substance is discovered shall be cleaned
with a disinfectant and all debris or items discarded by patrons shall be removed from the
theater and placed in a closed trash receptacle; provided all chairs or seats, aisles and
floors shall in all events be disinfected at least one time daily. All debris and trash shall
be removed from the premises at least once each week by a garbage or trash service or
other lawful means.
SECTION 11.15.26 Additional Regulations Concerning All Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(1) No person shall knowingly within any area where a patron is permitted access or
within any area visible to a patron within or upon a sexually oriented business premises,
appear nude or in a state of nudity regardless of whether such nudity is expressive in
nature. This subparagraph shall not be construed to apply to a person engaged in the bona
fide use of a single sex restroom for its intended purpose or to an occupant(s), not
otherwise visible to the public, within a room of an adult motel rented by one or more of
the occupants when no licensee or employee of the sexually oriented business is present.
(2) No person shall, knowingly in a sexually oriented business engage in specified sexual
activity, provided that this subparagraph (2) shall not apply to nor prohibit the erotic
movements or the erotic touching of one=s own genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or
breasts by a dancer or performer during the course of a live performance.
(3) Except as otherwise provided within Section 11.15, no person shall knowingly
within any area where a patron is permitted access or within any area visible to a patron
within or upon a sexually oriented business premises appear semi-nude unless the person
is an employee who, while semi-nude (i) shall be at least 4 feet from any patron or
customer and (ii) shall be on a permanent, securely fastened raised stage at least 2 feet
above the floor and (iii) shall be within the interior of the structure of the sexually
oriented business. This provision requires that the outer edge of the entire stage shall be
at least 4 feet from any patron or patron seating; said 4 foot distance shall be clearly
designated by a rail, by floor markings or by the seating and table arrangement; and, in
addition, the licensee shall post clearly visible signs upon the stage, visible from all areas
of patron seating near the stage, informing patrons of the 4 foot requirement. No patron
shall knowingly enter upon any stage occupied by a semi-nude employee nor enter within
4 feet of the edge of the stage occupied by a semi-nude employee nor otherwise enter or
remain at a distance within 4 feet or less from any semi-nude employee within a sexually
oriented business. If any body part of either the semi-nude employee or the patron or
customer is within a distance of 4 feet, same shall be considered to be an entry into the 4
foot prohibited area. This subparagraph shall not be construed to apply to a person
engaged in the bona fide use of a single sex restroom for its intended purpose or to an
occupant(s), not otherwise visible to the public, within a room of an adult motel rented by
one or more of the occupants when no licensee or employee of the sexually oriented
business is present.
(4) No employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, shall receive any
pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, nor shall any patron or customer pay or give
any gratuity to any employee while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business; except, however, that tips or gratuities for dancers or performers while
semi-nude may be paid or given if placed in a designated receptacle(s) within the
premises not located on the dancing or performing stage and not located in violation of
the distance requirement stated within subparagraph (3) above.
(5) No employee, while semi-nude, shall knowingly touch in any manner a patron or
customer or the clothing of a patron or customer, nor shall any patron or customer
knowingly touch in any manner an employee or the clothing of any employee while said
employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
(6) No licensee or any employee upon the premises shall knowingly permit or allow
any person upon the licensed premises to engage in or participate in any conduct which
violates any provision of Section 11.15.26(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5).
(7) A sign stating the provisions of paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) above shall be
posted near each entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to all patrons, employees, or other persons upon entering the sexually
oriented business.
(8) Except as provided within Section 11.15.24(h) and Section 11.15.26(11), the
interior premises of each sexually oriented business, except the sleeping room of an adult
motel, shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place in which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less
than two (2) foot candles as measured at the floor level. The licensee and any employee
present on the premises shall insure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or is open for business. The lighting
control or switch shall be inaccessible to any patron or other person except the licensee or
an employee of the sexually oriented business.
(9) No business licensee nor any employee present on the premises shall knowingly
permit any patron access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area
in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Section
11.15.7. Each such area where patrons are not permitted access shall be marked by an
appropriate sign denying access. No patron shall enter or attempt to enter or remain in
any area of the sexually oriented business which has been designated by a sign as an area
in which patrons are not permitted.
(10) Except for a viewing room within an adult store or a sleeping room and its
accessory room within an adult motel, no sexually oriented business shall have a private
room or an individual room or a personal room for use by any patron; moreover, except
within an adult motel, no area upon the same floor level within a building of a sexually
oriented business where patrons are permitted access, excluding restrooms, shall be
separated from other areas where patrons are permitted access by any door, curtain,
obstruction, or other barrier which blocks entry or access or which blocks visibility into
said area; and no area within a structure of a sexually oriented business where patrons
are permitted access but which is situated upon another floor level or within another
building shall be separated by any locked door or other inaccessible barrier which blocks
entry or access into said area and any such area shall have its door, entryway, or point of
access constructed of such material and in such manner that not less than fifty percent of
its door or entryway or point of access permits unobstructed visibility into adjoining areas
from outside the door or entryway. Except for a sleeping room in an adult motel, no
door or passageway or point of access or means of entry or access to any area within any
sexually oriented business where patrons are permitted access shall have any lock or be
capable of being barricaded or otherwise obstructed from other areas where patrons are
permitted access; provided the public entrances on the exterior of a sexually oriented
business may have a lock, although said public entrances shall remain unlocked at any
time that a patron is upon the premises. Nothing herein shall prohibit a conference room,
party room, or similar group facility upon the premises of a cabaret for which patron
access is restricted by an attendant provided such room or facility meets all of the
requirements of Section 11.15.
(11) All restrooms in a sexually oriented business shall be equipped with standard
toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. Not less often than daily, restrooms
shall be inspected by the sexually oriented business and cleaned with disinfectant, and
any item discarded by a patron and other wastes shall be removed and each trash
receptacle emptied. The interior of each restroom shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place within the restroom at an
illumination of not less than fifteen (15) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It
shall be the duty of the licensee and of any employee present on the premises to insure
that the illumination described herein is maintained at all times that the sexually oriented
business premises is occupied by patrons or open for business; the lighting control or
switch shall be inaccessible to any patron or other person except the licensee or an
employee of the sexually oriented business. No live performance nor any printed matter
or video reproductions or similar materials characterized by or depicting or describing of
Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical area@ shall be provided, allowed or
present at any time in the restrooms of the sexually oriented business. Separate male and
female restrooms shall be provided for and used by the patrons and employees of the
sexually oriented business. No female person shall use a restroom designated for a male
person and no male person shall use a restroom designated for a female person. No
restroom shall be used as a dressing room for any employee. The interior of each
restroom shall not be visible to any person except from within the interior of the
restroom.
(12) Separate male and female dressing rooms shall be provided for exclusive use by
employees of the sexually oriented business and no patron shall be permitted or allowed
access to said dressing rooms; nor shall the interior of the dressing room be visible to any
person except from within the interior of the dressing room. No person, except the
licensee or an employee of the sexually oriented business shall enter into any dressing
room or other room provided for the exclusive benefit and use of an employee of a
sexually oriented business; provided that this subparagraph shall not apply to an
employee of another business solely on the sexually oriented business premises to
deliver goods or materials, foods and beverages, or to perform maintenance or repairs to
the premises, provided, however, that any such person shall remain in such areas only for
the purpose and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties.
(13) The failure of a licensee to erect or maintain any sign or the failure of the sign to
be visible shall not excuse any patron or other person from compliance with any
provision of Section 11.15 nor shall same be a defense to any action against any patron or
other person under subsection 11.15.32.
SECTION 11.15.27 Prohibition Against Minors in a Sexually Oriented Business.
(1) No person shall knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to be employed
by a sexually oriented business nor shall any person knowingly allow a person under the
age of 18 years to enter upon or remain upon the premises of a sexually oriented business
nor shall a person knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to purchase any
good or service from any sexually oriented business.
(2) No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed by a sexually oriented business
nor shall any person under the age of 18 years enter upon or remain upon the premises of
a sexually oriented business nor shall a person under the age of 18 years of age make any
purchase of goods or services from any sexually oriented business.
(3) Each sexually oriented business shall insure that an employee is stationed as an
attendant at each public entrance to the interior of the sexually oriented business at all
times during such sexually oriented business' regular business hours. The attendant shall
prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually oriented
business. For purposes of preventing the violation of this subsection, the sexually oriented
business may refuse to permit entry to any person who is unable to produce adequate
written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is 18 years or older.
The licensee shall not permit entry of any person (except an employee of the sexually
oriented business) into the sexually oriented business without first demanding and
receiving from said person the presentation of some form of positive identification
containing proof age 18 years or older issued by a public officer in the performance of
his official duties. A reasonable belief by the licensee or his agent or his employee that a
person is 18 years of age or over shall not be a defense to any action under this section
unless said licensee, agent or employee shall have demanded and received some form of
positive identification as above described that such person is 18 years of age or over.
No person shall give or furnish to any person under the age 18 years any false or
fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person
nor shall any person give or furnish to any person under the age of 18 years evidence of
age and identification of any other person; nor shall any person under the age of 18 years
present or offer to any licensee, licensee's agent or employee any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own
for the purposes of obtaining entry into an sexually oriented business, nor shall any
person under the age of 18 years have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity.
SECTION 11.15.28 Hours of Operation.
(1) No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any
time except as follows:
(a) Monday-Saturday.
Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on each day.
(b) Sunday.
All sexually oriented businesses shall be closed.
(2) Each licensee shall require and shall have all non-employees (which specifically
includes but is not limited to all patrons and customers) off of the premises as defined
within Section 11.15.2(18) within ten minutes after the closing times provided herein and
shall require and have all employees, except cleaning and maintenance employees
described within subparagraph (4), off of the premises within twenty minutes after the
closing times provided herein, which 10-minutes and 20-minutes respectively shall be
considered a grace period to all times for closing and for the named persons to leave the
premises. Notwithstanding the grace period herein all business activities shall cease at
the closing hours specified herein.
(3) Whenever time is referred to in this subsection, it shall be understood and is
hereby enacted that the same shall be consistent with the official time of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois, whether the same shall be central standard time or central daylight
savings time.
(4) No person, including but not limited to any employee, licensee or patron,
except the business licensee (i.e. licensed operator) or a paid employee who is on duty
for and actually engaged in cleaning or maintenance of the premises shall remain in or at a
licensed premises after the closing and grace times specified herein above.
SECTION 11.15.29 Notices.
(1) Any notice required or permitted to be given by the City Clerk or any other City
office, division, department or other agency under this ordinance to any applicant or
licensee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as
specified in the application filed with the City Clerk, or within any written notice of
address change that has been received by the City Clerk. Notices mailed as above shall be
deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice
given by mail to a sexually oriented business is returned by the postal service, the City
Clerk or his designee shall within 24-hours cause it to be posted at the principal entrance
to the business, although only the mailing is required to be completed within any other
time period or deadline established by Section 11.15.
(2) Any notice required or permitted to be given to the City Clerk by any person
under this ordinance shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office
of the City Clerk.
(3) It shall be the duty of each applicant who is designated on the license application
and each licensee to furnish notice to the City Clerk in writing of any change of mailing
address.
SECTION 11.15.30 Calculation of Time.
The time within which any act required by Section 11.15 is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday, or a
Federal or State of Illinois holiday, in which case it shall be excluded. If the day immediately
following each Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a Saturday, Sunday or holiday then such
succeeding day shall also be excluded.
SECTION 11.15.31 Injunction, Penalties and Remedies.
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid license or in violation of Section 11.15 or any person who violates any
provision of Section 11.15 is subject to a suit for injunction in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) In addition, if any person, including but not limited to any licensee, employee,
customer or patron, fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates a provision of
Section 11.15, such person, upon conviction of such violation by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00.
Each violation or non-compliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
Each day of continued violation or non-compliance shall be considered as a separate
offense.
(3) All remedies and penalties provided for in Section 11.15 shall be cumulative and
independently available to the City and the City shall be authorized to pursue any and all
remedies to the fullest extent allowed by law.
SECTION 11.15.32 Nuisance Declared.
Any sexually oriented business established in violation of Section 11.15 or operated or
maintained with repeated or multiple violations of the provision of Section 11.15 shall be and the
same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. For purposes of determining
whether violations are Arepeated@ or Amultiple@ violations, any and all violations of Section 11.15
occurring within a twelve month calendar period shall be considered. The City may, in addition,
to or in lieu of any other remedy set forth herein commence an action to enjoin or remove or
abate such nuisance in such manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to
such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such
public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating or maintaining a
sexually oriented business contrary to the provisions of Section 11.15.
SECTION 11.15.33 Severability.
Section 11.15 and each subsection and provision of said Section 11.15 are hereby declared to be
independent divisions and subdivisions and notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative
intent it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said
Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid the
remaining section, subsections or provisions and the application of each section, subsection and
provision to any person or circumstance other than to those to which it is held invalid shall not be
affected thereby and it is hereby declared that such section, subsections and provisions would
have passed independently of such section, subsection or provision so known to be invalid.
SECTION 11.16: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
DEFINITIONS
(a) AVideo Gaming terminals@ shall mean a video gaming terminal as defined within
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/).
(b) AEstablishment@ shall mean a Licensed Establishment, Licensed
Fraternal Establishment, Licensed Veteran=s Establishment, or Licensed Truck Stop
Establishment as defined within the Illinois Video Gaming Act.
License Required.
No person shall place, have, operate, maintain, or keep any video gaming terminal
upon any premises within the City of Mt. Vernon without first obtaining a license for
each video gaming terminal (hereinafter called AVideo Gaming Terminal License@). No
video gaming terminal license shall issue except to an Establishment as defined above.
No Establishment shall be issued more than five video gaming terminal licenses.
Application.
An application for Video Gaming Terminal License(s) shall be made to the City
Clerk and shall be in writing and under oath, signed by an authorized agent of the
Establishment where the video gaming terminal(s) is to be placed.
The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the
applicant (Establishment); and shall state the name, description, State of Illinois License
Number, and serial number of each video gaming terminal proposed to be licensed. The
application shall also include a fully completed and executed Written Use Agreement as
described within the Video Gaming Act. In addition, the application may require any
information that may be necessary to determine compliance with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act or with this Section.
No license shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to the City,
including, but not limited to any licensing fees under this Section or any Article under the
Revised Code, or any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any tax imposed
by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer, or garbage services, or to any
person in default on any loan agreement or contract with the City, or in default on any
amount owed to the City.
Terms of License.
A license fee for each licensed video gaming terminal placed at or upon any
Establishment shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per annum for each video gaming
terminal. The license fee shall be non-refundable and shall be non-pro-ratable; and no
license shall be transferred to any other video gaming terminal, except as specifically
herein provided. Each licensed video gaming terminal shall have a separate license
(which shall consist of the numbered sticker issued by the City Clerk). If an
Establishment desires to place additional video gaming terminals or if a licensee desires
to substitute a licensed video gaming terminal for a previously licensed video gaming
terminal, then a new application for license shall be filed. A licensing fee for each
additional video gaming terminal shall be assessed, but no fee shall be assessed for
substituting terminals.
Display of License.
The Video Gaming Terminal License for each licensed video gaming terminal
shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the licensed video gaming terminal and the
licensed video gaming terminal shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of any
person who may frequent or be upon the premises where such video gaming terminal is
kept, placed, or used.
Inspection.
Each premises where a licensed video gaming terminal is placed and each licensed
video gaming terminal shall be subject to inspection by an agent of the City, including,
but not limited to law enforcement officials at all times; consent to inspection is a
condition of, and requirement of the license issued hereunder and of the placement of a
licensed video gaming terminal within a premises, and said consent shall be deemed to be
irrevocable permission for such inspection. Refusal of any Establishment or any
employee, or agent of any Establishment to allow or permit inspection shall be grounds
for revocation of all licenses for video gaming terminals situated upon the premises
subject of the refusal and shall be grounds for denial of any license or license renewal for
any video gaming terminal to be placed upon said premises for a period of twelve (12)
months from date of revocation.
Gambling Prohibited.
No Establishment nor employee or agent of same nor other person shall allow or
permit any gambling upon any premises where any video gaming terminal is placed
except for a video gaming terminal properly licensed and lawfully operated in accordance
with the Illinois Video Gaming Act and with the Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
No person, nor any entity in which such person has any interest, who has been
convicted (including a no contest or similar plea) of any gambling offense as prescribed
by any criminal code, statute, ordinance, or regulation of the United States or of any State
or of any political subdivision of either shall be eligible to hold any Video Gaming
Terminal License issued hereunder for a period of one (1) year from date of the
conviction for a single offense, three (3) years from date of conviction for a second
offense, and permanently in the event of a conviction for a third offense.
If any gambling offense resulting in a conviction of any person (including a no
contest or similar plea) shall occur at any Establishment, all licenses for any video gaming
terminal devices placed upon the Establishment may be revoked and if said license or
licenses are revoked, no license shall be granted to any person for a period of one (1) year
from date of revocation for the placement of any video gaming terminal device upon the
Establishment if said Establishment shall continue to be owned, leased or subject to the
control of the same interested party or parties as of the date of the gambling offense or
subject to the ownership, interest, or control of any person related thereto. ARelated@
means being employed by, owning stock in, being a partner in, having any interest
directly or indirectly in or being related by blood or marriage in the following
relationships: spouse, parent, step-parent, grandparent, step-grandparent, child, stepchild,
grandchild, step-grandchild, brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle or aunt.
Additional Regulations.
No Establishment where a video gaming terminal is situated or placed shall allow
any person under 21-years of age to play or use any video gaming terminal. No person
under the age of 21 shall play or use a video gaming terminal.
Each video gaming terminal must be located in an area restricted to persons over
21 years of age the entrance to which is within the view of at least one employee who is
over 21 years of age, of the Establishment in which the terminal is located.
No Establishment having any video gaming terminal license shall be situated
within 100 feet of a school (measured from property line to property line) or of a place of
worship (measured from building line of the place of worship to the property line of the
Establishment); provided that this restriction shall not apply if the school or church
locates within the restricted area after the Establishment has been licensed.
No Establishment, except a Licensed Truck Stop Establishment shall be licensed
hereunder unless said Establishment shall possess a valid liquor license issued by the City
of Mt. Vernon pursuant to Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, and said liquor
license must be in effect at the time of application and at all times thereafter during which
a video gaming terminal is made available to the public to play at the location.
No video gaming terminal licensed under this Section may be played or used
except during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic
beverages at the Establishment as set forth within Article 6, Section 6.14 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, except that this restriction shall not apply
to a Licensed Truck Stop Establishment. A licensed Truck Stop Establishment may
operate a video gaming terminal on a continuous basis.
No Establishment having any video gaming terminal licenses shall be situated
within one-hundred (100) feet of another Establishment having a video gaming terminal
license, measured from property line to property line. Not more than one Establishment
shall be issued license(s) for video gaming terminals for any structure or for any lot as
defined within Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The location restrictions
within this subparagraph shall not apply to a premises having a valid license for the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor issued prior to June 18, 2012 so as to prevent issuance of a
license for that premises so long as the liquor license for the premises in question is
renewed each subsequent year and continues in effect during all periods from such date;
nor shall the location restriction within this subparagraph with regard to each structure or
lot apply to an Establishment being part of a planned shopping center upon real estate
having the zoning classification B-PL, Planned Business District; however the distance
restriction within this subparagraph shall be applicable.
No video gaming terminal may be placed in any Establishment nor shall any
Establishment be licensed unless the Establishment has entered into a Written Use
Agreement with the terminal operator of the video gaming terminal for placement of the
terminal within the Establishment; a copy of the Written Use Agreement shall be filed
with the City Clerk at the time an application for license is filed, and if any amendments
or revisions are made to said Agreement, the amended or revised Agreement shall be filed
with the City Clerk within ten days of said amendment or revision.
No Establishment licensed hereunder shall place or have situated upon its
premises, nor shall any person own, operate, or possess any device that awards credits and
contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable of removing and recording the removal of
credits when the award of credits is dependant upon chance.
No Establishment, nor video gaming terminal shall be placed or operated except in
strict compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act (including Rules
and Regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board) and with the provisions of this Section.
No Establishment nor employee or other agent of same nor other person shall
permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct or illegal act upon any Establishment where
any video gaming terminal is placed.
Liability of Operator or Owner for Acts of Agent.
Every act of or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
provision of this Section by any officer, director, manager, employee, or other agent of
any Establishment shall be deemed to be the act of the Establishment (Licensee), and the
Establishment and each owner, or person having interest therein and the operator or
manager thereof shall be punishable and shall be ineligible to hold a license in the same
manner as if the act or admission had been done or admitted by the owner or interest party
or operator or manager or Establishment personally.
Penalties.
Any Establishment or other person found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of this Section shall be fined not less than $750.00 for each video gaming terminal for
which no valid license has been obtained or maintained and/or $750.00 for each other
violation of this Ordinance; and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violations of this Section, the City
Clerk may revoke any license for any violation of this Section after affording the licensee
(Establishment) due notice and opportunity to be heard in its own defense.
SECTION 11.17 RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles and
poker runs within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(b) Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Business means a voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
Charitable organization means an organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
Educational organization means an organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools, and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
Fraternal organization means an organization of persons having a common
interest, the primary interest of which is both to promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of the
government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the government.
Key Location means the location where the poker run concludes and the prize or
prizes are awarded.
Labor organization means an organization composed of workers organized with
the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
Licensee means an organization which has been issued a license to operate a raffle
or poker run under this Section.
Net proceeds means the gross income receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker
runs, less sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
Non-profit or not-for-profit means organized, operated, and conducted on a
not-for-profit basis, with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
Poker run means an event organized by an organization licensed under this Section
in which participants travel to multiple predetermined locations, including a key location,
drawing a playing card or equivalent item at each location, in order to assemble a
facsimile of a poker hand or other numeric score. “Poker run” includes dice runs, marble
runs, or other events where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by
obtaining an item at each location.
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in Article 28 of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 2012, (720 ILCS 5, Art. 28) conducted by an organization licensed under this
Section in which:
(1) The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers
or by some other means one or more of which chances is to be designated
the winning chance; and
(2) The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other
method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited
sporting contest.
Religious organization means any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of a religious worship.
Value of non-cash prizes means the retail value of such prizes.
Veterans organization means an organization or association comprised of members
of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a
public benefit.
(c) License Required.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle or sell chances for a raffle or
conduct a poker run having its key location or any predetermined location within the City
without first having obtained a license pursuant to this Section.
Sales for raffle chances and poker runs shall be conducted only at location(s)
designated in the license application and which are within the corporate limits of the City
of Mt. Vernon. The license granted for the key location for a poker run shall cover the
entire poker run, including locations other than the key location provided the application
and license includes the name and address of each predetermined location.
Licenses for raffles or poker runs shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educations or veterans organizations which operate
without profit to their members, which have been in existence continuously for a period
of five years immediately before making application for a license and have had during the
entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives
and which maintain an office in the City, or to a non-profit fund raising organization that
the Mayor determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as
the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. The Mayor may waive the 5-year
requirement under this subsection (B) for a bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
business, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organization that applied for a license to
conduct a poker run if the organization is a local organization that is affiliated with and
chartered by a national or State organization that meeting the 5-year requirement.
A License shall permit an Applicant to issue or sell raffle chances or conduct a
poker run only for the dates stated in the license application.
(d) Classification of Licenses; Fee
General Raffle License. A General Raffle License shall permit the conduct of one
raffle. Multiple drawings may be held to award the prizes but all drawings must occur on
the same day and at the same location. Not more than four General Raffles Licenses shall
issue to an applicant during each calendar year.
Hardship Assistance Raffle License. A Hardship Assistance Raffle License allows
a not-for-profit fund raising organization or group, organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial hardship assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering severe financial hardship as a result of an injury, disability, accident or disaster,
to conduct one raffle for that purpose.
Annual Raffle License. An Annual Raffle License shall permit the conduct of an
unlimited number of raffles in which the maximum value of all cash or non-cash prizes
for a single raffle shall not exceed $5,000.00. Annual Raffle Licenses shall issue to be
effective on or after May 1 each year and shall expire on the following April 30.
Poker Run License. A Poker Run License shall permit the conduct on one poker
run. Not more than four Poker Run Licenses shall issue to an applicant during each
calendar year.
The application fee for a license shall be $20.00 payable to the City Clerk at the time of
application. The license application fee for an Annual Raffle License shall not be prorated
as to term or fee. Application fees are not refundable, even in the event that the
application is rejected by the City, or if the raffle or poker run is cancelled.
(e) Persons Ineligible to Receive License.
The following groups or individuals are ineligible to receive a raffle or poker run
license:
(1) Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
(2) Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
(3) Any person who in default of any payment to the City or any person who
has been convicted of or assessed a penalty for any violation of this Section
or who has had any license issued under the Revised Code of Ordinances
revoked during a five year period prior to application;
(4) Any person who is not of good moral character;
(5) Any organization in which a person described in subsections (1), (2), (3) or
(4) of this Subsection has proprietary, equitable, or credit interest or in
which such person is active or employed;
(6) Any organization in which a person described in subsection (1), (2), (3) or
(4) of this Subsection is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not; and
(7) Any organization in which a person described in subsections (1), (2), (3) or
(4) of this Subsection is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle or poker run.
(f) Application.
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run shall file an
application with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, last four digits of social security
number, and date of birth of individual completing the application;
(2) The name, address, and type of organization applying for the license;
(3) The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the date
and state of incorporation;
(4) The name, address, telephone number, last four digits of social security
number and date of birth of the organization’s presiding officer, raffle
manager(s) and any other members responsible for the conduct and
operation of the raffle(s) or poker run;
(5) The location(s) at which raffle chances will be sold or issued and each
predetermined location for a poker run;
(6) The aggregate value of all prizes to be awarded for each raffle or poker run;
(7) The value of each prize to be awarded for each raffle or poker run;
(8) The price or prices charged for each raffle or poker run chance issued or
sold;
(9) The maximum number of raffle or poker run chances to be issued for each
raffle or poker run;
(10) The dates raffle chances will be issued or sold or the date or dates the poker
run will be conducted;
(11) The date(s) and location at which winning chances for raffles will be
determined and the date and the key location at which prizes will be
awarded for each poker run;
(12) For an Annual Raffle License, the number of raffles to be held during a
license period (May 1 – April 30);
(13) A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the applicant
or organization signed by its presiding officer and by the person completing
the application; and
(14) A certificate signed by the presiding offer of the applicant organization and
by the person completing the application attesting to the fact that the
information contained in the application is true and correct.
(g) Manager; Fidelity Bond.
The operation and conduct of all raffles and poker runs shall be under the
supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the licensee. The manager shall give
a fidelity bond equal in amount to the aggregate value of all prizes to be awarded for each
raffle or poker run, which bond shall be in favor of the licensee, conditioned upon his
honesty in the performance of his duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given in writing to the City Clerk not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.
The above bond requirement may be waived by the unanimous vote of all members of the
licensee (i.e. the organization receiving the license). The occurrence of said unanimous
vote shall be by affidavit of the organization’s presiding officer, filed with the City Clerk.
(h) Issuance of License and Display.
An Application for License and Application fee, along with the Fidelity Bond or
Affidavit of Bond Waiver, shall be submitted to the City Clerk’s office. The City Clerk
shall promptly review the license application for completeness and for compliance with
Section 11.17, and the Clerk shall submit the application and the Clerk’s findings to the
Mayor. The Mayor shall, within 30 days from the date of application approve or reject the
application. If an application is approved, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license to
applicant.
A license shall show the following, with respect to each raffle or poker run:
(1) Name and address of Licensee and the License Classification;
(2) The period of time during which raffle chances may be sold or issued, and
the date(s) and location at which winning chances will be determined; and
(3) The date(s) and key location and each predetermined location where the
poker run will be conducted and prizes awarded.
The license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location of the
determination of the winning chances for raffles and at the key location for poker runs.
Each General Raffle License, Hardship Raffle License, and Poker Run License
shall be valid for one raffle or poker run. An Annual Raffle License shall be valid during
a licensing period May 1 - April 30, or part thereof from date of issuance.
(i) Operation and Conduct.
The operation and conduct of raffles and poker runs are subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the licensee.
(2) No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
(3) No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
(4) A licensee may rent a location at which to determine the winning chance or
chances in a raffle or a key location or predetermined location for a poker
run only from an organization which is also licensed under this Section. No
premises (i.e. predetermined location), except the key location, where a
poker run is held is required to obtain a license if the name and location of
the premises is listed as a predetermined location on the license issued for
the poker run and no charge is paid for use of the premises.
(5) Raffle chances may be sold or issued only at the locations specified within
the application, and winning chances may be determined only at the
location(s) specified on the application and license.
(6) A poker run shall be conducted only at the predetermined locations
specified within the application, and prizes may only be awarded at the key
location designated within the application and license.
(7) Each raffle chance shall have printed thereon the cost of the chance, the
aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle, and the
maximum number of raffle chances to be issued except as provided below:
a. When raffle chances are sold, conveyed, issued, or otherwise
transferred only at the time and location at which winning chances
will be determined and only to the persons then in attendance;
b. When the raffle chance is also a ticket to an event and a portion of
the cost of the ticket is designated for a dinner, golf or other item of
value to be consumed or used by the purchaser at the event.
(8) No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the operation or
conduct of raffles or a poker run, except with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his
parent or guardian, unless same is otherwise prohibited by law.
(9) A raffle drawing or poker run must be held on the date and at the location(s)
listed on the license. If a raffle drawing or poker run is unable to be held
due to an extreme emergency or a natural disaster, the licensee must seek
written approval of the Mayor before the drawing or poker run can be held
on a different date. If a drawing or poker run is cancelled due to inadequate
sale of chances or tickets or due to some reason other than an extreme
emergency or a natural disaster, the licensee must notify all purchasers and
participants, refund all monies, and return all prizes within 30 days. Such
cancellation must be reported in writing to the City Clerk with a full report
showing compliance with this Subsection.
(j) Record Keeping of Gross Receipts; Expenses; Net Proceeds.
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances or poker run events shall
keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for
each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records
indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for
the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to
payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs or poker runs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and placed in a
separate account. Each organization should have separate records for its raffles and poker
runs. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles or poker runs should not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles or poker runs shall report monthly to
its membership and to the City Clerk its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from
raffles or poker runs, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this
Subsection.
Records required by this Subsection shall be preserved for three years, and
organizations shall make available their records relating to the operation of raffles or
poker runs for public inspection and for City inspection at reasonable times and places.
(k) Enforcement.
Failure to comply with any of the requirement of this Section shall constitute a
separate violation, and any person, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than
$50.00 or more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offence. In addition, the Mayor is authorized to revoke the license
of any licensee upon failure to comply with the requirements of this Section and is
authorized to deny an application for license of any person who shall have had any license
issued under any Article of the Revised Code of Ordinances revoked or of any person
who has been convicted or assessed a penalty for any violation of this Section within five
years prior to date of application. In addition, any person who shall be in violation of any
provision of this Section shall be subject to injunctive relief.
ARTICLE 12
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION 12.1
No person shall, within the City, by violent, tumultuous or obstreperous conduct or by
loud and unusual noises disturb the peace of the City, nor shall any person within the City use
profane, obscene or offensive language calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or assault,
strike, or fight with another with or without his consent, or permit any such condition in or upon
any premises within the City owned, possessed, or controlled by him.
SECTION 12.2
No person shall disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious
worship, by any means whatever. No person shall, within the City, disturb any school or any
lawful assembly of the public, or any funeral procession or assembly.
SECTION 12.3
No person or persons shall assemble together with an intent, or being assembled, shall
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the peace or the person of
any other.
SECTION 12.4
No person shall, within the City, permit or allow himself to become intoxicated or under
the influence of intoxicating liquors or drunk, in any public place or on the private premises of
any other, and any person who shall be found in a state of intoxication or drunk, in any such
place or on any premises of another, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
SECTION 12.5
No person shall, within the City, beg or solicit alms.
SECTION 12.6
(1) No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear nude or in a state of
nudity in a public place.
(2) APublic place@ means any location frequented by the public or where the
public is present or likely to be present or any location where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public or any location
that is readily visible to the public or any place to which the public has a right to
go or is invited.
(3) ANude@ or AState of Nudity@ means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SECTION 12.7
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or negligently break, deface,
injure, or destroy any property within the City of Mt. Vernon, whether such property is owned by
the State, County, Village, or other governmental body, or owned by any private person, firm, or
other association. It shall further be unlawful for any person within the City to throw or cast any
stone or missile upon any public property or private property of another or at any other person.
SECTION 12.8
a) No person shall discharge any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, or other firework
within the corporate limits of the City, nor permit the projectile of same to enter the corporate
limits of the City, except said prohibition shall not apply to a public display of fireworks licensed
as provided within Article 9 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
b) Except as hereinafter permitted, no person shall discharge a firearm within the
corporate limits of the City, nor permit any projectile from any firearm discharged outside the
corporate limits to enter the corporate limits of the City. Firearm is hereby defined to include,
but is not limited to, shotguns, rifles, black powder guns, pistols, all long, recurve, or compound
bows, cross bows, sling shots, wrist rockets, air guns, pellet guns, b.b. guns, and hand guns,
regardless of method of propulsion. The prohibition against discharge of a firearm as provided
herein shall not apply to any (i) law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty, (ii) use of a
firearm as permitted by Illinois law to resist or prevent an offense which reasonably exposes a
person to great bodily harm or death, or (iii) hunting of deer with a bow in accordance with
Subsection (c).
c) A person may discharge a long, re-curve, or compound bow within the
corporate limits of the City during the course of harvesting deer if the following requirements are
met:
i) The person must possess a valid deer archery permit issued by the State of
Illinois and must comply with all of the conditions of the permit and all
applicable laws and regulations of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources relating to archery deer hunting.
ii) The person must have the signed written landowner=s permission from the
owner and party in possession or control of the real estate upon which the
hunting shall occur and the bow discharged.
iii) The person must submit an application to the City Clerk to obtain a bow
hunting license; the submission must include a valid Illinois archery
permit and the landowner=s written permission. Upon receipt of the
application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City
Manager for approval, including specifically, approval by the City
Manager of the specific designated area for which the City license shall be
applicable. Factors which the City Manager may consider include, but are
not limited to, the location, size, and use of the designated area and of
property adjacent thereto, the frequency and size of the deer population
within the designated area, the proximity of the designated area to
pedestrian or vehicle traffic, the proximity of the designated area to
residential properties, schools, parks, and other similar properties, the
typography of the designated area and adjoining areas, and any objections
of persons who own, possess, or occupy property adjacent to the
designated area. No designated hunting area shall be approved by the City
Manager if discharge of a bow within the area presents a great likelihood
that an arrow will leave the designated area or if any discharge presents an
obvious threat or a danger to any person or property upon the designated
area or adjacent thereto. A license shall be issued by the City Clerk only
after approval of the City Manager and only for the designated area
approved by the City Manager. Each license shall be for one calendar day
only and not more than ten licenses shall be issued for use on each
calendar day.
iv) The person while in possession of any bow must carry the City license on
his or her person and must place a copy of the license in a visible location
on the dashboard of any vehicle being used.
v) The person shall hunt only from an elevated stand having a minimum
platform height of six feet. No person shall knowingly direct an arrow
across the boundary of or off of the designated area.
vi) The person shall harvest only a deer with no antlers, unless said person
shall have received a special license from the City that specifically, on its
face, states that a deer with antlers may be harvested. Licenses for the
harvest of not more than ten deer with antlers per calendar year may be
approved by the City Manager and issued by the City Clerk, provided that
no such special license shall be issued to any person unless that person
shall have first harvested three female deer within the corporate limits of
the City during said calendar year, and in no event shall any person receive
more than one special license per calendar year to harvest a deer with
antlers.
vii) The person upon a successful harvest shall be solely responsible for
removal of the entire deer from the designated area and from any real
estate adjacent thereto. No person shall enter upon any real estate,
including real estate adjacent to the designated area, without first receiving
permission from the owner or person in possession or control of the real
estate.
viii) Within ten days of expiration of the license, the holder thereof shall report
to the City Clerk whether a deer was harvested and if so, the sex of the
deer.
d) Any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with this Ordinance
shall upon conviction thereof be fined the sum of $500.00; a separate offense shall be deemed to
have been committed on each day that a violation occurs except that with regard to discharge of a
firearm a violation shall be deemed to have been committed upon each separate discharge of a
firearm. In addition, any person who violates or omits, or refuses to comply with the provisions
of this Ordinance may be enjoined as provided by law upon the filing of a petition therefor in the
Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois from engaging in any activity or conduct in violation
of this Ordinance.
SECTION 12.9
No person shall, in this City, pursue the calling of a fortune teller, or practice fortune
telling or the pursuit of same.
SECTION 12.10
Each hotel, boarding house, or motel within the City which shall accommodate transient
guests shall keep a register therein to register their names and addresses and every person in
charge of such hotel, boarding house, or motel shall keep such register at all times available for
inspection by any police officer or other peace officer.
SECTION 12.11
No person shall wilfully make a false alarm of fire, within the City, by outcry, mechanical
alarm, or other device.
SECTION 12.12
No person shall, within the City, enter into or upon any lot or parcel of ground which has
situated thereon any building or structure or is occupied for residential purposes, and while on
such lot or parcel of ground look into any door, window, or aperture in such building or structure
without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. No persons shall, within the City, intrude
or enter upon enclosed premises of another, or wilfully or needlessly walk, ride, or drive across
any lawn, grass plot, flower garden, or other property of another without the consent of the owner
or occupant.
SECTION 12.13
REPEALED 12/20/93 (SUNDAY BLUE LAW)
SECTION 12.14
No person shall, within the City, keep a common gaming house or procure or permit
within any building or premises used or occupied by him, any persons to play or game for money
or other valuable thing, nor shall he keep or suffer to be kept any table or other apparatus for the
purpose of playing a game or sport for money or other valuable thing. No person shall be present
within or be connected with any gaming room or shall play for any money or other valuable thing
at any game with cards, dice, or any other article or instrument, or shall bet on any game that
others may be playing. No person shall, within the City, have in his or her possession any table,
thing, or device for the purpose of gaming.
Every table instrument or device used for the purpose of gaming within the City is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and immediately upon discovery thereof by any member of the
Police Department of the City, it shall be seized and destroyed.
Video gaming terminals currently licensed and lawfully operated pursuant to the
Illinois Video Gaming Act and pursuant to Section 11.16 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mt. Vernon shall not be subject to the foregoing provisions
SECTION 12.15
No person shall drive or stop any vehicle upon any public park or public recreation area
except upon roads officially designated for vehicular traffic, upon areas designated as parking
areas, and upon such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated by the City Manager
as temporary areas. Vehicle is hereby defined to mean every device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is or may be transported except devices moved solely by human power, except
self-propelled wheelchairs, and except authorized emergency or maintenance vehicles.
SECTION 12.16
No person shall, within the City, commit any act of prostitution, fornication, or adultery
with any other person. No person shall, within the City, keep or maintain any bawdy house or
house of prostitution, nor shall any person knowingly rent, lease, or permit any building or
premises owned or controlled by such person to be used as a bawdy house or house of
prostitution. No person shall, within the City, be or become an inmate or frequent or patronize
any such bawdy house or house of prostitution. No person shall, within the City, entice,
influence, or persuade any other person to enter, reside in or frequent any bawdy house or house
of prostitution. No person shall, within the City, keep or maintain any disorderly house wherein
any gambling, prostitution, fornication, or other violation of the statutes of the State of Illinois or
ordinances of this City shall be permitted.
SECTION 12.17 Dogs Running at Large, Animal Offenses
(A) No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of performing
official duties, shall within the City permit any dog, cat, or other animal owned,
kept, in the care of, in the possession of, or controlled by such person to be or run
upon any street, sidewalk, or any other public place or public property or upon the
private property of another person or the private property of such person not
enclosed with a secure fence or enclosure. An animal shall not be deemed to be
running at large if restrained by a leash, cord, chain, not exceeding ten feet in
length or confined within a secure animal carrier or confined within a motor
vehicle.
(B) No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of performing
official duties, shall within the City allow or permit any dog, cat, or other animal
owned, kept, in the care of, in the possession of, or controlled by such person to
go upon the private premises of any other person without the consent of said other
person, whether said animal is restrained or not.
(C) In the event any dog, cat or other animal is apprehended while running at large
within the City and detained or confined within the facilities of the Jefferson
County Animal Shelter or other City authorized facility, then the owner, keeper or
other person claiming and removing the animal from the facilities shall pay a ten
dollar ($10.00) reclamation fee, in addition to any other fees or charges imposed
by the facility or other authority.
(D) No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of performing
official duties, shall within the City permit or allow any dog, cat, or other animal
owned, kept, in the care of, in possession of, or controlled by such person to
annoy, endanger, chase, molest, menace, attack, harass, threaten, bite, or injure
any person or other animal; any such dog, cat, or other animal which shall
annoy, endanger, chase, molest, menace attack, harass, threaten, bite, or injure any
person or other animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be taken
up and impounded. Any person who shall be the owner, keeper, caretaker, or in
control of such animal and who shall know or be notified that such animal has
bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall,
immediately and without delay, deliver such animal to the rabies control officer
for impoundment so that such animal may be securely confined for not less than
two weeks. If any such animal described above cannot be safely taken up and
impounded, it shall be slain by any police officer or rabies control officer of the
City, and if any such animal having been slain shall have bitten or caused an
abrasion to any person, the carcass of such animal shall be delivered to the rabies
control officer.
(E) No person shall within the City allow or permit any dog, cat, or other animal
owned, kept, in the care of, in possession of, or controlled by such person to
damage, soil, or defecate upon any street, sidewalk, park, public property or any
other public place nor upon the private property of another person. Any person
having the custody, possession, or control of any dog, cat, or other animal shall
remove immediately any feces left by such animal upon any public property or
public place or upon any such private property and dispose of same in a sanitary
manner. As to any property owned or possessed by a person who owns, keeps,
cares for, or controls any dog, cat, or other animal, such animal’s feces and waste
upon such property shall be disposed of as frequently as necessary to prevent an
odor, unsanitary condition or other nuisance.
(F) No person shall, within the City, overload, overwork, beat, torture, or commit any
cruel act upon any animal nor shall any person abandon any animal within the
City.
(G) No person shall, within the City, neglect any dog, cat, or other animal owned,
kept, in the care of, or in control by such person. Neglect is hereby defined to be
any act involving failure to provide for animal health or safety, including, but not
limited to failure to provide adequate food, water, shelter, exercise, ventilation, or
necessary veterinary care to an animal, or to adequately confine an animal in a
manner appropriate to its species, breed, age, and condition; neglect shall also
include leaving an animal unattended in a motor vehicle or other confinement
without adequate ventilation or under circumstances where said animal is exposed
to excessive heat or other harmful conditions.
SECTION 12.18
It shall be unlawful for any person to taunt, torment, tease, beat, strike, or administer or
subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals, or substance to any dog used by a law enforcement
officer in the performance of his functions or duties, or when off duty; or to interfere or meddle
with any such dog used by a law enforcement department or agency or any handler thereof in the
performance of the functions or duties of said department or agency. However, a police officer or
veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency situations when delay would cause the dog
undue suffering and pain.
SECTION 12.19 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
1. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them.
(a) ALegal Guardian@ means a person appointed guardian, or given custody or a
minor by a Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court
Act.
(b) AMinor@ means a person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18
years of age.
2. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to
have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to
have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian, in violation of this ordinance, upon the occurrence of the events
described in (a), (b) and (c) below:
(a) An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a
person or property, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions
from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of
violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and
malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and
(b) Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal
service returned, from the Police Department of the City of
Mt. Vernon following said adjudication or non-judicial sanction, and
(c) If at any time within one (1) year following receipt of the notice set
forth in (b) above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation
of any ordinances, law of statute as described in (a) above, or shall
have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance,
law of statute as described in (a) above.
SECTION 12.20 CITY AND TRUANCY CURFEW
1. Definitions. As used in this Ordinance unless the context requires otherwise
the following words or phrases shall mean:
ACity curfew hours@ means the period of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following
day, and 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
ACourt@ means the Second Judicial Circuit, Jefferson County, Illinois.
ACustodian@ means (1) a person who under court order is the custodian of
the person of a minor or (2) a public or private agency with which the court
has placed a minor or (3) a person acting in the role of a parent by reason of
a private agreement, arrangement, custom, or habit.
AEmergency@ means an unforseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency or
any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life.
AEstablishment@ means any privately owned place of business to which the
public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or
entertainment.
AGuardian@ means (1) a parent or (2) a person who under court order is the
guardian of the person of a minor; or (3) a public or private agency with
which the court has placed a minor.
AMinor@ means any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
AParent@ means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of another person.
APublic Place@ means any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
public ways, sidewalks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
AResponsible adult@ means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age,
authorized by a parent, guardian or custodian to have the care and custody
of a minor.
ASerious bodily injury@ means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
ATruancy curfew hours@ means the period of the day when the school the
minor would normally attend is in session, on days when the school the
minor would normally attend is in session.
ATruant officer@ means any officer, appointee, employee or other agent of
any school district or any federal, state, or local governmental entity or any
agency thereof performing the duties of a truant officer under the Illinois
Compulsory Attendance statute (105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.)
ATruancy Review Board' means an agency or entity established by any
school district or federal, state, or local governmental entity or any
counseling or social agency or any combination thereof recognized by the
City and/or the court as an agency which provides service to improve
education performance and/or attendance.
2. Curfew Restrictions
a) It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the City of Mt. Vernon during City
curfew hours.
b) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or custodian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be
present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the City of Mt. Vernon during City curfew hours.
c) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 2(a) or 2(b) or 4 (hereinafter)
that the minor was:
1. accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian, custodian, or
responsible adult;
2. on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or
responsible adult; without any detour or stop;
3. in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel with the consent or
authorization of a parent, guardian or custodian;
4. engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
without any detour or stop;
5. involved in an emergency;
6. on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
7. engaged in, going to or returning home from an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults,
sponsored by the City of Mt. Vernon, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
8. exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution; or
9. emancipated pursuant to law.
3. Truancy Restrictions
(a) It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or to
compulsory continuation education by statute or court order to be present in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of
Mt. Vernon during truancy curfew hours.
(b) It is unlawful for any parent, custodian or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Mt.
Vernon during the truancy curfew hours.
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 3(a) or 3(b) or 4 (hereinafter) that the
minor was:
(1) accompanied by a parent, guardian, or responsible adult if engaged in an
activity which would constitute an excused absence from the school from
which the minor would normally attend;
(2) involved in an emergency;
(3) going to or returning from a medical appointment without any detour or
stop;
(4) engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour or
stop;
(5) in possession of valid proof that the minor is a student who has permission
to leave the school campus.
(6) A bona fide participant in an alternative education or home
schooling program.
(7) Engaged in or subject to an authorized or excused absence from the school
which the minor attends, including but not limited to lunch periods.
4. Establishment Restrictions
It is unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an establishment to
allow a minor to be present or to remain upon the premises of the establishment in
violation of paragraph 2 or 3 above during curfew or truancy hours.
It is a defense to prosecution under this subparagraph if the owner, operator or
employee of the establishment immediately upon discovery of a minor reasonably
believed to be in violation of paragraph 2 or 3 notified the Police Department that
a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew or truancy
hours and refused to leave the establishment after being advised to do so by the
owner, operator or employee.
5. Enforcement
(a) Every member of the Police Department or other person enforcing or
attempting to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance shall inquire into the
minor=s reasons for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment
during curfew or truancy curfew hours prior to detention of the minor or issuance
of a citation. A minor shall be detained or a citation shall be issued only if the
police officer or other enforcing officer reasonably believes that the minor has
violated the provisions of this Ordinance and that no defenses to prosecution
apply.
(b) Every member of the Police Department while on duty, is hereby authorized to
temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of this Ordinance (regardless
of whether a citation is immediately issued) until the parent, custodian or guardian
of the minor shall take him or her into custody, but such officer shall immediately
upon taking custody of the minor reasonably attempt to communicate with the
parent, custodian or guardian of the minor unless subparagraph (e) herein is
applicable. A parent, custodian or guardian must take custody of the minor within
one (1) hour of the time notice or be subject to a charge of $25.00 per hour as
hereinafter provided.
(c) Whenever a Police Officer or Truant Officer witnesses or has knowledge
based on reasonable grounds of a violation of the Ordinance by any person, such
person may be issued a citation. A citation or complaint may be made to a Police
Officer or Truant Officer by any person.
(d) A citation issued hereunder this shall be in writing and shall:
(1) state the name of the person being cited and the person's address if
known:
(2) set forth the specific section of this Ordinance that was violated, the
date of the violation and a brief description of the violation;
(3) be signed by the issuing Police Officer, Truant Officer or
complaining party.
In each instance where a citation is issued to a minor for violation of this
Ordinance a minor's parent, custodian or guardian shall be provided a copy of the
citation notifying the parent, custodian or guardian of the charge made against the
minor.
(e) A minor cited for a citation under this Ordinance must attend a court hearing or
Truancy Review Board hearing on the citation and must be accompanied at the
hearing by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the
legal care and custody of the minor. If any such person fails to attend any court
hearing with the minor, and unless the interest of justice would otherwise be
served, the court may continue the hearing and shall issue a Notice or a Rule to
Show Cause to the person directing that said person to appear at the continued
hearing with the minor. Failure of the person to thereafter appear shall subject said
person to sanctions for contempt of court as determined by the court.
(f) Every member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby authorized to
temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of paragraph 3 of this
Ordinance, regardless of whether a citation is issued, and to deliver and surrender
the minor to the lawful authorities of the school that the minor would normally
attend.
6. Penalty
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00; and a
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day on which
such violation occurs or continues.
(b) In lieu of or in addition to a fine, a minor may be ordered to attend
counseling or to perform ten (10) hours of court approved community service
during times other than the minor's hours of school attendance and/or the minor's
parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
the minor may be ordered to attend a parenting class or series of parenting classes
or other counseling approved by the court or recommended by the Truancy Review
Board or to attend any program directly related to improving school attendance
and/or performance.
(c) In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant (a) or (b) above, the minor's
parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
the minor may be ordered to pay all amounts imposed as civil liability under
paragraph 7 hereinafter.
7. Civil Liability
If a minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one (1) hour which requires
the supervision of the minor by personnel of the Mt. Vernon Police Department,
the parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the legal care or
custody of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs therefor. The
parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the legal care or custody
of a minor who has committed any offense of the Ordinance shall be assessed and
billed for the costs; the costs shall be recoverable in any action enforcing any
provision of this Ordinance or in a separate civil action. In addition, the failure to
pay the costs shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and subject the violator
to the penalties described within paragraph 6 above. In the event any action is filed
the liable party shall be responsible for all court cost and any reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the City in collecting.
8. Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance including any exception, part, phrase or term or
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid such invalidity
shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can be
given affect without the invalid provision or application and in this in the
provisions of this Ordinance are declared severable.
SECTION 12.21
No person shall place an order for any food, good, or service from any business
within the City of Mt. Vernon with the intent not to accept and make payment for said
food, good, or service. Leaving or attempting to leave a place of business after placing an
order without accepting the order and making payment therefor shall constitute prima
facie evidence of an intent to place an order with the intent not to accept and pay for said
order.
SECTION 12.22
No person shall place, throw, deposit, drop, discard, or otherwise litter any paper,
can, glass, wrapper, garbage, debris, waste, or any other item upon any sidewalk,
roadway, alley, street, yard, public property, or private property within the City of Mt.
Vernon, except in public or private litter receptacles; same shall constitute the offense of
littering. Complaint for the offense of littering may be made by Traffic Citation
Complaint if said offense is committed by a person in or from a motor vehicle. Otherwise,
complaint shall be made in the same manner as other non-traffic ordinance violations.
SECTION 12.23
No owner, operator or person in control of any motor vehicle upon any street or upon any
public or private property within the City of Mt. Vernon, except the operator of an
authorized emergency vehicle, shall operate or permit operation of any sound
amplification system which can be heard outside of the vehicle from 75 or more feet,
unless that system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
Any violation of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the following fines: (a)
For the first violation of this Section within any twelve-month period a fine of $100.00;
(b) For the second violation of this Section within any twelve-month period a fine of
$250.00; and (c) For the third violation and each subsequent violation of this Section
within any twelve month period, a fine of $500.00.
SECTION 12.24
No person in control or possession of a residential property shall permit the accumulation of
residential refuse or household waste upon such property. Residential refuse and household
waste, except bulk waste as hereinafter defined, shall only be stored in approved containers as
hereinafter defined and shall be set out each week for pickup by the City refuse collection
contractor or other contractor. An approved container shall be (i) the roller cart provided by the
City refuse collection contractor or (ii) a reusable, water tight container made of plastic, metal, or
fiberglass with a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons, a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds,
and with a tight fitting lid, and with handles of adequate strength for lifting.
Each residence or dwelling shall have sufficient approved containers to hold all of the residential
refuse and household waste generated and accumulating upon a premises between collections.
Container covers shall be tightly placed upon each container so as to keep the container closed
whenever there is refuse or waste in the container. No refuse or waste, excluding bulk waste,
shall be set out for collection except within an approved container.
Each approved container, except when set out for pickup, if not stored within a building, shall be
placed and kept at all times on private property adjacent to the residence or other building at a
location which is not between the front of the residence or building and an adjoining street.
Containers during storage shall be placed upon the private property at a location which is least
visible from a public street or sidewalk.
No container shall be set out for pickup sooner than 24 hours prior to 6:00 a.m. on the date of
the scheduled pickup and no container shall remain set out for a period of 24 hours after 6:00
a.m. on the date of scheduled pickup. A permitted bulk item (i.e. bulk waste) may be set out 48
hours prior to 6:00 a.m. on the date of the scheduled pickup. Bulk waste is hereby defined to be
a large appliance, item of furniture, or waste material from a residential source other than
construction debris or hazardous waste with a weight or volume greater than allowed for
approved containers.
ARTICLE 13
NUISANCES
SECTION 13.1
No person shall keep, maintain or allow upon any premises within the City any carrion,
pigsty, decaying animal or vegetable matter, stagnant water or any other thing that may be
injurious to the health of or offensive to the public, or by which any noxious or offensive smell
may be created. The keeping, maintaining or allowing of any such matter or condition within the
City is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which shall be abated as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 13.2
No person shall dump, throw, place, deposit, maintain, store or keep on any street, alley,
premises, public property, private property or land within the City any junk, trash, waste, garbage
or other debris and the dumping, throwing, placing, depositing, maintaining, storage or keeping
of any such matter as aforesaid shall be declared to be a nuisance, which shall be abated as
hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 13.3
No person shall keep or allow any dead grass, dry weeds or any combustible material
upon any right-of-way or any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him within the City,
and no person shall keep or allow any rank or growing weeds of a height of one foot on any
premises within the City owned or occupied by such person. The keeping or allowing of any of
the material herein described is hereby declared to be a nuisance which shall be abated as
hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 13.4
No person being owner or having custody, care, control or possession of any animal
which shall die within the City limits shall allow the carcass thereof to remain in the City limits
for more than 12 hours and every such person shall cause such carcass to be removed within 12
hours of the death of such animal.
SECTION 13.5
No person shall have or keep any cattle, hogs, sheep or goats or other animals within the
City in such manner as to create any offensive smell or noise or to create any condition
dangerous to the health of the public.
Keeping or permitting six or more dogs and/or cats over the age of four months upon or
within any lot, structure, dwelling, or premises, except upon a lot, structure, or premises licensed and
lawfully operating under the Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605) and lawfully zoned under
Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, shall constitute and is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
SECTION 13.6
No person shall expectorate or spit on any sidewalk or public place within the City.
SECTION 13.7
No person shall within the City sell or offer for sale any tainted or spoiled matter,
vegetable or other food products to be used for human consumption.
SECTION 13.8 Open Burning
A. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or other open
burning fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained within the limits of the
City, except recreational fires, permitted landscape fires, and permitted leaf burning fires
as hereinafter defined and except small open flames for heating tar, welding, acetylene
torches, highway safety flares and the like.
B. Recreational fires shall consist of the burning of fuels for a legitimate
campfire, recreational, and cooking purposes, or in a domestic fireplace or device in areas
where such burning is consistent with other laws.
C. Recreational fires, permitted landscape fires, and permitted leaf burning fires
shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
(a) A recreational fire may only burn sticks, limbs, logs not exceeding four inches
in diameter, charcoal, cooking fuel or camping fuel only.
(b) No recreational fire shall be burned or be permitted to smolder between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(c) No recreational fire, permitted landscape fire, or permitted leaf burning fire
shall be burned during periods of high wind or extreme drought.
(d) Recreational fires shall be in a fire pit, fire ring, outdoor fireplace, chiminea, or
other such device designed for such burning, or shall be in an area surrounded by
non-combustible material. If the recreational fire is not within a device designed
for such burning, permission shall be obtained from the Mt. Vernon Fire
Department before igniting the recreational fire; in addition, no recreational fire
shall exceed an area dimension of 6 feet by 6 feet (i.e. no width or length
measurement of the fire area shall exceed 6 feet).
(e) No garbage, trash, debris, waste, refuse, lumber, building materials, or tires
shall be burned in a recreational fire, a permitted landscape fire, or leaf burning
fire; no landscape waste (including leaves) except sticks, limbs, and logs described
within subparagraph (a) above shall be burned in a recreational fire.
(f) No person shall willfully leave any recreational fire, permitted landscape fire,
or leaf burning fire including any smoldering fire, unattended; a fire shall be
considered unattended if a person of not at least 18 years of age is not physically
present out-of-doors and in visible contact with the fire at all times.
(g) No recreational fire, permitted landscape fire, or leaf burning fire shall be
burned upon any public street, public sidewalk, any drainage ditch within the
public right-of-way, or any manhole cover or burned upon the property of another
without written permission.
(h) Recreational fires, permitted recreational fires, and leaf burning fires shall be
extinguished immediately upon direction of police or fire personnel.
(i) A leaf burning fire (which may burn leaves and also sticks and logs not
exceeding four inches in diameter) may be burned as hereinafter stated, but on no
other dates, except as may be permitted within subparagraph D below. A leaf
burning fire is permitted between the hours of sunrise and sunset each day as
determined by the Astronomical Applications Department of the U.S. Navy
Observatory during the following periods: Monday through Sunday during each
the second full week of April, the second full week of May, the second full week
of October, and the second full week of November each year. Leaf burning may be
prohibited during a permitted leaf burning period by order of the Chief of the Mt.
Vernon Fire Department upon a determination by him that leaf burning constitutes
a fire hazard due to high winds, dry conditions or other factors. No leaf burning
fire shall be burned or shall be permitted to smolder between the hours of sunset
and sunrise.
D. No person within the City of Mt. Vernon shall burn any landscape waste
(including leaves) on any date or at any time except (i) as hereinafter provided,
(ii) except sticks, limbs, and logs within recreational fires or leaf burning fires as
permitted as within subparagraph C above, and (iii) except leaves within leaf
burning fires as permitted within subparagraph C above; provided, however, that
in the event of an emergency or other special circumstance, the burning of
landscape waste (including leaves) may be authorized for a definite period of time
by the City Manager upon the written recommendation of the Fire Chief of the Mt.
Vernon Fire Department, or by the Mayor by written declaration, or by the City
Council by resolution. In addition, individuals who own five or more acres of
contiguous property may burn landscape waste (including leaves) within the
confines of their respective property, provided that only landscape waste which is
generated from that property shall be burned; and individuals in possession of a
valid permit issued by an agency of the State of Illinois or of the United States
authorizing the burning of landscape waste may burn landscape waste in
accordance with the terms of the permit; each of said fires being “permitted
landscape fires”. In no event shall any person burn any landscape waste (including
leaves) upon any public street, public sidewalk, any drainage ditch within the
public right-of-way, or any manhole cover or upon the property of another without
written permission. No permitted landscape fire shall be burned or shall be
permitted to smolder between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of the Section shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Vernon. In addition, any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be
liable for and shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the City,
including without limitation any labor expenses, man hour costs, machinery and
equipment costs, and any material costs, incurred by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department,
associated with or relating to responding to the violation and/or fire or the containment of
said fire, and all reasonable attorney’s fees and other costs incurred by the City in the
collection of said costs and expenses.
SECTION 13.9
No person shall, within the City, make or create any loud, unnecessary or unusual noises
and the making or creating of any loud, unnecessary or unusual noises is declared to be a
nuisance.
SECTION 13.10
No person shall store or place any refrigerator, ice box or ice chest in any open,
unattended or unguarded place within the City limits without first removing the door or doors
therefrom, and placing or storing any such article in any such place without first removing the
door or doors is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
SECTION 13.11
When complaint shall be made by any person to the Police Department of the City, the
Inspection Department of the City, or the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any
condition that exists within the City which is a nuisance to the public, including any condition or
thing described in this Article, the Police Department , the Inspection Department, the City
Manager or the designee of any of them or other agency of the City, is hereby authorized to serve
or cause to be served a notice in writing upon the owner, occupant, and lien holders of the
premises upon which such nuisance shall be alleged to be located and such notice shall state the
condition of the thing alleged to be a nuisance and shall require such owner, occupant, and lien
holder to abate such nuisance within the reasonable time of not more than five (5) days after
service of such notice in writing either personally or by regular mail (service being complete
upon deposit within U.S. Mail Box) or to the last-known address of such person or persons or if
no address is known, by posting notice upon the property. In the event the owner, occupant, or
lien holder shall fail, neglect, or refuse to abate such nuisance within five days after the service of
notice, the City may proceed to abate such nuisance, and the reasonable costs and expenses of
such abatement by the City will be and the same is hereby assessed against such owner and
occupant personally as well as against the property respectively. The costs and expenses of
abatement of the nuisance shall, in all events be a lien upon the premises superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances except tax liens, and if notice has been given as provided
above superior to prior or existing lien holders, if within 120 (one hundred twenty) days after
such costs and expenses incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon or by the person performing the
service by authority of the City of Mt. Vernon in his or its own name files notice of lien in the
Office of the Recorder of Jefferson County, Illinois.
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the
real estate sufficient for identification thereof; (2) the amount of money representing the costs
and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (3) the date or dates when such costs and
expense were incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon. The lien of the City shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement of
the nuisance and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, and the lien of the City shall not be valid
as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose right in and to the premises arises
prior to the filing of the notice of lien and to whom notice was not personally served or mailed as
provided above. If notice to a mortgagee or lien holder was given by personal service or by mail
then the lien of the City shall be valid, prior and superior to any lien or claim of said mortgagee,
judgment creditor, or lien holder. Such lien may be foreclosed by the City of Mt. Vernon; or, at
the City=s election, the City may sue and recover from any owner or occupant if he fails, neglects,
or refuses to abate such nuisance within the aforesaid five-day period for the reasonable costs and
expenses of such abatement by the City provided that the City may file and foreclose such lien or
suit personally or both. Reasonable costs and expenses of abatement shall include (but shall not
be limited to) inspection and reinspection fees; abstracting and title costs; postage or service fees;
cost of notice preparation; labor expenses; man hour costs; machinery and equipment costs and
fees; travel time for equipment to and from the property; other costs associated with abatement of
the nuisance; all costs of disposal of material, debris, or other such items; administrative and
clerical costs; recording fees, including costs incurred for filing of lien and release of same; all
reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation, institution, enforcement, collection
or forfeiture of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other costs or expenses
incurred by the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder.
The foreclosure of any lien hereunder shall be a remedy coexistent with any other remedy
of the City, including the imposition of a fine for the maintenance of any such nuisance or the
violation of any Section of this Article.
SECTION 13.12
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
Section.
(1) AVehicle@ shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include without
limitation automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
(2) AProperty@ shall mean any real property within the City of Mt. Vernon.
(3) AStreet or Highway@ shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(4) AInoperable motor vehicle@ shall mean any motor vehicle which for a period of at
least thirty (30) days has for any reason been incapable of being actually driven
under its own power.
AInoperable motor vehicle@ shall not include motor vehicles that are kept within a
building when not in use or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business lawfully engaged in wrecking or junking motor vehicles.
AJunked vehicle@ means any vehicle including but not limited to recreational
vehicles and equipment, farm and other machinery which because of one of the
following characteristics, constitutes a threat to public health and safety:
A. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight, taillight or
any other cracked or broken glass;
B. Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood ornament, window
handle, running board, steering wheel, trunk handle, radio aerial, tailpipe or
decorative piece, or machinery with rotted, rusted or loose parts;
C. Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, snakes or other vermin or
insects;
D. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or other flammable fuel; or
E. Any other vehicle which because of its defective condition constitutes a serious
threat to the public health and safety of the citizens of the City.
a. Except the term junked vehicles shall not include vehicles stored within a
locked garage or on the premises of a place of business lawfully engaged
in wrecking or junking motor vehicles.
b. No person shall keep or have any inoperative motor vehicle as defined
herein on public or private property; same is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
c. No person shall store any junked vehicles as herein defined upon private
property nor shall any person place, leave or keep any junked vehicle
upon public property; same are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
d. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating or wrecked
vehicle or junked vehicle on any street or highway in the City; same are
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
e. No person shall use any motor vehicle or permit any motor vehicle to be
used for storage of anything or item. Any motor vehicle used for said
purpose is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
f. No person shall park, store, place, leave or keep any motor vehicle
required to be licensed by the State of Illinois upon public or private
property unless said vehicle is properly licensed for the current year as
required by law; any unlicensed vehicle is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
g. If any vehicle is found to be kept, stored or left in violation of this
Ordinance, the person in possession of the property upon which such
vehicle is kept, stored or left, or in absence of such person, any known or
ascertainable owner of the vehicle, shall be liable for such violation.
Possession of the property upon which the vehicle is kept, stored or left, or
ownership of the vehicle in absence of any person known to be in
possession, shall be prima facie evidence of responsibility and liability for
the condition giving rise to the nuisance.
h. Any person who violates Subsection b, c, d, e or f shall be subject to a fine
as provided in Section 22.6 of the Revised Code in addition to such other
remedies as permitted or provided by law.
i. Upon discovery of any vehicle which reasonable appears to be in violation
of this Ordinance, the corporate authorities of the Chief of Police or his
duly designated agent shall notify in writing the person in possession of
the property upon which the vehicle is kept, stored or left, or in absence of
such person, shall notify any known or ascertainable owner of the vehicle,
that:
1) The vehicle constitutes a nuisance under the provisions of this
Section;
2) The person must within ten (10) days remove or repair the vehicle
or otherwise abate the nuisance;
3) The failure to remove or repair the vehicle or abate the nuisance
will be sufficient cause for its removal by the City under the terms
of this Section; that the continued failure of the person to remove
or repair or abate may also subject him to a fine as provided in this
Subsection; and that the person receiving the Notice may appear
before the Building Official for the City of Mt. Vernon and show
cause why the motor vehicle should not be removed or repaired.
If the person in possession of the property upon which the vehicle
is kept, stored or left, or in absence of such person, any known or
ascertainable owner of the vehicle, fails to remove or repair the
vehicle or abate the nuisance in accordance with the terms of this
Section, the Chief of Police or his duly designated agent shall abate
such nuisance by causing the vehicle to be towed or transported to
a designated storage place as determined by the City and the cost of
the towing transportation and storage shall be charged and assessed
to each person who shall have received a Notice to Abate Nuisance
hereunder and shall be assessed against the motor vehicle. Such
charges shall be assessed and collected and such vehicle shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of as an unclaimed
vehicle after passage of 30 days in accordance with Section
18.19(m) of the Revised Code.
SECTION 13.13
(a) Definitions
1) Ashes shall include cinders, fly ash or other solid material resulting from
combustion and may include other solid material resulting from
combustion and may include unburned combustibles.
2) Atmospheric Pollution shall mean discharging from stacks, chimneys,
exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, premises, structures, vehicles, processes
or other source, or any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or
obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic substances,
waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter or any other materials in
such place, manner or concentration as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance
or annoyance to the public or to endanger the health, comfort, repose,
safety or welfare of the public, or in such manner as to cause or have a
natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property.
3) Cinders shall mean particles not ordinarily considered as fly ash or dust
because of their greater size, consisting essentially of fused ash and/or
unburned matter.
4) Dust shall include fly ash, cinders, dirt, grime and any other solid particles
resulting from any industrial process or other source.
5) Fly Ash shall include particulate matter capable of being gas-borne or
airborne and consisting essentially of fused ash and/or burned or unburned
material.
6) Fumes shall include gases, acids or vapors that are of such character as to
create an unclean, destructive, offensive or unhealthful condition.
7) Particulate Matter shall include material, other than water, which is
suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as
a liquid or solid.
8) Ringlemann Chart shall include and mean that chart published and
distributed by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular
6888 and on which are illustrated the graduated shades of gray or black for
use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
9) Smoke shall mean small, gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete
combustion consisting predominantly of carbon and other combustible
material and present in sufficient quantity to be observable independently
of the presence of other solids.
10) Smoke Units shall mean and represent the number obtained by multiplying
the density of the smoke observed and determined in Ringlemann
numbers under the Ringlemann Chart by the time of emission in minutes.
11) Soot shall include agglomerated particles consisting essentially of
carbonaceous materials.
(b) It shall be unlawful within the City of Mt. Vernon for any person owning or operating,
either as principal agent, or an employee, any burning combustion equipment or device, or
process equipment device or portable boiler, or any other device, to cause, suffer or allow
emission or discharge into the open air of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other particulate matter, air
contaminant or atmospheric pollution from any single such source, except in conformity with the
limits set forth hereinafter:
1) Not more than 15 smoke units under the Ringlemann Chart shall be permitted per
hour.
2) No smoke more intense than number two on the Ringlemann Chart shall be
allowed, except that during one hour of a 24-hour day, 30 units of smoke may be
emitted but with no more soot or intensity than number three on the Ringlemann
Chart.
3) No smoke, dust, soot, fumes or other particulate matter, air contaminant or
atmospheric pollution shall be permitted in quantities sufficient to produce an
opacity at any point greater than number three on the Ringlemann Chart, except a
plume consisting entirely of condensed steam.
4) The total quantity of emitted solids from any single source shall not exceed one
pound per hour, per acre.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.13B hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other
particulate matter, air contaminant or atmospheric pollution in such places as to be detrimental to
any person or the public or to endanger the health, safety or welfare of any person or the public
and the escape of such is declared to be a public nuisance.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the handling, loading,
unloading, storing, transferring, transporting, placing, depositing, or scattering of any ashes, fly
ash, cinders or dust collected from any combustion process, any dust, dirt, chaff, wastepaper,
trash, rubbish, waste or refuse matter of any kind, or any other substance or other material
whatever, which is likely to be scattered by the wind, or is susceptible to being wind-borne,
without taking reasonable precautions or measures so as to minimize atmospheric pollution and it
shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or cause to be operated or maintained, any
building, structure or premises or other place which has or involves any matter, material or
substance likely to be scattered by the wind or susceptible to being wind-borne so as to minimize
atmospheric pollution.
(e) Observations of smoke or emissions described above under the Ringlemann Chart
shall be made by comparing the observed density of the smoke with the Ringlemann Chart
numbers and where the density of smoke observed falls between two consecutive Ringlemann
Chart numbers, the lower Ringlemann Chart number shall be considered the density of the smoke
or other condition observed.
(f) Any emission or escape of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other particulate matter, air
contaminant or atmospheric pollution, in the sense of the limits described above, or in such
quantities and in such place as to be detrimental to any person or the public or which shall
endanger the health, safety or welfare of any person or the public, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and shall be abated in the manner described in Section 13.11 of this Article. The
City Manager is further empowered to institute legal proceedings on behalf of the City for
abatement or prosecution of any such nuisance.
(g) In order to determine the quantity of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other air contaminant
or atmospheric pollution emitted or escaping into the open air from any source, it shall be the
duty of any person owning any burning combustion equipment device, process equipment device,
or portable boiler or other device at his own expense to make or cause to be made an annual
examination and test thereof by a competent person or firm approved by the City Manager, to
determine whether same complies with the provisions of this ordinance and shall submit the
results of such test to the City Manager.
SECTION 13.14
(a) That any rank or growing weeds over the height of one foot growing on any lot or
tract of land within the City limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, are hereby declared a
nuisance. Such weeds shall be cut and removed by the owner or person having control of such lot
or tract of land within five (5) days after notice in writing to the last known address of such
person or if no address is known by posting notice upon the property by the Bureau of Inspection
or other City official to cut the same. Any person failing to cut such weeds on any premises
owned or controlled by him within five (5) days after such notice shall be deemed guilty of
violation of this Article and upon conviction thereof be fined.
(b) In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of any person, firm or corporation to abate
such nuisance within five (5) days after the service of notice as herein provided, the City may
abate such nuisance, and the reasonable cost and expense of such abatement by the City will be
and the same is hereby assessed against such firm or corporation, personally, as well as the
several lots or parcels of land, respectively. Such lien may be foreclosed by the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois; or, at the City's election, it may sue and recover from any person, firm or
corporation who fails, neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance within the aforesaid five-day
period for the reasonable costs and expenses of such abatement by the City provided that the City
may file and foreclose such lien or sue personally, or both. Reasonable costs and expenses of
abatement shall include (but shall not be limited to) inspection and reinspection fees; abstracting
and title costs; postage or service fees; costs of notice preparation; labor expenses; man-hour
costs; machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time for equipment to and from the
property mowed; other costs associated with mowing; all costs of disposal of materials, debris or
other such items; administrative and clerical costs; recording fees including costs incurred for
filing of lien and release of same; all reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation,
institution, enforcement, collection, or foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder;
and any other costs or expenses incurred by the City pursuant to exercise of its authority
hereunder.
SECTION 13.15 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
(a) No person shall permit any dog, cat or other animal within the City owned,
kept, in the care of, or controlled by such person to be or run at large upon any street, sidewalk,
park, or public place or public property nor to be or run at large upon the private property of
another person without said person’s consent. An animal shall not be deemed running at large
when off the premises of its owner, caretaker, or keeper, if such animal shall be restrained by a
leash, cord, or chain not exceeding ten feet in length or confined within a secure animal carrier or
confined within a motor vehicle.
(b) In the event any dog, cat or other animal is apprehended while running at large
within the City and detained or confined within the facilities of the Jefferson County Animal
Shelter or other City authorized facility, then the owner, keeper or other person claiming and
removing the animal from the facilities shall pay a ten dollar ($10.00) reclamation fee, in
addition to any other fees or charges imposed by the facility or other authority.
SECTION 13.16 FINES
Except as otherwise specifically provided within Article 13, any person who shall violate
any section or provision of Article 13 shall be subject to the following fines:
(a) A fine of $50 per day for each violation arising from a single Notice to
Abate Nuisance during a calendar year;
(b) A fine of $100 per day for each violation arising from a second Notice to
Abate Nuisance during a calendar year;
(c) A fine of $200 per day for each violation arising from a third Notice to
Abate Nuisance during a calendar year.
A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day on which a violation
occurs or continues after the date of service of the Notice to Abate Nuisance.
ARTICLE 14
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION 14.1
There is hereby created a Zoning and Planning Commission for the City of Mt. Vernon
(which Zoning and Planning Commission is also established by Article 21, Section 21-111 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances). Said Zoning and Planning Commission shall perform the duties
and have the authority as hereinafter set forth for the Plan Commission.
SECTION 14.2
The membership of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members,
all residents of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Members shall serve for a 5-year term, provided that
in the event of a vacancy or late appointment the appointment shall be for the unexpired term only.
The Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council shall appoint the membership and
designate the Chairman who shall serve in this capacity until a vacancy in his term of appointment
exists. Members of the Zoning and Planning Commission may be removed for cause after a public
hearing. Cause shall include, but shall not be limited to, the failure to attend two consecutive
meetings or four meetings during any 12-month period.
SECTION 14.3
In addition to the regular members provided for herein ,the City Engineer shall be a nonvoting
ex-officio member of said Zoning and Planning Commission and shall aid, assist, and
advise said Zoning and Planning Commission when requested.
SECTION 14.4 PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF PLAN COMMISSION
(a) Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan Commission shall
meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules
and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with City ordinances and state laws. The
Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection. The Commission shall also file an annual report with the City Council, setting forth its
transactions and recommendations.
(b) Said Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To prepare and recommend to the City Council of Mt. Vernon a comprehensive plan
for the present and future development or redevelopment and growth of said City.
Such a plan after its adoption by the City Council will be known as the official plan of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements with reference
to streets, alleys, and public grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous
territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half miles from such limits,
and not included in any municipality, such requirements to be effective
whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
2. To prepare and recommend to the City Council of Mt. Vernon from time to time,
such changes in the plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary by the
City Council or by the Plan Commission.
3. To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time, plans and/or
recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such official plan.
4. To give aid to the officials of the City of Mt. Vernon, charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the making
of these projects, and generally to promote the realization of the official plan.
5. To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general
purpose of public understanding.
6. To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies
or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and
integrated planning for the area.
7. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under authority of an
act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois entitled, “The Illinois Municipal
Code” and in particular, Sections 11-12-4 through 11-12-12 thereof, as amended, as
may be conferred by the City Council of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
SECTION 14.5
Following the adoption of an official plan for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, no map or plat
of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits
of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, or in contiguous territory outside of the City limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and within a one and one-half (11/2) mile radius thereof and not included
within any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the said subdivision
or re-subdivision shall provide for streets, alleys, public grounds and other requirements applicable
thereto of such official plan.
SECTION 14.6
The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a copy of all
ordinances, plans and data that may in any way assist the said Plan Commission in its duties.
That all City officials shall cooperate and assist the Plan Commission in its work and particularly,
with reference to the official plan of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
SECTION 14.7
The Plan Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, employ necessary help
and incur necessary expenses in order to perform its duties.
ARTICLE 15
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION 15.1 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW
No person shall hereafter engage in the business of plumbing in the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, either as a plumbing contractor, employing plumber, or journeyman plumber who shall
not comply with the requirements and provisions, including the minimum code of plumbing
standards, of the Plumber's License Law of the State of Illinois, 225 ILCS 320/0.01, et seq.
SECTION 15.2 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
The Building inspector shall sign and issue all notices, permits, and certificates required
by this Article. He shall keep a record of the performance of his duties which shall include a
record of all notices issued, applications received, and permits granted. He shall keep a record of
violations of this Article. He shall cause to be inspected in the manner required by law, and for
the purpose thereof may enter, all buildings in the course of erection and all buildings undergoing
alteration or repair as often as may be necessary to ensure conformance with the requirements of
this Article. He shall compel all work in plumbing to be performed in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
SECTION 15.3 PLUMBING PERMITS
No plumbing (except replacement of existing fixtures only) shall be installed, altered, or
changed in any building or structure; nor shall any plumbing be installed, altered, or changed
upon any service or lateral between a structure and the City's water or sewer system within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon except by authorized employees of the City until a
permit for such installation, alteration, or change shall have been obtained from the Building
Inspector. Said permit shall be issued only to a plumber contractor, employing plumber, or
self-employed journeyman plumber licensed under the Plumber's License Law of the State of
Illinois and bonded as hereinafter provided or to the owner occupant or lessee occupant of a
single-family residence as provided within 225 ILCS 320/2(2). After the permit shall have been
issued by the Building Inspector, no change or modification in the plans or specifications shall be
made unless such change shall first have been submitted to the Building Inspector and approved.
SECTION 15.4 FEES FOR PERMITS
The City Clerk shall collect the following fees for permits issued, which said fees shall be
paid prior to the issuance of the permit. The fee shall be the same in the case of alteration or
change of existing plumbing as in the case of the installation of new plumbing.
ITEM FEE
Each plumbing fixture or other plumbing opening $1.50
Air-conditioning unit (which requires plumbing) $1.50
Each floor drain $1.50
Each water tap or connection See Art. 16, '16.6(h)
Each sewer tap or connection See Art. 16, '16.7(r)
The fees for the permits above described shall not be charged to or collected from an
applicant if all of the following criteria are met:
1. The work is being done for the use of a governmental entity or a not-for-profit
organization whose purposes are religious, educational, or charitable.
2. The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that said fees have not
been and will not be included in any payment to any contractor or other person.
3. Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits and otherwise
fully comply with the Ordinances of the City, unless exempted therefrom by any law of the State
of Illinois or of the United States.
SECTION 15.5 NOTIFICATION TO BUILDING INSPECTOR
The Building Inspector shall be notified by the firm or person doing the work when any
plumbing work is begun and when it is ready for inspection. The Building Inspector shall cause
all inspections to be made, except inspections of taps for sewer or water, which inspections will
be caused to be made by the Superintendent of Public Utilities, all of said inspections to be made
by a licensed plumber. All work shall be left uncovered and convenient for examination until
inspected and approved. If such work shall not be left uncovered and convenient for inspection,
the Building Inspector, the Superintendent of Public Utilities, or their respective designee is
hereby authorized to require such excavation as shall be necessary to make the inspection. The
inspection shall be made within one day after receipt of notice that the work is ready for
inspection. All plumbing must be tested as provided by law in the presence of the inspector, and
all defective materials and work replaced and corrected. Upon satisfactory completion of the
work, the Building inspector or Superintendent of Public Utilities as applicable shall issue a
Certificate of Approval.
SECTION 15.6 PROHIBITION
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing as a journeyman plumber, contracting
plumber, or employing plumber in the City without having obtained a license from the State of
Illinois. No person shall commence any plumbing work within the City without first having
obtained a permit as required herein. No person shall refuse, neglect, or disobey any order of the
Building Inspector to correct or remove a nuisance existing by reason of unsanitary plumbing or
plumbing installed in violation of this Article.
SECTION 15.7 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
A. Application.
All premises served by the public potable water supply system of the City of Mt. Vernon
shall provide protection of the potable water system from contamination due to backflow or
back-siphonage of contaminants through the water service connection in accordance with the
Illinois Plumbing Code and in accordance with this Subsection which is enacted pursuant to said
Illinois Plumbing Code.
B. Purpose.
The purpose of this Subsection is (a) to protect the public water supply system from
contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply
system; (b) to promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and non-potable water systems,
plumbing fixtures, and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable
safety; (c) to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control
which will prevent the contamination of pollution of the public and consumer's potable water
systems.
C. Policy.
1. The owner, custodian, or occupant of each premises served by the public potable water
supply system of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be responsible for protection of the public water
supply from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants, through the
customer's water service connection. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or if in
the judgment of the Superintendent of Public Utilities or his authorized representative, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Superintendent of Public Utilities shall give notice to the consumer to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer
shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense at a location and in
a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, and this Ordinance and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
upon installation; failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or
devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until
such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing, and repair as hereinafter required for a period of at least five years. The
Superintendent of Public Utilities may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection
inspection report to the City of Mt. Vernon to assist in determining whether or not service line
protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the Environmental Protection Agency.
2. No person, firm, or corporation, shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary, or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois may
enter the supply or distribution system of said City.
3. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Utilities to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial, industrial, and other properties served by the public
water supply that may pose an actual or potential hazard, including premises described within
Section 15.7H2 and 3 herein.
D. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
Subsection:
1. AFixed proper air gap@ means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
2. AAgency@ means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
3. AApproved@ means backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineer, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
4. AAuxiliary water system@ means any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted
or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
5. ABackflow@ means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply.
6. ABackflow prevention device@ means any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing
Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
7. AConsumer@or ACustomer@ means the owner, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
system.
8. AConsumer's water system@ means any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
9. AContamination@ means any impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
10. ACross-connection@ means any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown an or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance
Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum, or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
11. ADouble-check valve assembly@ means an assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A
double-check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end
of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve.
12. AHealth hazard@ means any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of
consumers. The word Asevere@ as used to qualify Ahealth hazard@ means a hazard
to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant
reduction in the quality of life.
13. AInspection@ means a plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances, and installations of a
plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code,
77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
14. ANonpotable water@ means water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use
was determined by the requirements of 77 Ill. Adm. Code 900.
15. APlumbing@ means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration, or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private
water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley, or at the curb to,
within, and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work,
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping unit t o
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary
drainage and related ventilation system of any buildings where a person or persons
live, work, or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the
building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet Beyond the foundation
walls.
16. APollution@ means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, radiological, or
biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or
impair the usefulness of the water.
17. APotable water@ means water which meets the requirements of 77 Ill. Code 90C
for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
18. APotential cross-connection@ means a fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of
the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
19. AProcess fluid(s)@ means any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into
the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited
to:
a. polluted or contaminated waters;
b. process waters;
c. used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
d. cooling waters;
e. questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
f. chemicals in solution or suspension;
g. oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
20. APublic water supply@ means all mains, pipes, and structures through which water
is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks,
and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for
the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which
serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at
least 60 days per year. A public water supply is either a Acommunity water supply@
or a Anon-community water supply@
21. AReduced pressure principle backflow prevention device@ means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two
check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and
at the cessation of normal the pressure between these two checks shall be less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operates to maintain the pressure
between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device
shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
22. AService connection@ means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
23. ASurvey@ means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system
and must include location, type, and most recent inspection and testing date of all
cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
24. ASystem hazard@ means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
25. AUsed water@ means any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is
no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
26. AWater purveyor@ means the owner or official custodian of a public water system.
E. Water System.
The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the public water supply
system and the consumer's water system. The public water supply system shall consist of the
source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable
water system under the control of the Superintendent of Public Utilities up to the point where the
consumer's water system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution
system. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to
deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system. The consumer's water system shall
include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection which are used to convey water
from the public water supply distribution system to points of use.
F. Cross-Connection Prohibited.
Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing
water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited. No physical
connection shall be permitted between potable portion of a supply and any water supply not of
equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by
the Agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may
enter a supply.
There shall be no direct connections between potable water lines and any lines;
equipment, or any part of the sewage system, except only such connections as shall be made
through a minimum fixed air gap as detailed within Section 890.1140 of 77 111. Adm. Code 890
or the Illinois Plumbing Code.
G. Survey and Investigation.
1. The approved Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or
distribution system of the City of Mt. Vernon for the purpose of verifying the presence or
absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises and testing, repair, and
maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer's premises; and that the
Water Superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the City
of Mt. Vernon for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the
required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any
property so served shall furnish to the Superintendent of Public Utilities any information which
he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal
of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent of Public
Utilities, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
Ordinance.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of
water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential
cross-connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow
into his or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
3. It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public
water system by ensuring that:
a. All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices
are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
b. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
c. Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and
at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a Cross-Connection
Control Device Inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall
include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
d. Testing and Records
Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more
frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for
inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4(e).
Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of
CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
i. date of each test;
ii. name and approval number of person performing the test;
iii. test results;
iv. repairs or servicing required;
v. repairs and date completed; and
vi. servicing performed and date completed.
H. Protection Required.
1. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 900 and the Agency's
regulations 35 I11. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Public Utilities, actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply water system exist.
2. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist:
a. Premises having an auxiliary water, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an
additional source by the Superintendent of Public Utilities and the source is
approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
b. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include premises
having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the
public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the
Superintendent of Public Utilities.
c. Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Utilities and the Cross-Connection Control Device
Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
d. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection
survey.
e. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or
reestablished.
3. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public
water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890 and the
Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention
device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Superintendent of Public
Utilities determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
a. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
b. Laboratories.
c. Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
d. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping
stations.
e. Food or beverage processing plants.
f. Chemical plants.
g. Metal plating industries.
h. Petroleum processing or storage plants.
i. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
j. Carwashes.
k. Pesticide, or herbicide, or extermination plants and trucks.
l. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
I. Type of Protection.
1. The type of protection required under paragraph H 2 (a), (b), and (c) shall depend
on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
a. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated substances that could cause a severe
health hazard.
b. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or
health hazard.
c. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard
not dangerous to health.
2. The type of protection required under Paragraph H 2 (d) and (e) shall be an
approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow
prevention device.
3. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire
protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire
safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
a. the fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or other chemicals;
b. water is pumped into the system from another source; or
c. water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be pumped into
the fire safety system from any other source;
d. there is a connection whereby another source can be connected to the fire safety
system.
4. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be
protected by a double-check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double-detector check
valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
J. Backflow Prevention Devices.
All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall
be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary
Engineering, or American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specification. Installation of approved
devices shall be made in accordance with 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890, and only as
specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available onsite.
K. Inspection and Maintenance.
1. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention
devices required by these regulations are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance, and
repair made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate
a need or are specified in manufacturer's instructions.
a. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper
vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and
the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually
thereafter.
b. Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation
and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within fifteen
days.
c. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested at the time
of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer, and required service performed within five days.
2. Testing shall be performed by a licensed cross-connection control inspector.
3. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual
inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
4. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
a. date of each test or visual inspection;
b. name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection;
c. test results;
d. repairs or servicing required;
e. repairs and date completed; and
f. servicing performed and date completed.
5. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to
be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay.
6. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed,
or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the Superintendent of Public
Utilities.
L. Booster Pumps.
Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises,
such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster
pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or
less. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in
proper working order and to certify to the Superintendent of Public Utilities, at least once a year,
that the device is operable.
M. Violations.
1. The Superintendent of Public Utilities is hereby authorized and directed to
disconnect, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this Ordinance is not installed, tested,
maintained, and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent of Public Utilities; or if it
is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed; or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premises; or if a low pressure cutoff required by this Ordinance is
not installed and maintained in working order; or if any connection in violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance is known to exist; and said Superintendent of Public Utilities is authorized to
take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination to the public water supply distribution mains.
2. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have
been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Utilities and until the required reconnection fee is
paid to the City of Mt. Vernon.
3. Immediate disconnection with a verbal notice can be effective when the
Superintendent of Public Utilities is assured or has determined that eminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party
can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water
supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of Public Utilities or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential
contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
4. Neither the City of Mt. Vernon, the Superintendent of Public Utilities, its agents,
nor assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages, or lost revenues which may
result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this
Ordinance, whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
5. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance or any customer
responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of
the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly
installed, maintained, or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost
of clean-up of the potable water supply system; and said customer shall be responsible for all
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in enforcing the terms of this Ordinance.
SECTION 15.8 PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
The use of groundwater as a potable water supply is prohibited except for such uses or methods
in existence before October 1, 2011. The use or attempt to use groundwater from within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon as a potable water supply by the installation or drilling
of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the City
of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 15.9 PENALTY
In addition to any other provision herein, any person violating any provision of this Ordinance
shall be subject to a fine and penalty in accordance with Article 22.6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
ARTICLE 16
PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT
SECTION 16.1 COMBINED WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
The existing waterworks system in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements
and extensions thereto, that may hereafter be made, and the existing sewerage system in its
entirety, together with all additional improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be
made, are hereby declared to be a combined system to be known as the Department of Public
Utilities. Such combined waterworks and sewerage systems of the City shall be maintained and
operated as a single utility; except, however, that all receipts and expenditures, budgets and other
financial transactions shall be reported and kept separate as to the water and sewer systems and
all requirements of any bonding ordinances heretofore or hereafter in force shall be complied
with separately as to said system.
Charges or rates shall be established separately for sewer use and such rates shall be
established separately for sewer use and such rates shall be reasonable and commensurate with
the sewer and water services performed by such combined utility system, and sufficient to
maintain and operate such system and provide adequate depreciation funds and pay the principal
and interest on any revenue bonds which may have been or may hereafter be issued, which bonds
are by their terms payable from the revenues of the sewer system, water system, or both.
Any charges or rates as hereinafter stated for the water or sewer system of the City of Mt.
Vernon may be paid in cash, by check or by other approved medium of exchange; provided,
however, that a payor by check thereby expressly agrees to pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a
$25.00 charge for each check returned or dishonored by the payor's bank. Said charge is
immediately due and payable upon demand by the City therefor.
Each statement for service charges shall contain the phrase: AAn additional service charge
of $25.00 is assessed upon any check being returned or dishonored by payor's bank.@
SECTION 16.2 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
A. The office of Superintendent of Public Utilities in and for the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, appointed by the City Manager, shall be paid a salary of $20,000 per year, payable in
equal monthly installments as a cost of operation of the sewer system and the water system. The
Superintendent shall have the administration and supervision over the management, maintenance
and control of the combined water and sewer systems of the City, and the repair, cleaning, and
improvement of same; and he shall have supervision over the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage and water treatment facilities of the City. He shall also exercise general supervision
over the shop maintenance, water maintenance, sewer maintenance, water meter maintenance,
iron removal maintenance, and procedure, pumping stations, maintenance and operation of the
Public Utilities Department of all property pertaining thereto and connected therewith. He shall
perform such other duties as are presented by the City Council.
The above described salary shall be adjusted quarterly hereafter by one-half the
percentage of increase in the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
U.S. Department of Labor. The average index number as published for the month of May, 1981,
for AAll Items@ in a table entitled, AConsumer Price Index of U.S. City Average, All Items and
Commodity Groups@, shall have subtracted from it the same index number as published for the
month of August, 1981. The resultant number shall be divided by 2, and that figure used as a
percentage for increase or decrease in the salary herein provided. The same computation shall
then be made quarterly thereafter, using the average index figure for the last month of the prior
quarter and the last month of the then quarter.
B. The Superintendent of Public Utilities shall cause all ordinances of the City in
relation to sewer treatment, water treatment, sewage and water distribution, and sewer and water
matters to be enforced and shall prosecute all persons for violation thereof; and he shall carry into
effect all orders, general or special, which he may receive from the City Council, and report
promptly on same with recommendations. The Superintendent may, by authority of the City
Council, employ such number of laborers as may be necessary for the proper maintenance and
repair of the sewage and water treatment facilities and the sewer and water system of the City at
such prices as shall be fixed by any salary ordinance of the City.
He or the Superintendents for the departments of water and sewers, as the case may be,
shall oversee and direct the sewage and water treatment and the sewer and water laborers and
workmen and require them to labor faithfully, and he or the aforesaid Superintendents shall keep
a correct account of the time, duties and action of such laborers.
C. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Utilities to keep a correct list
of all implements, materials and other property of the City in his charge and in his possession,
or in the charge and possession of any persons within the Public Utilities Department; and upon
his resignation or removal from office he shall deliver such property to his successor in office,
making a receipt therefor, which he shall immediately file with the City Clerk who shall credit
him with same and shall charge the successor therewith.
The Superintendent shall keep in appropriate record a plain and accurate account of all
expenditures made under his supervision, specifying to whom and for what purpose made. He
shall examine all accounts of contractors and other persons for work pertaining to his division or
for implements and material furnished therefor and, if correct, shall certify the same to the Board
of Public Utility Commissioners.
D. When any work is done on any sewer or water main or upon any sewage or water
treatment facilities by or under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Utilities, the location
and manner of constructing or repairing the same shall be designated in an appropriate work
order. The Superintendent shall cause to be repaired promptly all breaks or leaks in the sewage or
water treatment facilities and in the sewer and water systems of the City; and where such breaks
and leaks or other damages cannot be readily repaired by the employees under his supervision, he
shall immediately report same to the City Manager.
In case of any accidents resulting to or from the sewer and water systems of the City or
any appurtenances thereof, the Superintendent of Public Utilities shall forthwith report same to
the City Legal Department and the City Manager, together with the names of any witnesses to
such accident as may be known to him.
E. The Superintendent of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to obtain and enter
into on behalf of the City, any and all contracts and agreements for furnishing sewer and water
service to individual customers consistent with rates for such service heretofore or hereafter
established by ordinance.
F. The Superintendent of Public Utilities shall annually, on or before the first day of
May each year, prepare and submit to the City Council and to the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners, a report showing in detail public works and improvements undertaken or
completed in connection with his department during the preceding year and the cost thereof to
the City. He shall also report in detail the acts and doings of said department, together with an
accurate report of all receipts and expenditures.
SECTION 16.3 SUPERINTENDENTS OF THE WATER SYSTEM AND OF THE
WATER TREATMENT AND SUPPLY SYSTEM.
There are hereby created the offices of Superintendent of The Water System and
Superintendent of the Water Treatment Plant and Supply System in and for the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois. It shall be the duty of such Superintendents to keep the water system of the City
in good working condition, order and repair and to protect said system from unnecessary damage
or loss. They shall superintend and direct all work pertaining to the further extension of such
water system and all repairs upon the same of every kind, nature and description. They shall keep
in a good state of repair at all times the water system of the City. They shall repair, clean and
furnish, when necessary and required, all water mains, culverts, drains and other public
waterways in the City, and they shall do and perform such other duties as may be required of
them by the Superintendent of Public Utilities and the ordinances of the City in relation to water
service. They shall from time to time examine the water mains of the City and make such
improvements and repairs as they may deem necessary. The Board of Public Utility
Commissioner shall delegate between such Superintendents the functions and duties of each.
SECTION 16.4 SUPERINTENDENTS OF SEWER SYSTEM AND SEWER
TREATMENT PLANT
There are hereby created the offices of Superintendent of Sewer System and
Superintendent of the Sewer Treatment Plant in and for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. It shall
be the duty of such Superintendents to keep the sewage treatment facilities and sewer systems of
the City in good working condition, order and repair and to protect the same from unnecessary
damage or loss. They shall maintain and operate the sewage treatment facilities and sewer
systems of the City and sewer treatment plant and they shall superintend and maintain all work
pertaining to all repairs upon the same of every kind, nature and description. They shall keep in
good state of repair at all times the sewage treatment facilities and sewer systems of the City and
they shall do and perform such other duties as may be required of them by the Superintendent of
Public Utilities and ordinances of the City. The Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall
delegate between such Superintendents the functions and duties of each.
SECTION 16.5 BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSIONERS
A. There is hereby created a Board of Public Utility Commissioners which Board
shall operate, manage and control and maintain the entire sewer and water systems, including
sanitary and storm water sewers, the sewage treatment plant, water treatment plant, water mains,
water reservoirs and all other sewer and water facilities of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and it
shall further be the duty of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners to approve all bills payable
by the Public Utility Department and to recommend to the City Council policy governing the
operation of the Public Utility Department, including the Water Department and Sewer
Department, all extensions thereto and rate adjustments thereof. All bills so approved shall be
transmitted to the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
B. The Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall consist of seven members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The terms of
the members first appointed shall commence on October 1, 1962; two members shall be
appointed for terms to expire on October 1, 1963; three members shall be appointed for terms to
expire on October 1, 1965; two members for terms to expire on October 1, 1967. Upon the
expiration of the terms of those first appointed, their respective successors shall be appointed for
terms of four years from October 1 of each odd numbered year. The Mayor and City Manager of
the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, shall also be ex-officio members of said Board, without vote.
C. Compensation of Board members - Expenses- Conflicting Interests - Restrictions
of Employment.
Members of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall serve without compensation
but shall be entitled to reasonable amounts for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance
of their duties. No member of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall hold or be
employed in or appointed to any office or place under the authority of the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners, nor shall any member of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners be directly
or indirectly interested in any contract made by the City, nor shall he be an employee of the City
Government.
D. Officers of the Board Meetings.
Members of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall elect annually by secret
ballot from their number one member as Chairman, who shall preside over meetings of the
Board, and a Secretary. Meetings of the Board of Public utility Commissioners shall be held at
least once a month in the City Hall of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. At all regular meetings of
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners, a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum.
Special meetings of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners may be called by the Chairman of
the Board or by any two members of the Board.
E. Ex-officio Treasurer of the Board - Bond.
The City Treasurer of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, shall serve as Ex-Officio Treasurer
of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners, but not as a member, and the general bond of the
City Treasurer shall be accepted as a bond of the Ex-Officio Treasurer.
F. The Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall make an annual report to the
City Council, determined by the fiscal year of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and such report
shall be presented to the Council during the first quarter of the next succeeding fiscal year and
shall contain a full account of the financial and other transaction of the Public Utilities
Department, together with full statement of the condition of the physical property comprising the
sewer system and water system of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
SECTION 16.6 REGULATIONS FOR WATER SYSTEM
(a) Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this Ordinance shall be as follows:
ACity@ shall mean the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
ADepartment@ shall mean the Department of Public Utilities of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois.
AWaterworks@ shall mean all facilities for collecting, storing, pumping, treating
and disposing of water.
APublic Main@ shall mean a water main in which all owners of abutting property
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
ABuilding Main@ or AService@ shall mean the extension from any building or
structure to the Public Main.
AWater Treatment Plant@ shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating water to render it potable.
AReservoir@ shall mean the collective system for storing water prior to treatment
and use, including any lakes and streams used for such purpose.
(b) Each applicant for water supply or service shall file with the Superintendent of
Public Utilities an application therefor, in writing, setting forth the name of such applicant, the
location of the premises for which such supply or service is sought, the name of the owner of the
premises, if other than the applicant, the nature and size of such service, or the extent of such
supply and proposed use thereof. Upon receipt of an application as provided herein, a permit may
be issued by the Superintendent for the installation of water service or the supplying of water in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that no permit shall be issued to any
applicant while in default through nonpayment of any past due amount owing to the City or its
predecessor for any water supply, sewer service, or installation theretofore rendered or made.
The Superintendent of Public Utilities shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all such
permits issued by him, showing the date when issued, the name and residence of the person to
whom issued, and the location of the property connected therewith. He shall also keep or cause to
be kept a record of all water service pipes connected with any water main or water pipes forming
a part of the water works system of the City, which record shall show the exact location of the
City, which record shall show the exact location of said service pipes. The Superintendent shall
also cause to be prepared a full and complete map or chart showing the location of all public
mains and distribution pipes belonging to the system of waterworks, together with the location of
all valves, fire hydrants and fire plugs connected therewith and shall keep same erected to date.
(c) The following rules governing the use of City water are hereby adopted:
1. The material used for service pipe must conform to the standard required by the
provision of the Plumbing Code of the City.
2. No person shall connect water pipe or conduct water into any two distinct
premises or tenements, unless separate and distinct sidewalk stopcocks and meters
shall be placed for each such premises or units served; nor shall such pipe be
allowed to cross lots into adjoining premises. Every service pipe must be provided
with a stop and waste, so situated that the water may be shut off-to prevent its
freezing.
3. Persons taking water must keep their service pipes connected with mains or
supply pipes, and all fixtures connected therewith, in good repair and protected
from freezing at their own expense and must prevent all unnecessary waste of
water. If it shall be found that there is an unreasonable or unnecessary waste of
water in any building, structure, or premises to which water is supplied from the
City's waterworks system, through or by means of a leak in any water pipe located
in any such building, structure, or in or on any premises, the Superintendent of
Public Utilities may cause the water supply to be cut off from such building,
structure, or premises unless such waste shall be stopped or shall cease within
twenty-four hours after he shall have given notice to the owner, occupant, or
person in possession, charge or control of such building, structure, or premises, to
stop such waste.
In cases where the water supply is cut off from any building, structure, or
premises on account of a neglect, failure, or refusal of any person so notified to
stop such leak, the water supply shall not again be turned on until the cost and
expense to the City of cutting off and again turning on such water supply shall
have been paid by such owner, occupant, or person in possession, charge or
control.
Persons who shall reasonably attempt to keep their service pipes connected with
mains (i.e. from the meter to exterior of structure) in good repair and protected
from freezing and in such condition as to prevent unnecessary waste of water and
who shall suffer a water leak arising from a concealed leak from said pipes which
leak was not immediately discovered or preventable upon exercise of reasonable
alertness or diligence and which leak was not the fault of the occupant or owner of
the premises shall be entitled to an adjustment to the water and sewer charges
imposed herein for a period (a) not greater than the billing month during which
the discovery of the leak is made and the period between the meter reading date
for said month and the date of discovery, if the leak is discovered by comparison
of water usage for said month with water usage for previous months, or (b) not
greater than that part of the billing month immediately preceding discovery of the
leak, if the leak is otherwise discovered. Provided, however, that such adjustment
shall be made only if discovery of the leak is reported and a request for adjustment
is made on or before the due date of the charges for the month during which an
adjustment is sought. The charge for water and sewer services during the month
that the adjustment is made shall be determined by adding the total water and
sewer charges for the six months prior to adjustment and dividing that sum by six
and by adding to that sum the actual costs incurred by the City for the purchase of
water from Rend Lake Conservancy District for the water usage during the month
of adjustment over and above the six-month average water usage; if water and
sewer charges for six months prior to adjustment are not available, then the charge
for water and sewer services during the month that the adjustment is made shall be
determined by estimating the charges for the month of adjustment to be equal to
the charges for the first month's water and sewer usage following repair of the leak
and by adding to that amount the actual costs incurred by the City for the purchase
of water from the Rend Lake Conservancy District for the water usage during the
month of adjustment over and above the estimated monthly water usage.
Adjustments for part of a month shall be made on a pro rata basis and made in
accordance with the foregoing provisions. No adjustments shall be made
hereunder unless and until satisfactory proof of repair of the water leak is
presented to the Director of Finance or his designee. In addition, no adjustment
shall be made hereunder unless and until satisfactory proof that the repair has been
effected by a licensed plumber, an owner-occupant of a single-family residence, or
a lessee-occupant of a single-family residence is also presented to the Finance
Director or his designee. Satisfactory proof shall consist of the completed work
order of a licensed plumber if applicable and a statement under oath signed by the
occupant of the real estate which contains a description of the leak, the date of
discovery of the leak, the name and address of the individual making the repair,
the date of repair, a description of the repair, the address of the property where the
repair is effected, the name of the property owner, the names of the occupants of
the property, and a statement that the repair has been effected in compliance with
all state and local regulations and requirements. The Finance Director or his duly
designated agent shall make the determination as to whether the person requesting
an adjustment is entitled to any adjustment and, if so, the amount of the
adjustment. Each person who shall request an adjustment shall be considered to
have authorized the Finance Director or his duly authorized agent to inspect the
premises, if necessary, to assist in the determination. If any person does not agree
with the decision of the Finance Director or his duly designated agent, said person
may appeal the decision to the City Manager within five (5) days of being notified
of the decision regarding the adjustment; the City Manager shall then make the
final decision.
4. No addition to or alteration whatever of any tap, pipe, watercock, or other fixture
shall be made or caused to be made by any person except through a duly licensed
plumber, and a permit first shall be obtained from the Superintendent.
5. Hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, baths, or other fixtures shall not be
kept running when not in use.
6. The Mayor may at any time during an emergency, when in his judgment the public
interest requires it, prohibit the use of City water for street or lawn sprinkling
purposes, for washing cars or for fountains, for such time as he may deem proper.
No person shall so use City water during the time for which such use shall have
been so prohibited.
7. In any case where the water has been turned on without the proper application or
authorization, or in any case where the water has been turned off for any reason
provided in this Article and the water is found on again, or in any case where in
the opinion of the City the turning off of the water on the curb stop-cock or angle
stop-cock is not a sufficient protection against the further use of water, the City
may take such steps as are necessary to prevent further use of the water including
but not limited to the locking of the meter, the removal of the meter, the crimping
of a supply pipe or disconnection at the corporation cock. Upon application or
re-application for water service when the water has been so turned off by the City,
an additional charge of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) covering all expenses
of so turning off the water shall be imposed and said charge shall be recoverable
from the owner of the property, the applicant for the service at the time the
unauthorized water service was used, any occupant of the property or any user of
the service; until payment of the charge, no water service shall be provided to the
property, except upon the determination by the City that none of the persons listed
above nor any person associated with the unauthorized water service is receiving
any service or benefits from re-connection of the water service.
8. Where the water supply to any building, structure, or premises shall have been cut
off or stopped on account of the nonpayment of water rates or on account of the
violation of any of the provisions of this Article, or for any reason or cause
whatsoever, where such cutting off or stopping shall have been done by the
Superintendent of Public Utilities, the water shall not again be supplied to such
building, structure, or premises or permitted to be turned on therein without a
permit first issued as above provided.
9. No person shall in any manner obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, the free access
of any officer or employee of the Water Department to any hydrant of said system
or to any stopcock, water meter, shutoff box or connection with any water main or
service pipe by means of any coal, lumber, brick, building material, or by any
other means, shift or device whatsoever, or refuse or prevent free access thereto by
such officer or employee whenever such officer or employee shall desire access
thereto. The officers, agents, and employees of the Department of Public Utilities
shall have free access to all and every part of any building, structure, or premises
to which water is supplied from the City's waterworks system, for the purpose of
examining the water pipes, taps, and fixtures therein or thereon, whenever such
examination is deemed necessary to determine whether there is occurring any
waste of water or whether the provisions of this Article are being complied with.
Any person in possession, charge, or control of any such building, structure, or
premises, into which any such officer or person shall desire to make entry or to
have access for the purpose herein specified who shall refuse to permit such entry
or access or who shall do or cause to be done any act or thing for the purpose of
preventing such entry or access, shall be punished as provided herein.
10. No service shall be rendered to any premises where storm water and sanitary
drainage are not separated as required by the ordinance governing sewers and
sewage disposal.
11. No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does
not comply with the Plumbing Code of the City; provided that water may be
turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions
of this Article.
12. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in any manner to interfere with any
main or service water pipe of the water system without first being authorized by
the proper authorities of the City, and at the same time procuring a permit from
the proper department of the City government, as required in the ordinances of the
City or any that may hereafter be passed by the City concerning such matters.
13. No person shall use or distribute, or permit to be used or distributed, any water
supplied directly or indirectly by the City, to any person not now being supplied
directly or indirectly with water produced by the City.
14. In case of making repairs or constructing new work, the City reserves the right to
shut off water without notice and keep it shut off as long as may be necessary to
accomplish such purpose or by giving such reasonable notice thereof to its
customers as shall be practicable.
15. All gas-fired burners connected to a water system and designed for the heating of
water shall be vented into a suitable chimney, with the exception of automatically
controlled appliances which use less than 5,000 BTU per hour, provided that such
appliances are equipped with an effective device that will automatically shut off
the gas supply to the main burner in the event the pilot flame is extinguished. All
gas-fired burners vented as required above shall be equipped with suitable down
draft diverter and all vent pipe joints shall be secured with metal screws.
16. All plans pertaining to utilities shall be submitted to the Technical Review Board
for their review and recommendation at least 15 days before presentation to the
respective commission.
17. All water mains shall be a minimum of 6" in size. Mains serving residential
districts shall consist of mains at least 6" in size, arranged so they form a good
gridiron. Where long lengths of pipe are necessary, 8" or larger mains should be
used. Mains should be looped if feasible.
18. In new construction, 8" or larger pipe should be used where dead ends and a poor
gridiron are likely to exist for a considerable time or where the layout of streets
are not well adapted to a good gridiron.
19. In commercial districts, the minimum size main should be 8" in size, arranged so
they form a good gridiron. Twelve inch (12") or larger mains should be used on
principal streets and for all long lines that are not connected to other mains at
intervals close enough for mutual support.
20. The use of dead-end 6" mains to provide fire protection shall not be allowed.
21. Fire hydrants shall be spaced a maximum of 600' apart in single family residential
areas.
22. Fire hydrant spacing and requirements in multifamily, commercial or industrial
areas shall be determined by an evaluation of the required fire flow for fire
protection for those areas. Construction plans and data shall be submitted to the
Mt. Vernon Fire Department and for review and evaluation. The evaluation shall
be performed by the Fire Chief or his duly designated representative.
Requirements for fire hydrant spacing shall be indicated on the subject plans
during the review and evaluation process.
The review shall include consideration of such items as type of construction, area,
occupancy, number of stories, density, special hazards, accessibility, water supply,
availability, and other factors. There shall be sufficient hydrants installed to
provide the required fire flow around any building with no hose line exceeding
500 feet in length. The Insurance Service Office's AGuide for Determination of
Required Fire Flow@, December, 1974 Edition, shall be used as the primary
guideline for determination of required fire flow and for fire hydrant spacing and
requirements; three copies of said Guide shall be placed on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon.
23. Valves shall be installed at least every 1300' on arterial mains; every 500' in
commercial districts and every 800' in residential districts. Valves may be required
at closer intervals in specific situations.
24. Specific locations of fire hydrants shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his
duly designated representative. The cost of fire hydrants and installation shall be
borne by the developer.
25. Water main extensions and fire hydrant installations shall be inspected by the City
during construction. Immediately upon completion, the system shall be tested,
EPA approval obtained and the system placed in service at the direction of the
City.
26. The Insurance Service Office Grading Schedule for Municipal Fire Protection
shall be used as a primary guideline for water and fire protection.
(d) The following rules and regulations governing plumbing work in connection with
the City Waterworks System are hereby adopted:
1. No person, firm, or corporation, except licensed plumbers shall make any
connections to or attachments with the pipes of the water system of the City, nor make any
repairs, additions to, or alterations of any tap, pipe, cock, or other fixture connected with said
pipes on the outside or street side of the water meter or upon the service between the water meter
and any structure or plumbing fixture except as permitted within Article 15 of the Revised Code
of Ordinances; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not apply to authorized employees of
the city.
Each licensed plumber making any connection to or attachment with the pipes of
the water system of the City of Mt. Vernon or with any private service line shall file and keep on
file the bond required by Article 15 of the Revised Code of Ordinances to the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois in the sum of Twenty-Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) conditioned upon a full
indemnity to the City of Mt. Vernon against damage to the City or to any persons to whom the
City may be liable by reason. of: (1) failure of the plumber to observe Ordinances of the City of
Mt. Vernon relating to plumbing; (2) failure of the plumber to observe all rules and regulations
established under the authority of any Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon relating to plumbing;
(3) failure of the plumber to observe all rules and regulations established by or under the
Plumber's License Law of the State of Illinois; and (4) negligence of the plumber in performing
or protecting any plumbing work. Such bond shall be renewed annually or more often in the
event of the impairment of the surety.
2. No connection shall be made between pipes carrying City water and pipes
carrying water from another source such as a cistern. well, bond or creek.
3. Every service shall have a curb stop-cock located near the curb. All curb
stop-cock used for service pipes of one and one-half inch (1 2@) waterway or less, shall be heavy
brass inverted stop-cocks; all curb stop-cocks used on service pipes of two inch (2") waterway or
more shall be of the gate valve type. All such stop-cocks shall be approved by the Plumbing
Inspector before they shall be installed. All curb stop-cocks shall be equipped with a curb box of
the extension type with an arch pattern base. A stationary operating rod shall be installed on the
stop-cock. The curb box shall be set at the permanent earth grade. Adequate masonry blocking
shall be provided under the stop-cock.
4. No service pipe between City water mains and the building shall be laid less than
four feet (4') below the surface of the street grade or lawn. The material used for such pipe shall,
in each and every case, be subject to the inspection of the Inspector of Plumbing or his agent, and
if found defective or below the standard, its use will not be permitted.
All services shall be laid straight from the curb stop-cock to the building and shall
be firmly bedded on solid earth. Water services shall not be backfilled until the Department has
inspected the service by means of a pressure test. Water and sewer service shall not be run in the
same trench, except by permission of the Department.
5. All service pipes from the City water mains to the water meter shall be of lead or
type K copper, except that services larger than two inch (2") inside diameter shall be Class 150
cast iron water pipe.
Lead service pipes shall conform to the following standards:
Lead Pipe 3/4 inch bore, 2 lbs. 10 oz. per lineal ft.
Lead pipe 1 inch bore, 4 lbs. 12 oz. per lineal ft.
Lead Pipe 1 1/4 inch bore, 6 lbs. 0 oz. per lineal ft.
Lead Pipe 1 2 inch bore, 7 lbs. 4 oz. per lineal ft.
Lead Pipe 2 inch bore, 9 lbs. 8 oz. per lineal ft.
On all lead service pipe, wiped joints shall be made without exception. Service pipes shall be free
of kinks or distortions which will reduce the area of the waterway.
6. No tap greater than three-fourths of an inch shall be made in any water main or
distributing pipe having less than an eight inch waterway. A one inch tap may be made in any
water main or distributing pipe having a waterway of eight inches or over, but no greater than a
one inch tap shall be made in any main or distributing pipe; however, when a larger tap is
required than is allowed to be tapped into any particular main or distributing pipe, a side-tap
using a sleeve and valve may be made by the City Waterworks personnel. A curb stop-cock will
also be required when such side tap is made. No feeder main having a waterway of twelve inches
or larger may be tapped without special permission from the Superintendent of Public Utilities.
Multiple taps shall be at least eighteen inches apart and shall not be in the same line along the
length of the main.
7. All taps in the mains cr distributing pipes of the waterworks system shall be made
on the side of said mains and not higher up than 22 2 degrees above horizontal. Service pipes
from said taps shall be securely blocked with masonry materials to prevent damage from earth
settlement.
8. No taps less than three-quarters of an inch shall be made in any main or
distributing pipe, and no service pipe shall be connected therewith of less than three-quarters of
an inch waterway. All corporation cocks used for any tap on the water mains must be approved
by the Department.
9. All corporation cocks installed in any water main or distribution pipe of the
waterworks system of the City and all curb stop-cocks shall be attached to the service pipe by
means of a wiped joint on lead services or by a flared connection on Type K copper pipe.
Connections to cast iron services may be made by means of a lead joint or mechanical joint.
10. All service pipes hereafter laid in unpaved streets shall run to a point within one
foot of the street edge of the sidewalk location, and in alleys to a point within one foot of the lot
line; provided that the above requirement shall not apply where service pipes are laid in
connection with the installation of a new water main, and in cases where service pipes are run in
dirt street preparatory to paving, in which latter case the location of the curb shall be obtained
from the City Engineer and the service pipe extended at least three feet inside of said curb.
11. All water meters shall be so located that they will be easily accessible to the meter
reader. All outside meters shall be equipped with an extension dial and shall be enclosed in a
meter pit made of masonry materials or cast iron, not less than thirty-six inches in diameter and
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
12. No plumber shall, after making any connection with the street mains, or after
making repairs or putting in any new attachment, leave the stop-cock open and the water turned
on in the premises unless a meter is set or a permit has been issued by the City to use the water.
A permit will be issued by the City to use water when the plumbing or building contractor has
agreed to pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day or part thereof when water is used to settle
ditches, earth around foundations, etc. The meter may be set and water used through the meter in
lieu of the above charges.
13. All new services shall be provided with new meters. All new services constructed
shall serve one and only one residence or place of business. All water meters shall be approved
by the Water Department. All discontinued services shall be shut off at and disconnected from
the main.
14. No residence or place of business will be allowed a water service unless there is a
water main or distributing pipe in the street or alley adjacent to the property to be served. Said
water main or distributing pipe shall be of four inch (4") size or larger in the case of existing
mains, and no water main construction will be allowed of less than six inches (6") in size.
15. Any plumber or other person violating any of the rules contained in this Section
shall for such offense forfeit and pay as a penalty any sum not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and be liable in damages to any person for injuries
resulting from the violation of said rules. For any injury or damage to said waterworks or fixtures
caused by the carelessness, neglect, or want of skill in any plumber or plumbers or his or their
employees, he or they shall be liable to an action on his or their bond for the damages sustained
by said City by reason of the breach or breaches of the condition of said bond.
16. No physical connection shall be permitted between the piping of the municipal
water supply system of said City, either within or outside any building or structure or upon public
or private property wherein any water derived from any source other than said municipal water
supply or any water derived from said municipal water supply and theretofore used or stored,
may be forced, drawn, siphoned or otherwise taken into said municipal water supply system,
either directly or indirectly or through the manipulation of valves, stops, pipes, or fixtures or
because of ineffective check or back pressure valves; or in any other manner whatsoever. This
Article shall not be construed to apply to the discharge of water derived from said municipal
water supply system into an elevated tank cistern, or suction well at an elevation above the high
water line of any such elevated tank, system or suction well.
17. Any Master Plumber who shall neglect, refuse, or fail to make good any defects or
faults discovered in his work shall not be permitted to do any further or additional work until the
defects or faults so discovered have been made good in a manner satisfactory to the
Superintendent.
(e) Whenever the property owner or owners of a tract or tracts of land, seventy-five
percent (75%) of which are improved, signify their intention of using City water service, and if
such tracts are not within the corporate limits of the city, but subject to lawful annexation, their
intention to annex said tract or tracts, and further signify their desire to install extensions of City
water mains at their own cost, on a cash basis, they may submit to the City Council an
application requesting that the City ascertain the probable cost and feasibility thereof. Upon
submission of such application to the City Council, the City Manager, City Engineer, and
Superintendent of Public Works shall investigate the proposed extension and advise the Council
of the estimated probable cost thereof, the feasibility thereof, the recommended manner of
construction and payment thereof, and whether or not in their opinion, such extension is in the
public interest. The Council may thereupon authorize such extension upon the terms and
conditions, which, in their opinion, shall promote the public welfare, provided that at least
seventy-five percent of all such tracts are improved by water-using structures.
(f) All permanent water services hereafter installed, whether for domestic or
commercial purposes, shall be metered. If the meter is set within the building, it must be attached
to the service pipe immediately after such pipe has entered the wall of the building. The meter
may be placed outside of the building in a suitable pit to be located at the curb or at some other
suitable location, if approved by the Director of Public Works. All water meters shall be
purchased from the Water Department at cost.
When a water meter is damaged in any premises by freezing or by hot water backing
through the meter or by other physical injury, the consumer shall be required to pay the cost of
repairs and labor. Any municipal water meter shall be taken out and tested upon complaint of the
consumer, upon payment of a fee of Twenty-five Dollars. If upon test, the meter is not within
three percent (3%) of being accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the Twenty-five Dollar
fee returned to the consumer. Every meter shall have a shut-off valve at the inlet side, and every
meter larger than one (1) inch in size shall be followed immediately by a shut-off valve.
All persons using water for any purpose, including sprinkling lawns and yards, will be
required to have their piping so arranged that water used for any such purposes will be measured
through their meters. All meters shall be sealed. No person shall break or cause to be broken, the
seal on any water meter, unless authorized to do so by the Superintendent of Public Utilities.
(g) No person or persons other than the members of the Fire Department of the City
for the uses and purposes of said Department, and those duly authorized by the Code of the City,
shall open any of the hydrants of the waterworks system or attempt to take water therefrom or in
any manner interfere with or injure any of said hydrants, except as follows:
1. The Rural Township Fire Department may be permitted to fill their vehicular
tanks at the hydrants specified by the Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent shall collect an annual fee of Thirty-five Dollars ($35.00) for the
establishment maintenance, or use of any fire hydrant located outside the
corporate limits of the City, and there is hereby created and levied such annual
charge of $35.00 per hydrant.
2. The General Foreman of the Water Department shall instruct the person or
persons designated by the Superintendent of Public Utilities in the proper use and
procedure in using hydrants and water in the Public Works Department for their
necessary work and that the said General Foreman of the Water Department shall
instruct all persons that no water shall be drawn from any hydrant, nor shall any
person operate any hydrant other than the firemen, except those designated by the
Superintendent of Public Utilities.
3. No person, firm or corporation not coming within paragraph 2 shall use any
hydrants without first securing permission from the Fire Chief.
4. It shall not be lawful for anyone to possess hydrant wrenches and the Fire Chief
shall collect all hydrant wrenches wherever found from any and all persons and
shall issue approved type wrenches to those parties entitled to the said wrenches.
Said wrenches shall at all times be under the custody of the Fire Chief.
(h) Each applicant for a new service shall pay a connection charge for tapping or
connecting to the City water main in the amount of $300.00 per tap-on or connection. In addition,
commercial, multi-family, and industrial applicants and residential applicants desiring a meter
larger than 5/8 inch shall pay a charge for the water meter of the necessary size for water service
from the City of Mt. Vernon equal to the purchase price of the City for said meter. The applicant
shall have the meter installed at the expense of the applicant by a licensed plumber bonded with
the City, which installation shall be subject to inspection by an authorized representative of the
City prior to the City's furnishing water. There shall be a $25.00 inspection fee for
single-residential connections and a $50.00 inspection fee for multi-family connections,
commercial connections and industrial connections. Relocation of an existing service shall not
constitute a new service, and no tap-on or connection fee shall be payable; although the meter fee
(if a new meter is installed) and the inspection fee shall be payable.
Each applicant for a new water service which taps or connects to a water main extension
constructed hereunder shall also pay an extension connection charge for tapping or connecting to
the water main. The extension connection charge shall be computed by multiplying the charge
per lineal foot times the lineal front feet of the applicant's real estate upon the extension. The
charge per lineal foot shall be determined by dividing the total cost of construction for the
extension by the total lineal footage of the extension (or by twice the lineal footage, if the
extension may serve property on either side).
The City may extend water mains adjacent to previously unserved property and may
collect the above extension connection charge from the owner of the previously unserved
property upon said owner's requesting water service for the property. The City of Mt. Vernon
may also enter into a written agreement with landowners (for the extension by the landowners) of
water mains adjacent to previously unserved land owned by a third party in order to serve the
landowner's property; said agreements may provide that the City will collect the extension
connection charge upon the third party's requesting water service for his property fronting on the
extension constructed by the landowner and provided that the City will pay the charge collected
to the landowner, provided, however, that no agreement shall be executed unless the landowner
provides a verified and itemized statement of the construction costs, a plat or description of the
extension constructed by the landowner, and an accurate record of the ownership of each
property adjacent to the extension.
Before any new connection is made, the customer shall deposit with the City a sum equal
to the connection charge, inspection fees, the extension connection charge described above if
any, and any meter deposit which may now or hereafter be required by appropriate Ordinance of
the City. After depositing such sum, service may then be installed.
The connection charges and extension connection charges above set forth are only for the
privilege of making connections to new water mains or to tapping onto existing mains and do not
include any costs of excavation and installation of buildings, main services, or other costs of
bringing water from the connection or tap to the structure served.
Immediately upon connection or tapping, the liability of the applicant for water charges
shall commence, whether the applicant shall then be receiving water or not. An applicant shall
not be excused from payment of monthly water charges but shall be charged at least the
minimum amount even though he shall choose not to receive water immediately.
(i) Rates and charges for the use and service of the water system of the City of
Mt. Vernon are hereby established as follows:
Consumption Rates
First 2,000 gallons
$13.93 minimum charge
Next 2,000 gallons
$9.38 per 1,000 gallons
Next 11,000 gallons
$8.38 per 1,000 gallons
Next 35,000 gallons
$7.77 per 1,000 gallons
Next 50,000 gallons
$6.17 per 1,000 gallons
Next 100,000 gallons
$5.20 per 1,000 gallons
Next 300,000 gallons
$4.57 per 1,000 gallons
Over 500,000 gallons
$3.87 per 1,000 gallons
The cost for use of City water shall be ascertained according to the amount of water used
during each billing period. The rates for water service in no case shall be less than the monthly
minimum bill set forth above.
The rate for bulk sales of water not made through metered sources to one purchaser shall
be 254 per 28.77 gallons.
Whenever water is supplied to premises outside of the corporate limits of the City, the
rates charged shall be a minimum of $25.11 for the first 2,000 gallons and thereafter shall be
130% times the rates above set forth for residential use.
Each of the foregoing rates established above shall be increased annually by 2% each
year, effective on November 1 of each year beginning 2017. The proceeds from the 2% rate
increase effective on November 1, 2016 (which increase is reflected within the above rates) and
each 2% annual increase thereafter (as enacted by Ordinance 2016-27) shall be expended solely
for capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases for the Public Utility
Department.
The proceeds from the 3% rate increase effective on May 1, 2009 enacted by Ordinance
2009-14 and all proceeds from each increase effective November 1 of 2009, 2010, 2011, and
2012 enacted by Ordinance 2009-30 shall continue to be expended solely for capital construction
projects or for capital equipment purchases for the Public Utility Department.
In the event that any charge for water service shall not be paid within sixteen (16) days of
the rendition of the bill statement therefor, there shall be added to such charge 10% of the
amount thereof as computed on the above rates as a penalty for late payment.
During the construction of any building and before any water is installed as is hereby
provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to use the City water
supply by making application therefor and paying the fee prescribed by the Superintendent of
Public Utilities.
In addition to a meter deposit, all customers shall pay a hook-up fee of $25.00 per hook-up prior
to any water service being provided to said customer; provided, however, that said hook-up fee shall not
be required to be paid under the following circumstances: (a) annual re-connection of service for a
summer or other seasonal home; (b) a change only in the name of the applicant for a water service
account; and (c) a temporary service not to exceed 5 calendar days, provided a disconnect request is
executed at the time of re-connection.
The City of Mt. Vernon shall review the user charges annually and shall revise them periodically
to reflect water purchase costs, operation costs, and maintenance costs.
(j) All water meters shall be read monthly unless circumstances prevent otherwise, in
which case water usage shall be estimated based upon prior usage. Notice shall be sent to the
property on which the meter is located, unless other directions are given. Said notice shall state
the amount of payment due, the previous reading and the gallons used. All bills shall be due and
payable on the date stated on the bill; and, if unpaid on said date, said bill shall be delinquent.
Upon any sewer or water bill becoming delinquent, all charges for water, sewer or garbage
services which have billed or other charges associated therewith shall be immediately due and
payable notwithstanding any other provisions herein. Payment must be actually received by the
City prior to the due date; deposit if payment in the U.S. mails does not constitute payment until
actually received by the City.
All bills shall be rendered at the rates hereinabove fixed. Failure to receive the monthly bill
shall not be an excuse for nonpayment of the bill. In all cases in which a meter fails to work for
all or any part of the month, the payment for said month in which the meter failed shall be an
amount estimated from the records of the office of the Superintendent of Public Utilities of past
usage for the same period in other years.
(k) No City water shall be supplied to any premises except upon the application of the
owner, the lessee, or occupant of the premises; and proof of ownership, tenancy, or occupancy
may be required by the City before service is provided. No City water shall be supplied to any
premises upon any application submitted after January 1, 1987, unless the premises shall have its
street address properly posted upon the premises in a conspicuous place so that the address is in
plain view and is clearly visible from the street. No City water shall be supplied to any premises
occupied by any person who is in default as to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due
the City regardless of whether said person is the applicant, nor shall any City water be supplied to
any premises upon the application of any applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer, or
garbage collection charges due the City no matter at which premises said default occurred, until
such applicant has paid such back water charges, and garbage collection charges in full, including
all charges and penalties.
The City shall be under no obligation to furnish or to continue to furnish water to any
applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer or garbage collection charges due the City no
matter at which premises said default occurred, nor to any premises occupied by any person who
is in default as to any water, sewer or garbage collection charges due the City regardless of
whether said person is the applicant, and the City at any time after said bill or bills become due
shall have the full power and authority to enter any premises and to turn off, disconnect,
discontinue, or otherwise terminate water service; said water service shall not be resumed until the
delinquent charges and all charges billed for water service, sewer service, and garbage collection
service are paid in full.
The foregoing provisions are solely for the benefit of the City and shall not constitute a
defense to sewer, water, or garbage collection charges for any owner or other person jointly liable
for said charges. Except for disconnection effected by the City for reason of default or other
reason, only the applicant in whose name service is provided or someone on his behalf may
demand disconnection of service.
Whenever it is necessary for the City to disconnect water service because of nonpayment of
charges, a $25.00 reconnect fee shall be assess and paid prior to resumption of water service; said
fee shall defray the costs of disconnection and reconnection of service.
(l) The applicant and the occupants of the premises receiving water service and the user of the
water service of said system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such service on said
premises; and the services shall be furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition
that the applicant, the occupant of the premises, and users of the service are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the City.
City may require each applicant to provide the name and address of the owner of the
property, name and address of the lessee of the property, names and addresses of all occupants of
the property, and names and addresses of users of the service as well as all addresses of the
applicant and each occupant during the preceding twelve (12) months.
(m) A meter deposit shall be required and collected from all new customers to insure the
payment of water and sewer charges to the City of Mt. Vernon, which deposit shall be held in
escrow for the purposes of paying any utility charges of that customer. The terms Anew
customer@ shall include all persons hereafter connecting to the water or sewer system and also
shall include persons who shall have had their services disconnected or terminated for any reason,
including lack of payment and who shall thereafter reconnect.
The required deposits shall be in the following amount:
Meter size
Deposit Required
Residential 5/8" meter (or no meter)
$100.00
Commercial 5/8" meter
$150.00
:@ meter
$200.00
1" meter
$250.00
1 3@ meter
$350.00
1 2@ meter
$400.00
2" meter
$450.00
3" meter or larger B deposit based upon 2 2 times the
cost of one month=s estimated
consumption of water.
Interest shall be paid on deposit accounts commencing on the date of such deposit at the rate
of 1% per annum from date of deposit, which interest shall be payable only upon termination of
water and sewer service to such depositor on the balance of the deposit remaining after payment
of all amounts due the City: said interest shall be computed as of the last day of the month if paid
on said date or the last day of the full month preceding payment if paid otherwise. The meter
deposit shall be returned to any customer who discontinues service as above set forth and who has
paid all water and sewer charges and delinquent charges due and garbage collection charges as
provided within Section 2.6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The terms of the within
subsection for meter deposit shall be applied to any customer whether such customer shall be an
owner or renter of the premises served. The foregoing customer shall be an owner or renter of
the premises served. The foregoing provisions for meter deposits shall be subject, however, to
the following exceptions:
(1) Whenever a customer shall be the owner of the property served, shall present evidence
of having paid all water and sewer charges for services to the premises without being in arrears for
the prior 12-month period, such customer shall be entitled to a refund of the customer deposit with
accrued interest. Such refunds shall be made semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each
year thereafter.
(2) Whenever such customer shall have established credit in the manner above described
and shall request service to a new or additional location and shall present evidence of ownership
of such location and of his continued payment of all water and sewer charges without arrears, no
meter deposit shall be required for such new service.
In addition to a meter deposit, all customers shall pay a hook-up fee of $25.00 per hook-up
prior to any water service being provided to said customer; provided, however, that said hook-up
fee shall not be required to be paid under the following circumstances: (annual re-connection of
service for a summer or other seasonal home; (b) a change only in the name of the applicant for a
water service account; and (c) a temporary service not to exceed 5 calendar days, provided a
disconnect request is executed at the time of re-connection.
(n) Any person who in any manner violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this section or with the orders and regulations issued by the
department pursuant thereto shall be subjected to having the supply of water stopped at once,
without preliminary notice; and no person shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from
which the supply has been turned off by the City except as authorized by the Superintendent of
Public Utilities or the Finance Director or a designee of either and payment of the turn-off and
turn-on charges prescribed herein. This remedy shall be concurrent with all other remedies and
penalties herein provided for the enforcement off this Section. The City of Mt. Vernon shall be
entitled to recover all costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in effecting or
defending the remedy herein provided.
(o) In the event charges, including penalty charges, for water service or sewer service are
not paid on or before the due date of the bill for such services, such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent. Thereafter such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien
upon the real estate for which such water and sewer services are supplied regardless of whether
such service has been supplied upon the application of the owner, and occupant or other user;
provided, however, that the owner of the real estate shall have no personal liability for the
delinquent charges unless said owner was also the applicant for or user of the services giving rise
to the charges. The Superintendent of Public Utilities or the Finance Director or a designee of
either is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies and
claiming such herein in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois, after first
giving seven (7) days' notice by regular mail of such delinquency to the owner and occupant of
said real estate. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for this amount, as well as for all
charges for water and sewer service subsequent to the period covered by the bill; that the lien for
water service and sewer service against the premises upon or for which water furnished by the
City is used or supplied shall be enforced and foreclosed by a suit in Chancery in the Circuit Court
of Jefferson County, Illinois according to the rules and practice of said court; and that the City
shall recover all costs including the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in preparing,
filing, and foreclosing the lien.
Said lien may also be enforced and foreclosed by intervention in any suit already commenced
in said Court or any other Court, whenever said intervention is proper under law. Whenever the
City is made a defendant in any suit in account of any lien, it shall have for the furnishing of water
full power to enforce its said lien in said proceedings.
The method herein provided for enforcing and foreclosing the lien for water and sewer
service charges shall not be considered as excluding any other remedy or any other method of
collecting said water and sewer service charges but shall be concurrent with all other remedies and
methods. The City shall recover all costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in
effecting collection for water and sewer service charges or incurred by the City in effecting or
defending any remedy.
SECTION 16.7 REGULATIONS FOR SEWER SYSTEM
(a) Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used shall be as
follows:
ASewage Works@ shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewage.
AInspector@ shall mean the Superintendent of Sewers of the City of Mt. Vernon, or his
authorized deputy agent, or representative.
ASewage@ shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and
storm waters as may be present.
ASewer@ shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
APublic Sewer@ shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
ACombined Sewer@ shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
ASanitary Sewer@ shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
AStorm Sewer@ or AStorm Drain@ shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
ASewage Treatment Plant@ shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
AGarbage@ shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
AProperly Shredded Garbage@ shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewer, with no particle greater
than 2 inch in any dimension.
ABuilding Drain@ shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning 3 feet outside the outer face of the
building wall.
ABuilding Sewer@ shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
AB.O.D.@ (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand), shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in 5 days at 201C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
ApH@ shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
ASuspended Solids@ shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension,
in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
ANatural Outlet@ shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
AWatercourse@ shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
APerson@ shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
AShall@ is mandatory; AMay@ is permissive.
ANPDES@ means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, by the
Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, after enactment of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972 to regulate the discharge of pollutants
pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act.
AIndustrial User@ shall mean non-governmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
(a) Division A - Agriculture, Forestry, & Fishing.
(b) Division B - Mining
(c) Division D - Manufacturing.
(d) Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric
and Sanitary Services.
(e) Division I - Services
A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Industries subject to Industrial Cost Recovery which discharge the equivalent of 25,000 gallons a
day, or less, of sanitary wastes, are exempt from Industrial Cost. Recovery, provided that the
discharges of the industry do not contain pollutants which (1) interfere with the treatment process,
(2) are toxic or incompatible, or (3) contaminate or otherwise reduce the utility of the sludge
production.
AResidential User@ shall mean any user of the treatment works not classified as an Industrial
User whose property is used solely for residential purposes and for auxiliary purposes
permitted by the zoning ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon in residential zones.
ACommercial User@ shall mean any user of the treatment works not classified as an Industrial
User or a Residential User.
ADebt Service Charge@ shall mean the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal, and coverage outstanding, and shall be assigned as per 16.7(m) hereof.
AReplacement@ shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are designed and constructed.
The term AOperation and Maintenance@ includes replacement.
ASewer Service Charge@ shall mean the charge per month levied upon all users of the sanitary
sewer system of the City of Mt. Vernon.
AIndustrial Wastes@ shall mean the liquid, gaseous, or solid wastes resulting from industrial
processes as distinct from segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
AOperation and Maintenance Costs@ shall mean those cots required for the normal operation
and maintenance of the sewage system, but shall not include items of capital expenditure.
ANormal Domestic Sewage@ shall mean sewage with a BOD-5 strength of 300 mg/l and a
suspended solids strength of 350 mg/l, and which shall not contain toxic wastes, oil, grease,
paint, flammables, explosives, or heavy metals.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the City of Mt. Vernon, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
(c) No person shall connect or cause to be connected any sanitary sewer, including house
connections, cesspools, septic tanks, or other sanitary sewer to any storm sewer, now or hereafter
constructed or maintained by the City of Mt. Vernon.
(d) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(e) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the City and abutting on any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located, a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
In the event that the City shall hereafter determine, and the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon shall provide by resolution or ordinance, that capacity is not available for new sewer
connections in the sewers, lift stations, and treatment plant of the City, then and in that event,
connection to a public sanitary sewer of the City is not required, as provided herein, during such
time as such determination shall remain in effect.
(f) Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions hereof,
the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this Article. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Inspector. The application for
such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement
by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the Inspector. A
permit and inspection fee of $12.50 shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time the application
is filed. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Inspector.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply
with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois. No permit
shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the City. No statement contained in this Article shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.
(g) No unauthorized person shall uncover any connections with or opening into, use, alter,
or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the Inspector. The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Inspector. A permit and inspection fee of
$25.00 shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time the application is filed. All costs and
expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only: when they are
found, on examination and test by the Inspector, to meet all requirements of this Article. The
building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74-42 or equal; vitrified clay
sewer pipe ASTM Specification C13-44T or equal; Schedule 40 PVC ASTM Specification
D-2665. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by
the Inspector where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or
unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that non-metallic
material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Inspector.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the inspector, but in no
event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such 4 inch pipe shall be not
less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) Feet of any bearing wall, which
might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The
building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
Changes in direction can be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity to flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work
unless otherwise approved by the Inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM Specification C-12-19, and except that no backfill shall be placed until
the work has been inspected. All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead.
Federal Specification QQ-L-156, not less than one inch (1") deep. Lead shall be run in one
pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing
material until after the joint has been tested and approved. All joints in vitrified clay pipe or
between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material or cement
mortar as specified below. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy
the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty degrees
Fahrenheit (1600F.), nor soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint
shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. Cement joints shall be
made by packing a closely twisted jute or oakum gasket of suitable size to fill partly the annular
space between the pipes. The remaining space shall be filled and firmly compacted with mortar
composed of 1 part Portland cement and 3 parts mortar sand. The material shall be mixed dry;
only sufficient water shall be added to make the mixture workable. Mortar which has begun to set
shall not be used or re-tempered. Lime putty or hydrated lime may be substituted to the extent of
not more than 25 percent of the volume of the Portland cement that may be added. Other jointing
materials and methods may be used only by approval of the Inspector.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the AY@ branch, if
such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is eight (8) inches in diameter,
and no properly located AY@ branch is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a AY@
branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the Inspector. Where the public sewer is
greater than eight inches (8") in diameter, and no properly located AY@ is available, a neat hole
may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream
direction at an angle of about forty-five degrees (450). A 45 degree ell may be used to make such
connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer.
The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher
elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, net joint shall be made, and the
connection made secure and water-tight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used
for the connection only when approved by the Inspector.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Inspector or his representative. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactorily to the City.
(h) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the Inspector. Cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of
the Inspector, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. Except as hereinafter provided,
no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewer:
(l) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 1501 F.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by
weight, of fat, oil, or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0,or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
(7) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
sewage treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
(10) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance which shall be
in violation of the NPDES permit issued to the City, or shall otherwise violate any
other Federal or State law or regulation relating to discharges to the sanitary sewer
system of the City.
(i) Grease, oil, sand, and similar type interceptors shall be required as provided within
Article 16 A of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(j) The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having:
(1) A 5-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per million by
weight, or
(2) containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in
subsection (h), or
(3) having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of
the City
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Inspector. Where necessary in the opinion of the
Inspector, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to, (a) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids
to 350 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits, provided for in
subsection (h) or, (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Inspector and of the Sanitary Water
Board of the State of Illinois, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense. When required by the Inspector, the owner of any property that is served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly approved by the Inspector. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made herein shall be determined in accordance with AStandard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage@ and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for
herein or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Testing procedures provided herein shall, be consistent with the October 16, 1973, AFederal
Register@ 940 CFT Part 136) entitled AGuidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants@, any Federal Regulations regarding Pretreatment, and any other appropriate Federal
Regulations.
No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby any industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(k) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently, break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part
of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(l) The Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance.
(m) Rates and charges for the use and service of the sewage system of the City of
Mt. Vernon are hereby established as follows:
Consumption Rates:
First 1,000 gallons
$8.78 minimum charge
Next 1,000 gallons
$9.72 per 1,000 gallons
Next 4,000 gallons
$8.45 per 1,000 gallons
Next 9,000 gallons
$7.17 per 1,000 gallons
Next 35,000 gallons
$5.46 per 1,000 gallons
Over 50,000 gallons
$4.62 per 1,000 gallons
Wherever sewer service is supplied to premises outside of the corporate limits of the City,
the rates charged shall be a minimum of $11.42 for the first 1,000 gallons and thereafter shall be
130% times the rates above set forth for residential use.
The foregoing gallonage compilation shall be based upon water service gallonage of the
user; provided, however, that if the user does not receive city water service, the charges for the use
and service of the sewage system shall be $57.99 per month.
Each of the foregoing rates established above shall be increased annually by 2% each year,
effective on November 1 of each year beginning 2017. The proceeds from the 2% rate increase
effective on November 1, 2016 (which increase is reflected within the above rates) and each 2%
annual increase thereafter (as enacted by Ordinance 2016-27) shall be expended solely for capital
construction projects or for capital equipment purchases for the Public Utility Department.
The proceeds from the 3% rate increase effective on May 1, 2009 enacted by Ordinance
2009-14 and all proceeds from each increase effective November 1 of 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012
enacted by Ordinance 2009-30 shall continue to be expended solely for capital construction
projects or for capital equipment purchases for the Public Utility Department.
In the event that any charge for sewer service shall not be paid within sixteen (16) days
of the rendition of the bill statement therefor, there shall be added to such charge 10% of the
amount thereof as computed on the above rates as a penalty for late payment.
The City of Mt. Vernon shall review the user charges annually and shall revise them
periodically to reflect actual treatment works operation and maintenance costs.
(n) Charges for sewer service shall be made monthly and shall be payable sixteen days
after rendition. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be charged on all bills if not paid within
sixteen (16) days of rendition as aforesaid.
The applicant for sewer service, the occupants of the premises served, and the user of the
sewage system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the sewage service charges set forth for
services to said premised.
No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises except upon the application of the owner, the
lessee, or occupant of the premises; and proof of ownership, tenancy, or occupancy may be
required by the City before service is provided. No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises
upon any application submitted after January 1, 1987, unless the premises shall have its street
address properly posted upon the premises in a conspicuous place so that the address is in plain
view and is visible from the street. No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises occupied by
any person who is in default as to any water, sewer or garbage collection charges due the City
regardless of whether said person is the applicant, nor shall any City water be supplied to any
premises upon the application of any applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer, or garbage
collection charges due the City no matter at which premises said default occurred, until such
applicant has paid such back water charges, sewer charges, and garbage collection charges in full,
including all charges and penalties.
The City shall be under no obligation to furnish or to continue to furnish sewer to any
applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the City no
matter at which premises said default occurred, or to any premises occupied by any person who is
in default as to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the City regardless of whether
said person is the applicant, and the City at any time after said bill or bills become due shall have
the full power and authority to enter any premises and to turn off, disconnect, discontinue or
otherwise terminate sewer service; said sewer service shall not be resumed until the delinquent
charges and all charges billed for water service, sewer service, and garbage collection service are
paid in full.
There shall be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon from its General Revenue Fund or other
revenues available to it, for the use and service of the sewerage system of the City of Mt. Vernon
to the City of Mt. Vernon, user fees in the amount equal to all amounts of costs for the operation
and maintenance of the sewer collection system and the wastewater treatment system for the
payment of which the user fees collected from other users of the system and other income of the
system shall be insufficient after the payment of all bonds and other obligations which are pledged
from the revenues of the system. Rates and charges to be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon shall
include all amounts required to be collected by the users of the system in order to comply with the
requirements of Ordinance No. 75-38.
The foregoing provisions are solely for the benefit of the City and shall not constitute a
defense to sewer, water, or garbage collection charges for any owner or other person jointly liable
for said charges. Except for disconnections effected by the City for reason of default or other
reason, only the applicant in whose name service is provided or someone on his behalf may
demand disconnection of service.
(o) Any person who in any manner violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this section or with the orders or regulations issued by the
Department pursuant thereto shall be subjected to having his sewage service terminated at once
without notice, and no person shall cause sewage service to be resumed, except as authorized by
the Superintendent of Public Utilities, the Finance Director, or a designee of either and upon
payment of the costs of termination and resumption of service as set by the City. Such remedies
shall be concurrent with all other remedies and penalties provided herein. The City of Mt. Vernon
shall be entitled to recover all costs including reasonable attorney fees in effecting or defending
the remedy provided herein.
(p) In the event charges, including penalties for water or sewer services, are not paid on or
before the due date of the bill for such services, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent. Thereafter such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien upon the real
estate for which such services are supplied, regardless of whether such service has been supplied
upon the application of the owner, an occupant or other user; provided, however, that the owner of
the real estate shall have no personal liability for the delinquent charges unless said owner was
also the applicant for or user of the services giving rise to the charges. The Superintendent of
Public Utilities, the Finance Director, or a designee of either is hereby authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies and claiming such lien in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois after first giving notice of seven (7) days by
regular mail of such delinquency to the owner or occupant of such real estate. The statement of
claim shall contain such information as shall be required for claims for lien for water services
heretofore set forth. The method herein provided for enforcing and foreclosing the lien for sewer
services shall not be considered as excluding any other method or remedy for collecting such
sewer charges but shall be concurrent with all other remedies and methods. The City shall recover
all costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in effecting collection for charges
for sewer, water, or garbage collection services or incurred by the City in foreclosing its lien or
incurred by the City in effecting or defending any remedy.
(q) All revenues derived from the operation of the sewage system shall be held separate and
apart from other funds of the City in compliance with provisions of any Sewer Revenue Bonds
and Ordinances of the City authorizing issuance of such bonds.
(r) Any owner, lessee, or occupant of a premises desiring sewer service from the City
sewer system shall make written application therefor to the Superintendent. Any person who is not
the owner of record of the premises and who applies for sewer service to said premises shall be
required to pay a cash deposit as heretofore provided within Section 16.6(m).
The connection charge for tapping or connecting to a sewer mains shall be $300.00 per
dwelling unit, which sum includes a $25.00 inspection fee referred to in Section 16.7(g) plus each
applicant for a new sewer service which taps or connects to a sewer main extension constructed
hereunder shall also pay an extension connection charge computed by multiplying the charge per
lineal foot times the lineal front feet of the applicant's real estate upon the extension; the charge
per lineal foot shall be determined by dividing the total cost of construction for the extension by
the total lineal footage of the extension (or by twice the lineal footage if the extension may serve
property on either side). Relocation of an existing service shall not constitute a new sewer service,
and no connection charge shall be payable; although the inspection fee shall be payable.
The City may extend sewer mains adjacent to previously unserved property and may collect
the above extension connection charge from the owner of the previously unserved property upon
said owner's requesting sewer service for the property. The City of Mt. Vernon may also enter into
written agreements with landowners for the extension by the landowner of sewer mains adjacent
to previously unserved land owned by a third party in order to serve the landowner's property; said
agreements may provide that the City will collect the above described lineal foot extension
connection charge upon the third party's requesting water service for his property fronting on the
privately developed main extension and provided that the City will pay the lineal foot extension
connection charge collected to the landowner, provided however that no agreement shall be
executed unless the landowner provides a verified and itemized statement of the construction
costs, a plat or description of the extension constructed, and an accurate record of the ownership
of each property adjacent to the extension.
The term, Adwelling unit@ shall be defined to mean each premises served by a service main
from a single tap, plus each separate living unit within an apartment, duplex, or other multiple
occupancy building, but as to hotels and motels only, the term Adwelling unit@ shall be defined to
mean each three motel or hotel rooms. The same connection charges shall be made for each other
tap or connection to a sewer for separate office, commercial, or industrial uses. The same
connection charges shall be made for each restaurant, lounge, or other separate commercial use at
any hotel or motel. Before any new connection is made, the customer shall deposit with the
Department a sum equal to the connection charges plus any customer deposit which may now or
hereafter be required by any Ordinance of the City. After the deposit of any such sum, the services
may then be installed.
(s) Omitted
(t) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Section 16.7(h) of this ordinance, and which, in the judgment of the Inspector, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Inspector may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or,
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the following provisions:
In the event that any person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewers any
wastes containing over 300 parts per million BOD-5 or 250 parts per million suspended solids
content, then that person shall pay to the City the following surcharges, over and above the regular
sewer rates as set forth in Section 16.7(m):
(1) For each pound of BOD-5 in excess of that amount which would be contained in sewage
with a BOD- 5 strength of 300 mg/l, a surcharge rate per excess pound of BOD-5 as determined
by the City Council, which rate shall be reviewed as often as needed; as of December 1, 2017, the
surcharge rate is $1.25 per excess pound. The surcharge rate shall be due and payable on such
dates as determined by the City Manager.
(2) For each pound of Suspended Solids in excess of that amount which would be
contained in sewage with a Suspended Solids strength of 250 mg/l, a surcharge rate per excess
pound of Suspended Solids as determined by the City Council, which rate shall be reviewed as
often as needed; as of December 1, 2017, the surcharge rate is $1.25 per excess pound. The
surcharge rate shall be due and payable on such dates as determined by the City Manager.
(u) Industrial Cost Recovery. (No Grant outstanding as of December 1, 2017)
(a) Industrial Cost Recovery Required: Each industrial user shall pay that portion of any Federal
Grant which has been obtained by the City for the financing of the construction of wastewater
treatment works allocable to the treatment of the wastewater from such user. Such user's share shall
not include an interest component.
(b) Determination of Industrial Cost Recovery: An Industrial user's portion of any Federal
Grant shall be based on the loadings attributable to wastewater of such user tributary of the
wastewater treatment works of the City.
(c) Cost for Industrial User: The costs to be recovered for an industrial user anywhere within
the service area of the City, shall be determined as follows:
(l) For normal strength wastewater (ie: BOD-5 equal to or less than 300 mg/l) and/or suspended
solids equal to or less than 250 mg/l an amount for each l,000 gallons as determined by the City
Council.
(2) For extra strength wastewater (ie: BOD-5 greater than 300 mg/l and/or suspended solids
greater than 250 mg/l) a surcharge, in addition to (c) (l) above, shall be charged for each pound of
BOD-5 introduced into the sanitary sewer system in excess of the amount contained at BOD-5 =
300 mg/l at a rate as determined by the City Council and, for each pound of suspended solids
introduced into the sanitary sewer system in excess of the amount contained at SS = 250 mg/l at a
rate as determined by the City Council.
(d) Charge for Industrial Cost Recovery: Each year during the industrial cost recovery
period, each industrial user of the treatment works shall pay the cost recover amount determined for
each industry, divided by the recovery period. Where an industry is connected to a public sewer
after the start-up of the facilities constructed under a Federal Grant for each quarter remaining in
the recovery period, such industry will not be required to pay for those quarters of the recovery
period for connection to a public sewer.
(e) Length of Industrial Cost Recovery Period: The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal
to the useful life of the sewers or treatment works, which shall be 30 years from the beginning of
full use of the facility.
(f) Payments and Billing Periods for Industrial Cost Recovery: For the purpose of industrial
cost recovery, the year shall be divided into quarterly periods, said periods to begin on the first day
of July, October, January, and March, and all industrial users of the City of Mt. Vernon shall pay the
cost as determined for industrial cost recovery and such payment shall be made quarterly on the
fifteenth day of the month immediately following the expiration of the quarterly period for which
service has been supplied, and such charge shall be payable within ten (10) days after rendition
thereof, and in the event such bills are not paid within said ten (10) days, a service charge of ten
percent (.10010) shall be added thereto.
(g) Delinquency and Termination of Service: In the event the charges for industrial
cost recovery are not paid within ten days after the rendition of that bill, then such service charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquent charge
shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such sewer services were supplied. The City
Clerk is hereby authorized and directed each quarter to file sworn statements showing such
delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois, and the filing of
such statements shall be deemed notice of a lien for the payment of such charges for sewer
service. If the delinquency in the payment of the recovery cost continues for a period of more
than sixty (60) days, the sewer service shall be discontinued.
(h) Time of First Payment: The initial payment made by an industrial user which is connected
to a public sewer after the start-up of the treatment works or sewer line constructed with a
Federal Grant, shall be made by the next scheduled due date as defined above and shall be equal
to one-quarter of the amount due.
(i) Adjustment of Charge Due to Plant Improvement Utilizing Federal Grant
Funds: If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works utilizing a Federal Grant, each
existing industrial user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
(j) No Charge for Unused or Unreserved Capacity: An Industrial user's portion of any Federal
Grant shall not include any portion of the grant amount allocable to unused or reserved capacity.
(k) Commitment for Increased Use: An industrial user's portion of any Federal Grant shall
include allowance for the cost of any firm commitment to the City of Mt. Vernon for any increased
use by such user.
(l) Payment to United States of America Required: The City of Mt. Vernon shall retain fifty
percent (50%) of the amounts recovered from industrial users. The remainder, together with any
interest earned thereon, shall be returned to the Treasury of the United States Anti-Pollution Fund
on an annual basis.
(m) Disposition of Retained Amounts: Eighty percent (80%) of the retained amounts
together with interest earned thereon, shall be used solely for the eligible cost of the expansion or
reconstruction of treatment works associated with the project and necessary to meet the requirements
of the Federal Act and the State of Illinois.
The City of Mt. Vernon, prior to commitment of the retained amounts, shall obtain written
approval of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency for any expansion or reconstruction.
The remainder of the retained amounts may be used for such expenditures as the City deems
appropriate.
(n) Investment of Retained Amounts Required: Pending use, the grantee shall invest the
retained amounts for reconstruction and expansion in (l) obligations of the U.S. Government, or (2)
obligation guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof,
or (3) shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by obligations of the U.S.
Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U. S. Government
or any agency thereof.
(o) City Clerk's Responsibility: The City Clerk shall maintain the necessary records for
determination of user share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection services.
(p) City Treasurer's Responsibility: The City Treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and
expenditure of all monies collected for industrial cost recovery.
(q) Monitoring Required: The City Council shall maintain a program of
monitoring industrial user discharges as the City Council deems necessary, provided that any
major contributing industry shall be monitored no less than twelve (12) times annually. All other
industrial users shall be monitored at such frequency as deemed necessary by the City Council for
determination of the population equivalent of the industrial user. The monitoring data collected shall
be used to determine industrial cost recovery surcharge.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Section shall be served by the City of Mt.
Vernon with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall become liable to the City of Mt.
Vernon for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City of Mt. Vernon by reason of such
violation.
SECTION 16.8 REGULATIONS FOR JAYCEE LAKE AND MILLER LAKE
(a) Definitions
AReservoir@ means the artificial lake and water impounded therein by means of a public
water supply dam, known as Jaycee Lake generally situated over parts of Sections Five and Eight
of Township Two South, Range Three East of the Third Principal Meridian, Jefferson County,
Illinois, and/or the artificial lake and water impounded therein by means of a public water supply
dam, known as Lake Miller situated over parts of Sections Twenty-eight, Twenty-nine,
Thirty-two, and Thirty-three of Township One South, Range Three East of the Third Principal
Meridian, Jefferson County, Illinois, and any structure or structures heretofore or hereafter
constructed within the limits of the herein defined drainage area which is used, or for use as water
supply for the City.
ACity@ shall mean City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
ADrainage Area@ means the entire area of land and water that drains into the reservoir.
AWater Course@ means any stream, natural or artificial, channel, spring, or depression of
any kind in which water flows continually or intermittently over any part of the drainage area
directly or indirectly into any part of the reservoir.
AIntake@ means the place where the water supply for the City is taken from the reservoir.
AWater Line@ for Jaycee Lake means the contour known as 491.00 feet above sea level
according to United States Government elevation as obtained from the bench mark established in
Mt. Vernon, Illinois in the Post Office therein.
AWater Line@ for Lake Miller means the contour known as 520.00 feet above sea level
according to United States Government elevation as obtained from the bench mark established in
Mt. Vernon, Illinois in the Post Office therein.
AShore Line@ means the extended point where the plane of the surface of the reservoir
touches the land.
AMarginal Land@ means the land owned or controlled by the City adjacent to the shore line
and not flooded by the waters of the reservoir.
ACustodian@ refers to any lease from the City of any marginal land for cottage or other
purpose.
(b) Regulations
All provisions of this Section, except where expressly otherwise provided, shall apply to
Jaycee Lake reservoir and Lake Miller reservoir and the marginal lands adjacent thereto.
(A) No building or structure, whether for habitation or otherwise, including but not
limited to any dock, shall be constructed, altered or maintained within the waterline of the
reservoir, unless a permit in writing therefor based upon a written application setting forth the
location, specifications and intended use thereof, shall be granted by the City of Mt. Vernon.
(B) No person not an authorized employee of the City shall make any connection with,
uncover, alter or disturb any raw water pipe or main, or any filtered water line or main, conduit,
electric wire or line, sewer or other utility constructed or maintained by the City and between the
reservoir dam and said City limits, or open any manhole, intercepting chamber of any
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City based upon a written
application setting forth the location and nature of the work to be done, together with a description
thereof or copy of plans or specifications therefore of the contemplated connection or alteration
and a depositing with the City such a sum of money as the City shall estimate will fully cover all
damage of any kind which may be caused by the connection or alteration or filing an appropriate
bond, guaranteeing restoration, in form, amount and with surety, as approved by the City, if
requested by the City to do so.
After said alteration or connection has been completed, the City Engineer shall be notified
in writing and allowed to inspect the work done and thereafter the sewer, water pipe or main,
conduit, electric wire or line, manhole or intercepting chamber shall be immediately restored to as
good a state or condition as prior to the doing of said work, to the satisfaction of the City or by the
City, as the City may elect. If the completion of the restoration be without expense to the City and
to its satisfaction, the sum deposited shall be refunded but if any of the work be done by it, the
City shall certify the actual expense incurred and shall refund to the holder of the permit the
difference, if any, between the amount deposited and the amount certified; in the event the amount
so certified shall be in excess of said deposit, the holder of the permit shall immediately pay said
excess to the City.
(C) No person shall place, throw, discharge or cause to be discharged, any sewage,
garbage, waste, saltwater, oil, oil and gas well products, or other polluting substance into the
reservoir or into any natural or artificial watercourse or open or covered sewer, ditch, tile or drain
flowing directly or indirectly, continuously or intermittently, into the reservoir; no person shall
construct any open or covered sewer ditch, tile or drain or make any change therein or connected
therewith so as to cause any pollution or polluting substance to flow into or reach more quickly,
the reservoir.
(D) No person shall cause or permit any domestic livestock or poultry to run at large
upon the reservoir or marginal lands of another. Any livestock or poultry found at large may be
taken up by the City and sold to pay the expense of taking, keeping, advertising and selling such
livestock or poultry, and to pay all damage incurred by the City of its property by such livestock or
poultry. No livestock, animal or poultry shall be allowed to stand, wallow, wade, or swim or be
washed or watered in the reservoir.
(E) No person shall upon the reservoir or upon any marginal land by violent or
tumultuous or obstreperous conduct or by loud and unusual noises disturb the peace nor shall any
person upon the reservoir or any marginal land use profane, obscene or offensive language
calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, nor shall any person assault, strike or fight with
another, with or without his consent, or permit any such condition in or upon any premises upon
the marginal land leased, possessed or controlled by him.
(F) No clothing, bedding, carpet, vehicle, receptacle, utensil or article that tends to
pollute the water shall be washed in the reservoir.
(G) No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure, or
destroy any property upon the reservoir or the marginal land, whether such property is owned by
the State, County, City, or other governmental body or owned by any private person firm, or other
association. No person upon the reservoir or upon the marginal lands shall throw or cast any
stone or missile upon any public property or upon private property of another or at any other
person.
(H) No person shall enter into or upon any lot or parcel of ground which has situated
thereon any building or structure or which is occupied for residential purposes, and while on such
lot or parcel of ground look into any door, window or aperture in such building or structure
without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. No person shall intrude or enter
upon the enclosed premises of another or wilfully or needlessly walk, ride, or drive upon any
lawn, grass plot, flower garden or other property of another without the consent of the owner,
lessee or occupant.
No person shall enter into or upon any lot or parcel of ground nor upon any marginal land
without the permission of the owner, lessee, or person in control of said land. No person shall
intrude or enter upon any dock, boathouse, or boat of another without the consent of the owner
thereof. No person shall fasten any trot line, any boat or other item to any dock, structure, post,
tree or other item owned or leased by another or upon the property owned or leased by another
without the consent of the owner or lessee. No person shall place any trot line, throw line or
similar device within 25 feet of the shoreline of the reservoir; provided nothing herein shall
prohibit an owner or lessee and their permitted guests from fishing with a pole or poles from a
dock or from land adjacent to the shoreline owned or leased by him.
(I) No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear nude or in a state of nudity in a
public place, all as defined within Section 12.6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(J) No person shall place or maintain upon the reservoir any houseboat or water craft
with sleeping accommodations or water craft constructed, occupied or intended for use as a
temporary or permanent residence. No person shall permit or allow or use any boat, vessel, or
other floating device, except for a water craft as defined and licensed by the State of Illinois; in
addition, paddle boats are permitted; inner tubes, air mattresses, and similar devices are
prohibited. No person shall permit or allow or engage in the use of or racing of model boats or
similar devices of any type upon any portion of the reservoir. Boating of any kind or character is
prohibited in the reservoir at the spillway and within 50 feet thereof.
(K) No person shall stock or place any fish or other aquatic life and within the
reservoir, except commercially purchased minnows for fishing and except fish first caught from
said reservoir which are being returned to the reservoir and except as permitted by resolution of
the City Council or as permitted within any license or lease granted by the City Council.
(L) No person shall use the marginal land, except pursuant to a lease or license
authorized by the City Council; use of marginal land shall be in strict conformance with any
applicable lease or license.
(M) No person shall allow or engage in the racing of water craft or in the careless or
reckless operation of any boat or water craft upon the reservoir.
(N) No person shall permit or allow or engage in any ice skating, ice cutting, ice
fishing, or other ice activities upon the reservoir, except as permitted within a license or lease
granted by City Council; nor shall any person allow or operate any snowmobile, off-road vehicle
or any vehicle or device upon any iced over portion of the reservoir.
(O) No person shall permit or allow or engage in any hunting; nor shall any person,
except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties, discharge any rifle, shotgun,
pistol or other firearm, unless permitted by resolution of the City Council or unless otherwise
permitted in writing by the City Council.
(P) No person shall use or permit or allow use of the reservoir or of any marginal land
for any business, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or irrigation purpose. Watering of lawns
and gardens, use of the reservoir as a private domestic water source, and similar restricted
residential use of the reservoir is permissible pursuant to a duly authorized lease or license, unless
otherwise restricted or prohibited by City. Nothing herein shall prohibit the current licensee, Mt.
Vernon Gun and Sportsmens Club, from leasing boats not to exceed ten (10) in number to its
members nor from charging its members a fee for use of its camping facilities or from charging its
members a membership fee.
(Q) No person under 10-years of age may operate any boat or craft. Persons at least
10-years of age and less than 12-years of age may operate a boat or craft only if they are
accompanied on the boat or craft and under the direct control of a parent or guardian or person at
least 18-years of age designated by a parent or guardian. Persons at least 12-years of age and less
than 18-years of age may operate a boat or craft only if they are accompanied on the boat or craft
and under the direct control of a parent or guardian or a person at least 18-years of age designated
by a parent or guardian or if such person between the ages of 12 and 18 is in possession of a
boating safety certificate issued by the Department of Natural Resources, Division of Law
Enforcement, authorizing the holder to operate motorboats. Violations of this subparagraph done
with the knowledge of a parent or guardian shall be deemed a violation by the parent or guardian.
(R) No person shall operate or place upon the reservoir any boat or craft larger than
20-feet in centerline length, except a pontoon boat may be 24-feet in length; provided that any
lessee of marginal land or owner of real estate immediately adjacent to the waterline of the
reservoir may place upon the reservoir a pontoon boat not to exceed 28-feet in length if the
certificate of title for said pontoon boat evidences that said lessee or owner owned the pontoon
boat prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
(S) No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any boat or craft equipped with a
motor or internal combustion engine, regardless of whether such motor or engine be temporarily
or permanently attached to said boat or craft, on any of the waters of the reservoir, unless such
motor or engine is equipped with an efficient muffler, in good working order and constant
operation so as to prevent excessive noise and annoying smoke. No outboard motor or internal
combustion engine shall be deemed equipped with an efficient muffler, unless the exhaust gases
are discharged under water or are muffled as to be not noisier or more annoying than an internal
combustion engine of like power equipped with an underwater exhaust.
(T) No person shall use on any boat or craft on the waters of the reservoir with a
muffler cut-out or any device whatsoever that operate to discharge exhaust gases or any motor or
engine without such gases passing through an efficient muffler.
(U) No person shall operate any boat or craft at a speed greater than thirty-five (35)
miles per hour between the hours of sunrise and sunset upon Jaycee Lake reservoir nor greater
than twenty-five miles per hour between the hours of sunrise and sunset upon Lake Miller
Reservoir. No person shall operate any boat or craft at a speed greater than five miles per hour
between the hour of sunset and sunrise. The speed limit at the spillway and boat ramp and within
100 feet of each shall be 5 mph at all times. No boat or craft shall be operated at a speed that
creates a wake within any area marked with a buoy and designated as a no-wake area. Any cove
marked with a buoy at its entrance shall be a no wake area; other no wake areas may be designated
and marked by the City Manager.
(V) No boat or craft of any kind or character shall be operated on the reservoir unless it
carries for each occupant an adequate life preserver (personal flotation device) for each person
especially designed for that purpose; each person under the age of 13-years shall wear a life
preserver when an occupant of a boat or craft when said boat or craft is underway. No person
shall participate or engage in water skiing (if otherwise permitted) except when wearing an
adequate life preserver, provided, however, that the City Council may from time to time upon
Jaycee Lake authorize water skiing exhibitions or performances without the use of life preservers.
All boats or crafts shall be equipped with all safety equipment as required by the Illinois Boating
Act and approved by the U.S. Coast Guard.
(W) No person shall engage in the business of renting boats for hire or carrying
passengers for hire on the reservoir, except as may be authorized by special concession granted by
the City.
(X) No persons required to be licensed by the laws of Illinois now and hereafter, shall
take, catch, or attempt to take or catch any species of fish, frogs or turtles without a State of
Illinois Fishing License in full force and effect, issued to said person and in his possession; all
persons shall strictly adhere to the Game and Fish Code of the State of Illinois and the
amendments thereto; in addition, all persons shall observe and adhere to all valid fishing
restrictions and regulations enacted or authorized by the City Council within this Ordinance. The
privilege of fishing the reservoir or any part thereof may be suspended by the City at any time
whenever such suspension shall be deemed proper to conserve aquatic life or to prevent any
tendency to pollute the waters of the reservoir, or to promote the improvement or convenient
maintenance, or control of said reservoir, or any part thereof. The posting of any authorized sign
shall suspend the privilege of fishing at such location. All persons using the waters of the
reservoir for fishing purposes shall so use the same as not to create any unsanitary condition in or
about said water or so as to pollute or make any part of the waters unwholesome or unfit for use.
No person shall conduct, sponsor or permit or participate in any fishing tournament or contest
upon the reservoir except as authorized by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
(Y) Any person picnicking or making other use of the reservoir shall keep the reservoir
and premises clean and neat, and shall pick up and remove in a sanitary manner all paper, garbage,
rubbish and debris, and before leaving the premises and shall put out any fire by him made. No
person shall deposit or place any paper, can, garbage or litter into the reservoir.
(Z) No person shall upon the reservoir or the marginal lands permit any dog owned,
kept or controlled by such person to be or run at large within any street, sidewalk or other public
place unless such animal shall wear a good and substantial muzzle; nor shall any person permit
any cat or other animal be or run at large within any street, sidewalk or public place. No person
shall allow or permit any dog, cat or any other animal owned, kept or controlled by such person to
be at large and to go upon the private premises of another person. Any dog or cat found or other
animal running at large may be taken up by the City and if not promptly called for may be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of, all without liability on the part of any officer performing such
duty, or the City. No person shall permit or allow any dangerous, fierce or ferocious dog owned,
kept or controlled by such person to annoy or endanger any other person. Any dog which shall
bite or injure any person or shall destroy or injure any other animal is hereby declared to be
nuisance and shall be taken up and impounded. Any person who shall be the owner, keeper or in
control of the dog and shall know or be notified that such dog has bitten or injured any other
person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall deliver such dog for impoundment shall cause
such dog to be chained and confined not less than two weeks. If any such dangerous, fierce or
vicious dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded it shall be slain by any law enforcement or
rabies control officer of the City and if any such dog having been slain shall have bitten or caused
an abrasion on any person, the carcass of such dog shall be delivered to the rabies control officer.
(AA) No person shall ride, park or use any 3-wheeler, 4-wheeler, motorcycle, dirt bike,
motor bike, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or other similar motor vehicle upon any marginal land,
except mowing and maintenance equipment operated by City personnel or persons specifically
authorized by resolution or ordinance of the City Council; provided, however, that a motorized
device (such as a wheelchair or golf cart) which is actually used solely to accommodate a
physically impaired person is not prohibited. Nothing herein shall prevent use of a private drive
improved as a roadway for access to marginal land or for parking, but said private drive shall not
be used as a riding track or for repetitious recreational riding.
(AB) No fireworks or balloons shall be lighted or set off upon the reservoir or upon any
marginal land, except as may be permitted in writing by the City Council. No fire shall be lighted
or used except at such places as may be designated by the City for such purpose and except by any
lessee, his family and guests on the parcel of marginal land leased to such lessee by the City.
(AC) No person shall wilfully, maliciously, or negligently cut, break, climb on, carry
away, conceal, transfer, tamper with, mark upon, or in any way injure, damage, or deface the
reservoir dam or any tree, shrub, plant, or any hydrant, regulating device, transformer, meter, wire,
wiring, pole, or any fence, wall, bridge, railing, bench, building, or other structure of any kind or
property, or take down, alter, mar, move, injure, destroy any sign, trail marker, placard, notice,
post, pile or buoy posted or placed by the City or authorized to be posted or placed by the City or
drive any motor car, vehicle, boat or craft in such a manner as to cause the same to collide with,
run against, strike or cause to strike, injure or deface or damage any such property, but custodians
of the marginal land surrounding said reservoir may make changes and improvements as
permitted in their leases from the City.
(AD) No person shall solicit alms or do anything pertaining to soliciting, peddling or
hawking. The erection or maintenance of any sign or bill, poster, the posting or placing of any
advertising poster, placard, or card, or the distributing of any advertising matter by handbills, or
otherwise, except regulatory signs posted by City, is prohibited.
(AE) No person shall make an ascent in any balloon, aeroplane, hydroplane or any other
device or any descent in any aeroplane, balloon, hydroplane or any flying device or parachute
without a written permit from the City, except in a declared emergency. No person shall go upon
any portion of the reservoir or marginal land where a sign or notice, posted or authorized to be
posted by the City, prohibit same.
(AF) No building or structure or anything erected or constructed on the face thereof or in
any way connected therewith, shall extend into, upon or over any boulevard, road or parkway
unless a written application setting forth the location and specifications of the encroachment shall
have been made. No person shall move any building on, along or across, or obstruct or excavate in
any road unless a permit in writing therefor shall have been procured from the City, based upon a
written application setting forth the dimensions of the building to be moved and its contemplated
route. or the location or nature and specifications of the proposed excavations or obstructions and
upon depositing with the City such a sum of money as the City shall estimate will cover all
damages to the roadway, trees, shrubs, grass, lamp posts and other property and improvements
upon said road, or upon filing appropriate bond to guarantee such complete restoration as
requested by the City.
After said work shall have been completed, the road, grass, trees, shrubs, lamp posts and
other property and improvements shall be immediately restored to their former condition by the
holder of the permit to the satisfaction of the City or by the City, as the City may elect. If
restoration be made without expense to the City, and to its satisfaction, the sum deposited shall be
refunded, but if any of the work be done by it, the City shall certify the actual expense incurred
and shall refund to the holder of the permit the difference, if any, between the amount deposited
and the amount so certified by the City; in the event the amount so certified should be in excess of
said amount deposited, the holder of the permit shall immediately pay such excess amount to the
City.
(AG) Any walk, opening, excavation, projection or obstruction which shall be
constructed, erected, placed or maintained in or upon any road, contrary to any of the provisions
of any Ordinance of the City, may be filled up, removed or abated by the City at the expense and
risk of the person constructing, erecting, placing or maintaining the same.
(AH) All persons shall obey all official signs and traffic signals and police officers of the
City. The display of unauthorized traffic signs and signals is prohibited.
(AI) No vehicle shall be driven except upon roadways and parking places constructed
or designated by the City for such use and except by any lessee or permittee of lessee upon lands
leased to said lessee.
(AJ) No vehicle shall be permitted to stand in any of the following places except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of any police officer.
a. Where parking or standing is indicated to be prohibited by an authorized
sign.
b. In any intersection or crosswalk.
c. Upon the roadway of, or approaches to, any bridge or the impounding dam
forming the reservoir.
d. At any place where the standing and parking of a vehicle shall block the use
of any walk or driveway.
e. At any place where the standing and parking of a vehicle will tend to
obstruct the flow of a single line of traffic in each direction or cause either
of such lines of traffic to veer from its course in the center of the roadway.
f. Upon any marginal land, except that a lessee or licensee or permittee of
same may park upon the premises subject of his lease or license.
(AK) No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any road or driveway at a speed greater
than is reasonable and proper, having regard for the traffic and the use of the way and so as not to
endanger the life, limb, or injure the property of any person. The City from time to time may
designate the maximum rate of speed on all roads, based on the location, nature and amount of
traffic on the same and shall erect suitable signs indicating such maximum rates of speed. If the
rate of speed of any motor vehicle operating on any road shall exceed the rate of speed designated
for said location, said rate of speed shall be prima facie evidence that the person operating such
motor vehicle was running at a rate greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard for the
traffic and the use of the highway.
(AL) No person shall make, aid or countenance or assist in making any improper noise,
racket, disturbance, breach of peace, or anything tending to a breach of the peace or be guilty of
any disorderly or offensive conduct or collect or assemble any body or group of persons for any
unlawful purpose or for the annoyance or disturbance of any other person or persons or the
damage or destruction of property of the City or of any other person.
(AM) No person intoxicated by alcohol nor any person under the influence of any
unlawful drug shall appear or remain be present upon the reservoir or upon any other public place
or upon the private premises of another without the owner=s consent.
(AN) No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee or agent of
the City while engaged in any work or the improvement, care or supervision of the reservoir.
(c) Regulations for Jaycee Lake Only
(A) All facilities including without limitation the trailer parking lot, boat ramp, and
land used and adjacent to the boat launching area, and the pavilion and picnic area on the south
and east sides of Lake Jaycee and all marginal land not subject to a lease, shall be closed and the
use thereof prohibited after 10:00 o'clock p.m. or prior to 5:00 a.m. of each day; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to go upon or use any of such facilities or land after 10:00 o'clock p.m. or
prior to 5:00 a.m. each day. Lessee=s of marginal land adjacent to the reservoir may use the
reservoir for any permitted use during each hour of any day.
(B) Swimming, skin diving, bathing, wading, or any similar water activity (except
skiing) in the reservoir is prohibited, except in such areas and at such times as may be determined
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(C) Water skiing shall be permitted upon Jaycee Lake reservoir unless otherwise
prohibited by the City Council by resolution or ordinance. Each boat towing any person or
persons on water skis, aquaplane, or any other object shall have a minimum of two persons aboard
and one of said persons shall act as an observer at all times. Water craft engaged in skiing shall
travel in a clockwise direction when towing a skier. No person shall ski nor shall any person
operate a boat having a skier in tow, except during the hours from sunrise to sunset. Skiing shall
mean use of any water ski, aquaplane, or other similar object or contrivance intended, constructed
or actually used in tow behind any boat.
(D) No person shall enter or remain at the boat launching ramp or at the trailer parking
lot adjacent thereto or within fifty-feet of the boat launching ramp or trailer parking lot except for
the purpose of and during the launching or trailering of a boat. No person shall fish within
fifty-feet of any part of the boat launching ramp.
(E) No person shall place any fishing jug or similar device upon Jaycee Lake nor shall
any person place any trot line, throw line, or similar device upon Jaycee Lake, except within a
cove designated as a no wake area.
(F) No person shall place or operate a boat or water craft of any kind upon Jaycee Lake
unless said person has secured and shall have in his or her possession a license as hereinafter
provided.
No boat or craft of any kind may be propelled, kept or used on Jaycee Lake reservoir until
the owner thereof shall have secured a written license from the City based upon a written
application, setting forth the length of such boat or craft, its means of locomotion, and if propelled
by an internal combustion motor engine, the piston displacement thereof, the maximum number of
passengers said boat or craft may safely carry, its contemplated use, and other and further
information as the City may from time to time require. Such license when granted shall be in
writing and may be further evidenced by an official number sticker or marker to be yearly
furnished by the City to the licensee and such sticker or marker shall be placed on the outside
upper right hand corner of the rear transom, and such license shall be exhibited on request to any
agent of the City. In addition, a second sticker or marker shall be furnished by the City and affixed
to the trailer for said boat.
Such license shall be effective from May 1 of the year of issue through and including April
30 of the next ensuing year and may be annually renewed by filing a like application before said
boat or craft may be lawfully propelled, kept, or used in the reservoir. Each application or renewal
must be accompanied by the payment of an annual license fee as follows:
(a) Boat or craft propelled by oars, or sail or electric trolling motor ....................... $5.00
(b) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine owned by any
resident of Jefferson County, Illinois or any person who is a Lessee of
marginal land ................................................................................................. $ 50.00
(c) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine owned by a non-resident
of Jefferson County, Illinois and non-lessee of marginal land from City
or operated for testing by a boat retailer, boat dealer, boat mechanic
or other commercial entity .............................................................................. $100.00
All applications for permit shall state the kind and type of public liability insurance carried
by the applicant, the name of his insurer and limits of coverage. No permit shall be issued
hereunder unless the applicant shall present to the City Clerk proof of public liability insurance
coverage in an approved company and in an amount not less than $300,000 per person and per
occurrence or in such other amounts as shall be determined by the City Manager, in his discretion.
The within provisions requiring a license shall also specifically apply to boat retailers, boat
dealers, boat mechanics, and other persons operating a boat or craft upon the reservoir for test
driving, provided the license sticker for the boat shall be in the possession of the boat operator and
the license sticker for the trailer shall be displayed within the motor vehicle pulling the boat trailer
in the front window on the driver=s side. No testing shall occur except on Monday through Friday
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
(d) Regulations Specific for Lake Miller
(A) Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or by other action of the City Council, use
of Lake Miller shall be restricted to and is permitted only by lessee=s of marginal land and by
owners of real estate immediately adjacent to the waterline of the reservoir or by members of the
Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmen=s Club, Inc., a current licensee of Lake Miller as of the date of
adoption of this ordinance; this provision shall supersede any provision within a lease for
marginal lands requiring membership in the Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmen=s Club, Inc. Use of
Lake Miller shall be restricted to fishing and boating. Any lessee or owner herein described who
places or operates a boat or craft upon the reservoir and who is not a member of the Sportsmen=s
Club shall have an official City sticker affixed to his water craft and any lessee or owner fishing
Lake Miller without a boat or craft shall not be required to acquire an official City sticker but shall
have satisfactory proof of an existing lease with the City or of current ownership of the land from
which he is fishing. No guest of any lessee or owner or of any Sportsmens Club member shall
place any boat upon the reservoir except a boat having the required City sticker or Sportsmens
Club membership number as set forth herein, except nothing herein shall prohibit a guest or
family member of a lessee or owner or an authorized guest of the Sportsmens Club from using the
properly licensed (sticker) boat of said lessee or owner or properly identified boat of a Sportsmens
Club member. All members of the Sportsmens or guests of same engaged in fishing or boating
upon Lake Miller shall have in his or her possession a current annual membership card or a
membership guest card in the Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmens Club, Inc., which membership or
guest card shall be promptly produced upon request by an authorized representative of the
Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmen=s Club, Inc. or upon the request of any representative of the City
and each member shall also have his Sportsmen=s Club membership number affixed and clearly
visible upon his boat or motor. In the event any person shall not display the required City sticker
or shall not promptly produce the required membership card then either Mt. Vernon Gun and
Sportsmen=s Club, Inc. or City may demand said person to immediately cease using the Lake.
Upon failure of the person to cease using Lake Miller, said person shall be in violation of this
ordinance and shall be guilty of a criminal trespass. In the event Mt. Vernon Gun and
Sportsmen=s Club, Inc. shall cease holding a license for the Lake then use of Lake Miller shall be
as provided by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
Any lessee of marginal land or owner of real estate immediately adjacent to the waterline
of the reservoir desiring to place a boat or craft upon Lake Miller but who does not desire to
obtain membership in the Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmen=s Club, Inc. shall obtain a license from
the City based upon a written application setting forth the length of each boat or craft, the means
of locomotion of each boat or craft, and such further information that the City from time to time
may require; upon request each applicant shall provide a copy of the certificate of title for the
boat or water craft evidencing that said boat or water craft is titled in the name of the applicant.
Such license granted shall be in writing and may be further evidenced by an official sticker or
marker to be yearly furnished by the City to a licensee and such sticker or marker shall be placed
on the outside upper right-hand corner of the rear transom, and such license shall be exhibited
upon request to any agent of the City. Such license shall be effective from May 1 of the year
issued through and including April 30 of the next ensuing year and shall be annually renewed by
filing a like application before said motor craft may be lawfully propelled, kept or used in the
reservoir. Each application or renewal must be accompanied by the payment of an annual license
fee as follows:
(a) Boat or craft propelled by oars, sails, or electric trolling motor ..................... $ 5.00
(b) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine .................................... $50.00
(B) On May 1 of each year the Sportsmen=s Club or other licensee of the Lake shall file
with the City Clerk a list containing the names, current addresses, and membership number for
each member of the Sportsmen=s Club (licensee) and a list of the names, addresses and each
officer, director or employee of the Sportsmen=s Club (licensee).
(C) Swimming, skin diving, bathing, wading, skiing or any similar water activity in the
reservoir is prohibited, except in such areas and at such times as shall be determined from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
(D) No person shall place, use, or operate upon Lake Miller any boat or water craft
with a motor having horsepower of 10-horsepower or more. Failure to strictly comply with this
provision shall result in a fine of not less than $100.00 per violation and shall subject the violator
to an injunction which prohibits the violator from using the Lake for a period of 12-months from
date of imposition of the fine.
(E) No person shall fish from the banks or shoreline adjacent to Lake Miller except for
lessees or custodians and their guests fishing from property subject to the lease or license of such
lessee or custodian.
(F) No person shall park upon any private or public road or upon any marginal land to
fish or otherwise use the reservoir, except that a lessee of marginal land and guests of same may
park upon the premises subject of the lessee=s lease.
(G) No person shall fish from the dam nor the spillway nor from any boat launching
ramp nor from any bridge situated upon or adjacent to the reservoir.
(H) No person shall ride, park or use any motor vehicle, three wheeler, 4-wheeler,
motorcycle, dirt bike, motor bike, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or vehicle of any type (except
mowing and maintenance equipment operated by City personnel or persons authorized by
resolution of the City Council) upon the dam, the dam=s face, the dam=s toe, the spillway or within
200 feet of any part of the dam or the spillway nor upon any marginal land except marginal land
leased to King City Dirt Riders by resolution of the City Council.
(I) No person (including any lessee of marginal land or owner of real estate adjacent to
the shoreline) shall construct any boat ramp or boat access nor permit any access to the public or
access to any person not authorized to use the reservoir, except such boat ramp or access as may
be authorized in writing by the City Council, provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit
a lessee of marginal land or an owner of real estate adjacent to the shoreline from having, placing,
maintaining, or constructing a private boat access solely for the personal use by said lessee or
owner.
(e) Permits
All applications for permits or license herein provided for shall be directed to the City
Clerk. All permits and license herein provided for that may be issued by the City shall not be
transferable in any way, and all benefits which may be derived therefrom shall accrue only to the
person or persons to whom the permit was originally issued by the City. Each permit or license,
whether or not issued for a consideration, shall be subject to revocation by the City whenever the
licensee or holder of such permit in any way violates or permits the violation of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation for the regulation, care, protection, or control of the reservoir,
drainage area or water supply of the City.
Each custodian of marginal land and each licensee or holder of any permit from the City
herein provided for, shall at all times keep his or her post office address on file with the City Clerk
and any provision for written notice to any custodian, licensee, or holder of any permit from the
City herein provided for shall be deemed for all purposes to have been complied with when the
same in writing shall have been deposited in the United State registered mail, postage prepaid, and
properly addressed to such designated address. The affidavit of the person so mailing such notice,
together with the registry receipt, shall be prima facie evidence of the mailing thereof.
(f) Steering Rules for Water Craft
The following steering rules shall govern the use and operation of boats on the reservoir;
RULE 1. When two motor or engine driven boats are meeting head on, or nearly head on,
so as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter her course to starboard (right) so that each
shall pass on the port (left) side of the other.
RULE 2. When two motor or engine driven boats are crossing so as to involve risk of
collision, the boat which has the other on her own starboard (right) side shall keep out of
the way of the other.
RULE 3. When a motor or engine driven boat meets, crosses the course of or overtakes a
boat propelled by oars or muscular power, the motor or engine driven boat shall keep out
of the way of the other.
RULE 4. Where, by any of the rules herein prescribed, one of the two boats shall keep
out of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed.
RULE 5. Where, by any of the rules herein prescribed, one of two boats shall keep out
of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed.
RULE 6. Every motor or engine driven boat which is directed by these rules to keep out
of the way of another boat, shall on approaching her, if necessary, slacken her speed or
stop or reverse.
RULE 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, every boat or craft
overtaking any other shall keep out of the way of the overtaken boat or craft.
RULE 8. In obeying and construing these rules, due regard shall be had to all dangers of
navigation and collision and to any special circumstances which may render a departure
from above rules necessary in order to avoid immediate danger.
RULE 9. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any boat or craft, or the owner or
operator thereof, from the consequences or any neglect to keep a proper outlook, or of a
neglect of any precaution which may be required by the exercise of due care and caution or
by the special circumstances of the case.
RULE 10. No boat or craft shall collide with, run against, strike injure, deface or
damage any buoy, stake, sign, piling or other structure installed by the City or with the
City's consent, or be anchored or moored so as to obstruct the view of any buoy or
navigation sign or signal.
RULE 11. No boat or craft commonly known as a houseboat or craft on which the
occupants have sleeping accommodations shall be permitted on the reservoir.
RULE 12. Persons using or operating any boat or craft on the waters of the reservoir
shall do so in such manner as not to create any unsanitary condition in or about said waters
and shall not pollute said waters by the discharge, in any material amount, of oil or other
polluting liquid or solid tending to make said waters unwholesome or unfit for water
supply purposes or injurious to the aquatic life thereof.
RULE 13. No boat or craft shall be used or operated, nor any horn or sound device
sounded so as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or quiet.
RULE 14. The City shall at all times have power and authority to prohibit, restrict or
otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance or operation of any or all boats and
crafts on the waters of the reservoir, should it become necessary to do so in the interest of
the public health or safety, or for the protection or improvement of the reservoir or other
cause.
RULE 15. Any boat or craft found abandoned or adrift in the reservoir or any unlicensed
boat or craft thereon shall be taken up by the City and the City shall have a lien thereon for
all license fees therefor and the expenses of taking, towing, keeping, advertising and
selling of the same and for all damages caused by such craft to property of the City, and
may enforce such lien by advertisement and sale of such craft in like manner as chattel
mortgages may be foreclosed under the laws of this State. Nothing herein shall be
construed as exonerating the owner or operator of any boat or craft from personal liability
to the City, or any other person, for any damage, or injury caused by such boat or craft.
(g) Nuisances
(A) No person shall cause or permit any part of the reservoir or the water thereof, to be
used, kept or maintained so as to cause the pollution of any part of the waters in the reservoir or so
as to create, continue, or contribute to the creation or continuance of any public or private
nuisance upon marginal lands.
(B) The violation of any provision of Section 16.8 whereby any unsanitary condition is
created, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(C) No person shall keep, maintain, or allow upon the reservoir or upon the marginal
lands any carrion, pigsty, decaying animal or vegetable matter, stagnant water, or any other thing
that may be injurious to the health of or offensive to the public or by which any noxious or
offensive smell may be created. The keeping, maintaining, or allowing of any such matter or
condition is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(D) No person shall dump, throw, place, deposit, maintain, store or keep any street,
alley, premises, public property, private property, or land within the reservoir or upon any
marginal land any junk, trash, waste, garbage or other debris and the dumping, throwing, placing,
depositing, maintaining, storage or keeping of aforesaid is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(E) No person shall keep any cattle, hogs, sheep or goats, poultry, or other animals
upon the marginal lands in such manner as to create any offensive smell or noise or to create any
condition dangerous to the health of the public; same is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(F) No person shall store or place any refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest in any open,
unattended or unguarded place upon the reservoir or within the marginal lands without first
removing the door or doors therefrom; and the placing or storing any such article in any such
place without first removing the door or doors is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(G) No person shall keep or have any inoperative motor vehicle or junked vehicle as
defined within Section 13.12 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, except that Avehicle@ shall also
include water craft, upon the reservoir or upon the marginal lands, nor upon any street or highway;
same is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall use any motor vehicle or permit any
motor vehicle to be used for storage of any thing or item; any motor vehicle used for said purpose
is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall park, store, place, leave or keep any motor
vehicle required to be licensed by the State of Illinois upon any public or private property unless
said vehicle is properly licensed for the current year as required by law; any unlicensed vehicle is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. Abatement of any nuisance involving a motor vehicle shall be
abated as provided within Section 13.12 of the Revised Code of Ordinance.
(H) No person shall permit any dog, cat or other animal owned, kept or controlled by
such person to be or run at large within any street, sidewalk or other public place; same is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. A dog, cat or other animal shall be deemed running at large when off
the premises of its owner or keeper without being under adequate control of its owner or keeper.
(I) Any item or thing declared to be a nuisance herein shall be abated as provided
within and shall be subject to the provisions of Article 13 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mt. Vernon.
(h) Right to Inspect
Subject to the provisions of any lease authorized by the City Council, the City, by its
authorized representatives, shall have the right to go upon and into the reservoir every part
thereof and the improvements thereon at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of
inspecting the same; also, to gain access to other land, plant and care for trees and other
vegetation; to construct or cause to be constructed and maintain, sewer, water and gas pipes,
electric and telephone lines and pipes, pipes and lines for other services and their appurtenances;
to improve and protect shoreline and to do any other work pertaining to the improvement,
protection, sanitary control and regulation of the reservoir and its environs.
Nothing within this Ordinance shall apply to or be construed to prevent or penalize any act
done or caused to be done by the City in constructing, operating, improving, repairing,
maintaining, patrolling, policing, protecting, or caring for said reservoir, the aquatic life there in,
the shores thereof, the bird and natural life thereon, or any part of the waterworks system of said
City.
The City does not assume, expressly or impliedly, any liability by reason of theft, damage,
or injury to any person, boat, motor, equipment, cottage or other things, and no such liability shall
be imputed to it.
(i) Declaration of Emergency
In the event the City Council shall, by resolution or ordinance, declare the existence of an
emergency necessitating use of water from Jaycee Lake or Lake Miller, immediately upon such
declaration of emergency, all swimming, bathing and wading within the reservoir, if otherwise
permitted as provided herein, shall be prohibited and no person shall operate any boat or craft
upon the reservoir at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour, nor operate any boat or craft
upon the reservoir with an internal combustion engine of more than ten horsepower.
(j) Enforcement
The City may appoint and employ such number of special policemen, deputy sheriffs and
deputy game wardens to act as police officers, who shall be known as ALake Police@ as the City
may determine to be necessary to enforce the provisions of this Section. Each such officer so
appointed shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this Section and any and all
Ordinances, Rules and Regulations of the City for the government, control and protection of the
reservoir and all sanitary regulations and ordinances, any and all Laws, ordinances, regulations
and rulings of any governmental authority, applicable to the reservoir and marginal land, and it
shall be his duty to do so.
Each such officer herein provided for shall have the power and it shall be his duty to
preserve the peace and good order and to protect all property within the reservoir, to arrest any
person found in the act of violating or attempting to violate any Law of this State or Ordinance,
rule or regulation of the City, for the protection and control of the reservoir, or anyone aiding and
abetting such violation or attempted violation.
Each such officer shall have the power and authority within the limits of the reservoir and
marginal land to serve and execute warrants or other legal process for the apprehension and
commitment of persons charged with or held for the commission of any crime or misdemeanor or
the violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the City governing and controlling the
reservoir and marginal land and while serving, or executing or assisting in the service or execution
of any such warrant or legal process he shall be vested with all the common law and statutory
powers of a law enforcement officer for such purposes.
Any such officer herein provided for may at any time call upon any able-bodied person
above the age of eighteen years to aid him in arresting, retaining or holding in custody any person
guilty of having committed any unlawful act or charged therewith or to aid such officer in
preventing the commission of such unlawful act and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such
aid or assistance when so required shall incur a penalty of not less than Five Dollars ($5.00), nor
more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
Whoever shall resist or in any way, hinder or prevent such officer in the discharge of his
duty, or shall endeavor to do so, or whom shall in any manner assist any person in the. custody of
any such officer to escape or attempt to escape from such custody, or who shall attempt to rescue
any person in such custody, shall be fined not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Two
Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
(k) Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Section shall become subject to revocation
and/or suspension of his privilege to use the reservoir where the violation occurs and, in addition,
liable for all damage and expense thereby caused to the City, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by City, by reason of such violation or by reason of enforcing the provisions of the
ordinance. In addition, the penalties provided within Section 22.6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances shall apply to each violation of any provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 16 A
FATS, OILS, GREASES AND OTHER SUBSTANCES
SEWER CONTROL ORDINANCE
Scope and Purpose. The scope and purpose of this Ordinance is to aid in the prevention of
sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulations of fats, oils,
greases and other substances into the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial
establishments or other users, particularly food preparation and serving facilities, as the discharge
of fats, oils, greases and other substances into the sanitary sewer system interfere with the
operations of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with normal
operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or form that is beyond
the treatment capability of the sewer treatment plant.
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Prohibited Discharge. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no user shall discharge
any water or wastewater containing non-emulsified fats, wax, grease or oils, in excess of
one-hundred parts per million by weight (100 mg/L) or containing any substance which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32o and 150o Fahrenheit.
B. Solvents Prohibited. The use of degreasing or line cleaning products containing
petroleum based solvents, or containing any solvent, caustic, or acid which dissolves
grease or containing any enzyme or any chemical or other agent which dissolve grease is
prohibited, regardless of whether same is added directly into the grease trap or grease
interceptor or same is added to floor drains or other kitchen fixtures. All such solvents
are also prohibited for use with any oil and water separator or other separator.
Bacteria or other microbial agents which contain no other prohibited agent may be used
only if such agent does not interfere with the performance of the grease trap or grease
interceptor. The use of such agents is prohibited if there is any sign that the use of the
agent is interfering with the grease trap=s or grease interceptor=s performance. Prima
facie signs of such interference include:
(a) The use of any such agent is accompanied by an emulsification of oil and/or
grease in the grease trap that causes a shift in the consistency of the grease
contents from a stratified layer with a dense greasy crust on top to an almost
uniform pancake batter-like consistency.
(b) The use of any such agent is accompanied by an accumulation of grease or the
appearance of free-floating oil or grease downstream of the grease trap.
(c) The use of any such agent is accompanied by any end-of-pipe grab sample result
for fats, oils and greases above the instantaneous maximum concentration limit of
100 mg/L.
Any user utilizing bacteria or microbial agent shall remain responsible for not exceeding
the established oil and grease numerical limit and responsible for maintaining an effective
volume of the interceptor or separator. Any user utilizing biological additives must
notify the City not less than 30-days prior to such use and must provide the
manufacturer=s Material Safety Data Sheets, and submit a report with product name,
quantity purchased, date purchased, and dosage to be used for such additives. In
addition, during all periods of use, a maintenance record of the use of such agent must be
maintained showing the date and dosage each time an additive is used. The exclusive use
of biological additives is not an acceptable grease management or maintenance practice.
Bacteria or microbial agents shall not be employed as the sole method of treating or
maintaining a grease trap=s or interceptor=s effluent. The use of any bacteria or microbial
agent shall not excuse compliance with each and every other provision of this Ordinance,
including the installation and maintenance of the required grease interceptor or trap and
all provisions relating thereto.
II. FATS, OILS, GREASES AND FOOD WASTES.
A. Definitions. In the interpretation and application of this Section the following words and
phrases shall have the indicated meanings:
1. ACooking Establishments@: Establishments which are primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption
foodstuffs and which use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie
cooking, broiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are
infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that
produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires
washing. Cooking establishments do not include those establishments primarily
engaged in the preparation of pre-cooked foodstuffs that do not include any form
of cooking, nor do cooking establishments include cold dairy and frozen foodstuff
preparation and serving establishments.
2. AEPA 2 Procedure Formula@: (# of seats)X(storage factor-SF)X2 # of hours
open = interceptor volume (gal)
Storage Factor SF
0-8 hours/day 1
8-16 hours/day 2
16-24 hours/day 3
Example: 50 seat restaurant open 24 hours/day B calculation: (50)X(3)X 2
(24)=1,800 gal interceptor
3. AExisting structures@: Any structure constructed prior to July 1, 2005 for which no
structural renovation or addition has been made subsequent to August 1, 2005.
4. AFood waste grinder or disposal@: A device which shreds or grinds up solid or
semi-solid waste materials into smaller portions.
5. AGrease@: Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that
contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are
detectible and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the
United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from
time to time; said definition includes fats, oils and greases.
6. AGrease Interceptor@: An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 55 gallons per
minute and is located outside the building.
7. AGrease Trap@: An interceptor whose rated flow is not less than 20 gallons per
minute nor more than 55 gallons per minute and is typically located inside the
building.
8. AInterceptor@: A device designed and installed to separate and retain for removal,
by automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from
normal wastes while permitting normal sewage or waste to discharge in to the
drainage system by gravity.
9. AMaterial Safety Data Sheet@ is a fact sheet developed by manufacturers for all
products that contain a chemical. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) include
brand-specific information such as physical data (solid, liquid, color, melting
point, flash point, etc.), health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, handling,
disposal, personal protection and spill/leak procedures.
10. AMinimum Design Capacity or Capability@: The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain
greases from grease-laden wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewer.
11. AUser@: Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the
City, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of
wastewater into the sanitary sewer, including persons who contribute such
wastewater from mobile sources such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
For purposes of this Ordinance only, user does not include an owner or occupant
of a single family or multi-family dwelling used solely for residential use unless
said dwelling experiences a grease or similar blockage or problem within its
service line or within an adjoining sewer main more than twice during any
12-month period.
12. AWaste Hauler@: An entity which transfers wastes from the site of a user to an
approved site for disposal or treatment. The waste hauler, in addition to the user,
is responsible for insuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed
regarding waste transport and disposal.
B. Grease Interceptor or Trap Requirements.
1. Upon any new construction or renovation subsequent to July 1, 2005, all sewer
users, including but not limited to all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels,
hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps,
caterers, bakery, butcher shops, and meat or food processors, who discharge fats,
oils or greases shall install, maintain and properly operate a grease interceptor
whose rated flow equals or exceeds 100 gallons or meets the rate of flow required
by EPA 2 Procedure Formula, whichever is greater. If the EPA 2 Procedure
Formula calculation requires a grease interceptor in a size greater than 2,000
gallons then multiple interceptors in a series shall be installed for each 2,000
gallons required or part thereof.
2. All sewer users occupying and utilizing an existing structure, including but not
limited to all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, bakery, butcher
shops, and meat or food processors, who discharge fats, oils or greases shall be
required to install on or before January 1, 2006 a grease interceptor which meets
or exceeds the requirements for new construction and renovation unless said user
at said existing structure either (i) currently meets the requirements stated within
paragraph B1 above or (ii) obtains a variance under paragraph C herein and
thereafter installs a grease trap(s) meeting the following trap requirements and
also strictly complies with ABest Management Practices@ hereinafter set forth
within paragraph D:
a. the minimum size of a grease trap installed on the same floor as the fixture
shall have one-half of the liquid holding capacity of the fixture.
b. A grease trap located on a floor beneath the fixture shall have 60% of the
liquid holding capacity of the fixture. To determine the liquid holding
capacity in gallons of a plumbing fixture, multiply the length by the width,
by the height in inches, and divide by 231.
c. The grease trap must have a flow restrictor which is fully operational and
the grease trap must be fully functional and operating at all times.
d. Where 2 or more sinks or receptacles are connected to a trap the liquid
holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume of the fixture
served.
e. The fact that a grease trap or traps are currently installed at an existing
establishment shall not excuse an establishment from meeting the
requirements of paragraph B1 if no physical barrier or restraint prevents
same.
3. All cooking establishments subject of the provisions of this Ordinance, whether
new construction or renovation or existing structures shall implement and strictly
comply with the ABest Management Practices@ hereinafter set forth.
4. Grease interceptors or traps shall be constructed of durable, corrosion resistant
materials and shall have watertight covers fastened in place.
5. No grease interceptor or trap shall receive the discharge from a food waste grinder
or disposal.
6. No grease interceptor or trap shall receive the discharge from a dishwashing
machine except as hereinafter provided. No dishwasher shall be discharged into
any grease trap nor into any grease interceptor less than 100 gallons in size. In
addition, no dishwasher shall be discharged into any grease interceptor 100
gallons or larger, except as may be provided by the State of Illinois Plumbing
Code, provided, however, that not-withstanding any other language herein
dishwasher may be discharged into any grease interceptor 100 gallons or larger if
said grease interceptor shall be separate and apart from all other grease
interceptors required by this Ordinance and shall serve and receive discharge only
from the dishwasher and no other source. All new construction beginning on the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be required to install and provide a separate
grease interceptor as provided herein for all dishwashers and, in addition, any user
having a dishwasher which experiences a grease or similar blockage or problem
within its service line or within an adjoining sewer main shall be required to
install and provide a separate grease interceptor as provided herein for all
dishwashers.
7. The flow rate of the interceptor or trap shall be sufficient to handle the maximum
demand of the connected system.
8. Each grease interceptor shall be so installed and connected that it shall be at all
times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of the intercepted
grease.
9. Each interceptor or trap shall be designed and installed with proper venting so that
it does not become air bound.
10. An effluent sampling port shall be provided at the exit pipe for each interceptor so
that the interceptor effluent can be sampled prior to combining with other
untreated flows. Said sampling port shall be not less than 8" in diameter.
11. Water-cooled grease interceptors or traps are prohibited.
12. In areas where additional weight loads may exist the grease interceptor shall be
designed to have adequate load bearing capacity.
13. No water or wastewater in excess of 140o Fahrenheit shall be discharged into any
grease trap or interceptor; no discharge effluent shall be greater than 85o
Fahrenheit.
14. No non-grease laden source shall be connected to any interceptor or trap or to any
line intended for grease interceptor service.
C. Variance. Grease interceptors required under this Ordinance shall be installed unless the
City Building Inspector authorizes the installation of a grease trap or other alternative
pre-treatment technology after determination that the installation of a grease interceptor is
not feasible. The user bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease
interceptor in not feasible. The City Building Inspector may authorize the installation of
a grease trap where the installation of a grease interceptor is not possible due to physical
barriers, physical constraints, space constraints or other considerations not within control
of user and not subject to feasible correction or remedy. If an establishment believes the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible because of documented space
constraints, a written request for a grease trap or alternate grease removal device shall
contain the following information:
a. Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space
outside building; and
b. Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at
that site.
Alternate pre-treatment technology includes but is not limited to devices that are used to
trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into
the sanitary sewer collection system.
A user of an existing structure subject to the provisions of this Ordinance which is not a
cooking establishment and which demonstrates that the discharge from its food service
and/or preparation activities contain less than 100 mg/L of grease may receive a variance
from minimum sizing requirements or installation and maintenance requirements. The
sampling and testing to demonstrate the concentration of grease in the discharge must be
conducted annually at times selected by City, all at the user=s expense, by an independent
testing organization and measured in accordance with the analytical test procedures
established in 40 CFR 136 as amended from time to time.
No variance shall be granted to any new construction. Each user granted a variance shall
implement and comply with Best Management Practices to the extent that same are
applicable to user=s activities. Variances are not to be liberally granted and shall be denied
absent strict compliance with variance requirements.
The user seeking the variance shall submit a written request to the City Building
Inspector, which written request shall include sufficient technical data provided by the
manufacturer of the grease trap or alternate pre-treatment technology, including but not
limited to capacity, operation and maintenance so as to permit a thorough review of the
request for variance. Granted variances shall be valid only for the use proposed by the
user and the variance shall be non-transferable. The variance shall be rendered null and
void in the event of the transfer of ownership of the user=s establishment or any change in
the methods of operation by user. Failure to strictly implement and comply with Best
Management Practices shall also render a variance null and void.
D. Best Management Practices. All cooking establishments subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance and any user who utilizes a grease trap or who receives a variance shall
implement and strictly comply with the following management practices:
1. All kitchen staff shall be trained in management practices and methods to reduce
the volume of grease discharged into the sanitary sewer system. No foods, fats,
cooking oil or grease shall be emptied or placed into any sink, drain, floor drain,
dishwasher or other drain. All food wastes, food scraps and food scrapes shall be
disposed of as solid waste in a trash can or dumpster.
2. All cooking oils shall be discarded into containers for recycling and shall be
disposed of by a recycling facility; receipts and records evidencing such disposal
shall be maintained for 3-years by the cooking establishment and made available
to City Inspectors upon request.
3. Oil and grease recycle containers shall be placed in a location convenient for the
employees or agents of user to place the oil into the container.
4. ANo Grease@ signs shall be posted above each sink, on dishwashers, over each
drain, and near all other potential grease discharge points.
5. All foods, fats, cooking oil and grease remaining in pots and pans shall be
dry-wiped and scraped out into the trash container or dumpster.
6. No food waste disposal or grinder shall be utilized. All food scrapes and food
wastes shall be disposed as solid waste in a trash container or dumpster.
E. Grease Interceptor and Trap Cleaning and Maintenance Requirements.
1. A grease interceptor or trap shall be considered to be at its maximum level and
shall not be considered operative if the grease layer and solids (sludge pocket)
combined measures 50% of the depth of the interceptor or trap; a grease
interceptor or trap shall be considered in operating condition only if the combined
measurement of the grease layer and solids is less than 50% of the total interior
depth measurement of the interceptor or trap. In no event shall the grease layer
extend below the bottom of the effluent tee regardless of the depth of the grease
layer.
2. All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be routinely and regularly cleaned
and inspected to insure proper operation. If the grease level is at its maximum,
the grease interceptor or trap shall be immediately cleaned or discharge into same
shall be prohibited. If any grease interceptor or trap is determined to be at its
maximum upon inspection then cleaning frequencies shall be increased. A grease
trap or interceptor is recommended to be cleaned when the grease layer and solids
combined measure 30% of the depth of the grease interceptor or trap.
3. The on-duty manager of user must witness all cleaning of grease traps and
interceptors to insure that the cleaning is performed completely and properly. To
properly clean a grease interceptor the entire contents must be removed, including
grease layer cap (floating grease) and sludge pocket (settled solids); failure to
remove the sludge pocket (settled solids) from the bottom will result in lower
capacity and reduced detention. The manager must also be sure removable
baffles are replaced after cleaning.
4. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned by removing the grease layer, solids layer,
and water; the sides and bottom of the grease interceptor shall be cleaned with a
scraper and all tees, baffles, and the bottom shall be inspected for problems. All
water shall be removed from the grease interceptor and shall be replaced with
clean water and no water which has been skimmed or pumped from the grease
interceptor or from any other grease interceptor shall be reintroduced back into the
grease interceptor. Separator trucks which pump the contents of the grease trap
into the truck, separate the water layer from the fats, oil and grease and then
returns water into the grease trap are prohibited.
5. The grease interceptors during maintenance must be inspected and great care must
be taken to insure that the baffles are in place and properly positioned.
6. The cover of the grease interceptor must fit properly so it does not leak. All
in-ground interceptors should be examined for cracks which could allow
wastewater to leak out or groundwater to leak in.
7. Maintenance and cleaning records shall be kept in strict accordance with Section
F below.
8. Upon any grease interceptor or grease trap being inspected by the City and upon it
being determined that the grease interceptor or trap shall be at its maximum level
the user shall be immediately subject to all remedies provided within Article VII
of this Ordinance.
F. Grease Interceptor and Grease Trap Maintenance, Record Keeping and Grease Removal.
Subject to Section E paragraph 1 and 2 above, all grease interceptors and grease traps
shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as often as required in order
to maintain minimum design capacity and effective volume of grease interceptor,
provided that in all events grease interceptors shall be inspected at least once each week
and grease traps shall be inspected at least once each day. In addition to the above
requirements, a grease trap shall be serviced and emptied within one hour of a written
notice from the City Building Inspector to clean same and a grease interceptor shall be
serviced and emptied within 24-hours of a written notice from the City Building Inspector
to clean same..
A maintenance record in the form (Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance Record
Verification Form) designated within Appendix A to this Ordinance shall be maintained
by the user indicating maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors and traps. The
record shall indicate: each date and time of inspection and/or cleaning; each date and time
of cleaning or maintenance; name of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of
person witnessing cleaning or maintenance; estimated volume of grease removed; method
of grease disposal; verification signed by owner or manager of user. The maintenance
record shall be maintained for a period of 3-years and shall be available for inspection by
the City. In addition, the Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance Record Verification
Form shall be filed with the City Inspection Office on a regular and recurring basis not
less often than quarterly.
In addition, all users shall complete, obtain and maintain signed copies of a Waste Hauler
Manifest in the form designated within Appendix B to this Ordinance for each time that
the grease interceptor is cleaned. The user shall certify that its representative witnessed
the grease interceptor being cleaned or that user inspected the interceptor afterward to
insure that the interceptor was cleaned properly. The Manifest shall be signed by the
user and shall also be required to be signed by a representative of the organization that
receives the grease from the hauler, after the Manifest has been signed by the user, the
hauler and the disposal entity, a copy of the Manifest shall be filed with the City
Inspection and Building Department within 5-days of the interceptor being cleaned.
G. Right of Entry and Inspection. The City Building Inspector or his authorized designees
shall have such right of entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine compliance
with this Ordinance.
III. SAND, SOIL AND OIL
Sand, Soil and Oil Interceptors. All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations,
automobile dealerships, other similar businesses that have any type of automotive or
equipment washing facilities, and other users who are a source of sand, soil and oil shall
install effective sand, soil and oil interceptors. Sand Interceptor shall mean a concrete or
other approved structure installed outside a building designed to collect sand, grit or other
inorganic particles prior to admission to the sanitary sewer. Such interceptors shall be
sized to effectively remove sand, soil and oil at the expected flow rates. These
interceptors shall be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the wastewater
collection and treatment system of the City. Any owner or operator whose interceptor is
deemed to be ineffective shall be required to change the cleaning frequency or to increase
the size of the interceptor. Owners or operators of washing facilities shall have an
affirmative duty to prevent the inflow of rainwater into the sanitary sewers.
In all motor vehicles wash racks drainage shall discharge into watertight catch basin at
least 36" in diameter or 3'X 2 2@ rectangular shape. The bottom shall be not less than
27" below the invert of the outlet pipe. The outlet pipe shall be trapped with a catch
basin trap and shall be of cast iron or schedule 40 PVC with a seal of at least 6" and a
clean out of least 4".
Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an operative sand, soil and
oil interceptor which met all applicable laws and standards at time of installation and
which effectively collects sand, grit, oil, and other inorganic particles so as to prevent
entry of same into the sanitary sewer may, upon request to and approval of the City
Building Inspector, continue to use said existing interceptor until such approval shall be
revoked for cause, including but not limited to inadequate maintenance, failure to
maintain or clean, disrepair, change of standards, discharge of sand, soil or oil into the
sanitary sewer, inadequate capacity, or blockage within the sewer line or main.
A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating maintenance and
cleaning of the sand, soil and oil interceptor. The record shall indicate each date and
time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of cleaning or maintenance; name
of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing cleaning or
maintenance; estimated volume of sand, soil, oil, and other materials removed; method of
disposal of the sand, soil, oil, and other materials removed, and verification signed by the
owner and manager of the user. The maintenance records shall be filed with the City
Inspection Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often than quarterly;
maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and shall be available for
inspection by the City. The City Building Inspection or his authorized designee shall
have such right of entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
IV. GASOLINE, OIL AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
A. Gas and Oil Interceptors. Commercial vehicle repair garages and gasoline stations with
grease racks or pits, storage garages, enclosed parking garages, fire stations, emergency
vehicle garages, and all facilities which generate oil and/or flammable waste shall be
provided with floor drains or trench drains connected to an approved gas and oil
interceptor. Residential garages with floor drains shall have a gas and oil interceptor if
they have four (4) or more vehicle bays or exceed 900 square feet in size.
1. General Requirements.
a. Gas and oil interceptors shall be of cast iron, steel, polyethylene, polymer
concrete or equally durable fiberglass materials suitable for gas and oil
fiberglass interceptors shall not be used for receiving any substance other
than gas and oil. Poured concrete interceptors are prohibited.
b. Each interceptor or basin shall be provided with a heavy metal cover
which shall be bolted into place and made gas and watertight.
c. Each interceptor and, if provided with separate compartments, each
compartment and basin shall be provided with a vent of at least two 2",
which shall extend independently to the outer air. Two or more vents
may be connected to a header which shall be 6" or higher than the lowest
floor drain served.
d. The inlet of the interceptor or the first basin shall be trapped except when
floor drains are individually trapped.
e. Floor drains above the level of the interceptor or basins shall connect to a
separate stack vent.
f. Interceptors must be constructed in accordance with the Illinois State Fire
Marshal=s rules and regulations for underground storage tanks (41 Ill.
Adm. Code 170), where applicable, and shall be maintained to prevent
loss of gas, oil, etc. interceptors utilizing an automatic draw off feature
must install a separate U.L. approved underground storage tank or storage
tank integral with the interceptor.
g. Minimum Dimension. Oil interceptors shall have a depth of at least 2'
below the invert of the discharge drain.
h. Performance. The oil interceptor shall have at least a 12" water seal with
a minimum 90 percent efficiency rating or have a minimum of an 18"
water seal. Gas and oil in the effluent from the interceptor or triple basin
shall not exceed the levels specified by the sewage treatment authority
having jurisdiction, as promulgated by local ordinances and regulations.
i. Trench drains shall be of cast iron, steel, polymer concrete or fiberglass
material comparable to schedule 40 PVC. Poured concrete trench drains
for gas/oil discharges are prohibited.
2. Commercial Requirements. For all commercial facilities specified in this
Section, a minimum of one (1) floor drain for each 500 square feet shall be
installed. Where trench drains are used to carry wastes to the gas/oil interceptor,
the trench drain shall either extend the entire length of the work (stall) area or
shall be installed in each working stall. Continuous trench drains shall have a
trapped and vented opening no less than every 40 lineal feet. Intermittent trench
drains shall be treated as individual floor drains and shall meet the trap and
venting requirements for floor drains. Floor drains for such areas shall be
provided with an interceptor or a series of three (3) basins before discharging into
the building drainage system.
3. Sizing.
a. Motor Vehicle Servicing. Interceptors are required for motor vehicle
servicing areas. The minimum size interceptor shall be six (6) cubic feet
(45 gallons) for the first 100 square feet of garage floor area plus one (1)
cubic foot for each additional 100 square feet to be drained into the
interceptor. (One (1) cubic foot equals seven and one-half (72 gallons.)
b. The minimum size interceptor for all facilities, except those facilities
required to conform to subsection (3)(a) of this Section, shall be six (6)
cubic feet (45 gallons) for the first 500 square feet of floor area plus one
(1) cubic foot per each additional 500 square feet to be drained into the
interceptor.
4. Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an operative
gasoline and oil interceptor which met all applicable laws and standards at time
of installation and which effectively collects gasoline and oil so as to prevent
entry of same into the sanitary sewer may, upon request to and approval of the
City Building Inspector, continue to use said existing interceptor until such
approval shall be revoked for cause, including but not limited to inadequate
maintenance, failure to maintain or clean, disrepair, change of standards,
discharge of gas and oil into the sanitary sewer, inadequate capacity, or blockage
within the sewer line or main.
A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating maintenance and
cleaning of the gas and oil interceptor. The record shall indicate each date and
time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of cleaning or maintenance;
name of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing
cleaning or maintenance; estimated volume of gas and oil and other materials
removed; method of disposal of the gas and oil and other materials removed, and
verification signed by the owner and manager of the user. The maintenance
records shall be filed with the City Inspection Department on a regular and
recurring basis not less often than quarterly; maintenance records shall be
maintained for a 3-year period and shall be available for inspection by the City.
The City Building Inspection or his authorized designee shall have such right of
entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine compliance with
this ordinance.
V. LAUNDRIES
Interceptors. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor having a
removable wire basket or similar device that will prevent passage into the sewage system
of solids 2 inch or larger in size such as string, rags, coins, buttons or other solids
detrimental to the system, hereinafter called Aprohibited solids.@
Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an operative prohibited
solids interceptor which met all applicable laws and standards at time of installation and
which effectively collects prohibited solids so as to prevent entry of same into the sanitary
sewer may, upon request to and approval of the City Building Inspector, continue to use
said existing interceptor until such approval shall be revoked for cause, including but not
limited to inadequate maintenance, failure to maintain or clean, disrepair, change of
standards, discharge of prohibited solids into the sanitary sewer, inadequate capacity, or
blockage within the sewer line or main.
A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating maintenance and
cleaning of the prohibited solids interceptor. The record shall indicate each date and
time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of cleaning or maintenance; name
of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing cleaning or
maintenance; estimated volume of prohibited solids and other materials removed; method
of disposal of the prohibited solids and other materials removed, and verification signed
by the owner and manager of the user. The maintenance records shall be filed with the
City Inspection Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often than quarterly;
maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and shall be available for
inspection by the City. The City Building Inspection or his authorized designee shall
have such right of entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
VI. BOTTLE ESTABLISHMENTS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND OTHER
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Bottling Establishments. Bottling plants shall discharge processed wastes into an
interceptor that will provide for the separation of broken glass or other solids before
discharging wastes into the sewer system.
B. Slaughterhouses. Slaughtering room and dressing room drains shall be equipped with
interceptors that meet or exceed the requirements set forth within the provisions of this
Ordinance relating to fats, oils, greases, and food wastes. In addition, slaughtering room
and dressing room drains shall be equipped with interceptors or separators which shall
prevent the discharge into the sewer system of feathers, trimmings, entrails and other
materials that cause clogging.
C. Sand Interceptors in Commercial Establishment. Any commercial establishment which
discharges or may discharge heavy solids into the sanitary sewer not otherwise regulated
by a provision of this Ordinance or other more restrictive local, State or federal law or
rule shall install sand or similar interceptor that will prevent the discharge of heavy solids
into the sewer system. Sand and similar interceptors for heavy solids shall be designed
and located so as to be prevent discharge of heavy solids into the sanitary sewer and at a
minimum shall meet the requirements of Section III herein.
D. General Requirements. Interceptors and separators shall be designed so as to not to
become air bound where tight covers are utilized. Each interceptors and separator shall
be vented where subject to a loss of trap seal. Access shall be provided to each
interceptor and separator for service and maintenance. Interceptors and separators shall
be maintained by periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil or other floating
substances and solids deposited in the interceptor or separator.
E. Maintenance. A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating
maintenance and cleaning of the interceptor. The record shall indicate each date and
time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of cleaning or maintenance; name
of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing cleaning or
maintenance; estimated volume of materials removed; method of disposal of the materials
removed, and verification signed by the owner and manager of the user. The
maintenance records shall be filed with the City Inspection Department on a regular and
recurring basis not less often than quarterly; maintenance records shall be maintained for
a 3-year period and shall be available for inspection by the City. The City Building
Inspection or his authorized designee shall have such right of entry and inspection as may
be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
testing to determine compliance with this ordinance.
VII. ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
A. Suspension of Services. The City may suspend water and/or sewer service when such
suspension is necessary in the opinion of the City Manager, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which may (i) present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons or the environment; (ii)cause stoppages or excessive
maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer collection
system; (iii) cause interference to the City=s sewer treatment facility; (iv) cause the City to
violate any condition of its NPDES permit or (v) when necessary to prevent the repeated
violation of this Ordinance by a user, a repeated violation being defined as two violations
of any provision of this Ordinance as determined by the Building Inspector during any
12-month period.
If reasonably possible after consideration of the circumstances a user shall be notified of
the City=s intent to suspend water and sewer service prior to such suspension. Any
person notified of a suspension of water and sewer service shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary including
immediately termination of water or sewer service to the user. The City shall reinstate
the water or sewer service only when such conditions causing the suspension have passed
or have been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the City Inspector within 15-days of the date of the
occurrence.
B. Notice of Violation. Except where the provisions of this Ordinance relating to
suspension of services is applicable, the City shall serve upon any user alleged to be in
violation of this Ordinance a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
5-days of the date of notice the user shall correct the violation or if the violation cannot
reasonably be corrected within said 5-day period then within said 5-day period the user
shall submit a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation to the City Inspection
Department. Multiple notices of the same violation shall be considered repeat violations
which may result in suspension of services.
C. Administrative Penalty. Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to
the City, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this Ordinance or any
notice issued hereunder may be assessed an administrative penalty not to exceed $50.00
per violation. Each day on which non-compliance shall occur or shall continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessment shall be added to the user=s
next scheduled sewer service charge and shall be subject to collection in the same manner
as all other charges for sewer service. The administrative penalty described herein shall
be imposed by the City Manager upon the written recommendation of the Chief Building
Inspector of the City. Notice of the imposition of the administrative penalty shall be
given to the user immediately upon said administrative penalty being imposed.
D. Recovery of Costs. If the City is required to clean out or replace the public sewer line or
repair or replace any pump or other equipment of the public sewer as a result of stoppage
resulting from poorly maintained or operating grease interceptor or grease trap or lack
thereof or because of any violation of this Ordinance the user shall be required to refund
to City the labor, equipment, materials and overhead costs incurred by the City. Said
costs shall be added to the user=s next scheduled sewer service charge and shall be subject
to collection in the same manner as all other charges for sewer service. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict any other remedy the City has under this
Ordinance or State or federal law.
E. Fines. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a
violation of a provision of this Ordinance occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
In addition to the imposition of a fine, any violator of any provision of this Ordinance
shall be subject to issuance of an injunction to restrain violations of the Ordinance.
APPENDIX A
GREAS E INT ERCE P TOR/ TRAP MAINT ENANCE
RECORD VERI F ICAT ION FORM
U s e r N ame :
Address:
DATE CLEANED/
INSPECTED BY
WITNESSED BY GALLONS
PUMPED/
REMOVED
GREASE
DISPOSAL
SITE/HAULER
USER
VERIFICATION
SIGNATURE
TIME
APPENDIX B
WASTE HAULER MANIFEST FORM
The purpose of this form is to track the grease that is removed from a user’s establishment.
It is a standard form that helps all FSF's record the volume of grease that is being pumped
and removed from their facility. It also helps to ensure that the grease is disposed to a
proper location.
INSTRUCTIONS TO USER REPRESENTATIVE: An authorized representative for the User
shall fill out all information requested in the top box of the form. The business address shall be
the physical address and not a post office box. The User representative shall sign and date the
form when the waste is removed certifying that the waste being removed contains no hazardous
material.**
INSTRUCTIONS TO WASTE HAULER: The driver of the service vehicle is considered
an authorized representative for the waste hauler. The driver shall fill in requested
information regarding the waste hauler in the second box of the manifest and shall complete
the certification regarding the nature of the waste removed. The address shall be the mailing
address of the waste hauler. The driver shall maintain possession of the manifest until the
waste is discharged at a qualified disposal site. The waste hauler shall then give the form to
the disposal site representative to complete.
INSTRUCTIONS TO DISPOSER: An authorized representative for the disposal facility shall
fill in requested information in the bottom box of the manifest. The address shall be the mailing
address of the disposal facility. The waste disposal site shall be the physical location of the
disposal facility. Some examples of the waste disposal methods are landfill burial and wastewater
treatment plant. The waste disposal method shall not be detailed. The disposing facility
representative shall complete the certification and return the original manifest to the User listed in
the first box of the form.
**THE FOOD SERVICE FACILITY SHALL KEEP A COPY OF THIS MANIFEST
AFTER THE WASTE HAULER HAS ACCEPTED THE WASTE. THE USER SHALL
ALSO PROVIDE A SELF-ADDRESSED, STAMPED ENVELOPE WITH THE
ORIGINAL FORM TO ENSURE ITS RETURN AFTER THE WASTE HAS BEEN
DELIVERED TO THE DISPOSAL SITE. IT IS THE USER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO
TRACK THE MANIFEST AND TO MAINTAIN A COPY OF EACH COMPLETED
MANIFEST AT THE USER’S ESTABLISHMENT.
CITY OF MT. VERNON, ILLINOIS
WASTE HAULER MANIFEST
EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER (618)
GENERATOR INFORMATION
Business Name: _____________________________________________________________________
Address: ____________________________________ City: __________________ State: ___ Zip: _____
Phone: ________________________________ Customer Billing: _______________________________
Waste tank or Trap Capacity:__________________ gallons Pump Freq: _________________________
Waste From:  Grease Trap  Grip Trap  Other _____________________
I CERTIFY THAT, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE, THE WASTE MATERIAL REMOVED
FROM THE ABOVE PREMISES CONTAINS NO HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. I ALSO CERTIFY THAT
A REPRESENTATIVE OF THIS BUSINESS WITNESSED THE PUMPING OR INSPECTED THE TRAP
AFTERWARDS.
(Print Name)
(Date) (Time In) (Signature)
WASTE HAULER INFORMATION
Business Name: __________________________________________________________________________
Address: ___________________________________ City: ___________________ State: _____ Zip: ______
Phone: _____________________________________ Truck License Number: _________________________
Gallons Received: Vehicle Permit Number:
I CERTIFY THAT THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ABOVE IS CORRECT AND THAT ONLY THE
TYPE WASTE SPECIFIED IS CONTAINED IN THE SERVICING VEHICLE.
(Driver’s License No.) (Driver Name - Print)
(Date) (Time Out) (Signature)
DISPOSAL INFORMATION
Business Name: ___________________________________________________________________
Address: __________________________________ City: __________________ State: ______ Zip: _____
Phone: Gallons Received:
I CERTIFY THAT I HAVE DISPOSED OF THE WASTE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ALL CITY, STATE
AND FEDERAL LAWS.
(Date and Time Received) (Print Name)
(Signature)
ARTICLE 16B
MOUNT VERNON PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE
(Reference Ordinances: 85-48, 95-14, 96-12, and 2017- 50)
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Purpose and Policy
1.2 Administration
1.3 Abbreviations
1.4 Definitions
SECTION 2 - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Prohibited Discharge Standards
2.2 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
2.3 State Pretreatment Standards
2.4 Local Limits
2.5 City's Right of Revision
2.6 Dilution
SECTION 3 - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
3 1 Pretreatment Facilities
3.2 Additional Pretreatment Measures
3.3 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans
3.4 Hauled Wastewater
SECTION 4 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
4.1 Wastewater Analysis
4.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
4.3 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
4.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
4.5 Application Signatories and Certification
4.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
SECTION 5 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
5.1 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
5.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
5.3 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
5.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
5.5 Limitations on Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
5.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
5.7 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
5.8 Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
SECTION 6 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports
6.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
6.3 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
6.4 Periodic Compliance Reports
6.5 Reports of Changed Conditions
6.6 Reports of Potential Problems
6.7 Reports from Unpermitted Users
6.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
6.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
6.10 Analytical Requirements
6.11 Sample Collection
6.12 Timing
6.13 Record Keeping
SECTION 7 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING
7.1 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
7.2 Search Warrants
SECTION 8 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
SECTION 9 - PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
SECTION 10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
10.1 Notification of Violation
10.2 Consent Orders
10,3 Show Cause Hearing
10.4 Compliance Orders
10.5 Cease and Desist Orders
10.6 Emergency Suspension
10.7 Termination of Discharge
10.8 Revocation or Suspension of Wastewater Discharge Permits
SECTION 11 - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
11.1 Injunctive Relief
11.2 Civil Penalties
11.3 Criminal Prosecution
11.4 Remedies Nonexclusive
SECTION 12 - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
12.1 Performance Bonds
12.2 Liability Insurance
12.3 Water Supply Severance
12.4 Public Nuisances
SECTION 13 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
13.1 Upset
13.2 Bypass
SECTION 14 - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
SECTION 15 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
15.1 Pretreatment Charges and Fees
15.2 Severability
SECTION 16 - EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 17 – FALSIFICATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Purpose and Policy
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works for the City of Mt. Vernon and enables Mt. Vernon to comply with all applicable State and
Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code ' 1251 et seq.) and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of
this ordinance are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works that will interfere with its operation;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works;
C. To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may be affected
by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
D. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
E. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works; and
F. To enable Mt. Vernon to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other
Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works. The
ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the program established herein. This ordinance replaces City Ordinance 85-48 and all
amendments thereto. All existing permits and connections are hereby adopted by reference, and at
least three copies of such regulations are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part
of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
1.2 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City
Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to other authorized personnel.
1.3 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
gpd - gallons per day
IEPA - Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
mg/l - milligrams per liter
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
TSS - Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. - United States Code
USEPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1.4 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
A. AA@AAs in ACyanide-A@ means amenable to alkaline chlorination.
B. Act or Athe Act.@ The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. ' 1251 et seq.
C. Approval Authority. The Regional Administrator of the U.S. EPA, Region 5, until such
time as the State of Illinois' request for program authorization is approved, whereupon, the
State of Illinois shall be the approval authority.
D. Authorized Representative of the User.
(1) If the User is a corporation:
(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million
dollars (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner of proprietor,
respectively.
(3) If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the
activities of the government facility, or their designee.
(4) The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted
to Mt. Vernon.
E. Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 201
Centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
F. Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. ' 1317) which apply to aspecific category of users and which appear
in 40 CFR Chapter I. Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
G. City. The City of Mt. Vernon.
H. City Manager. The chief administrator of the POTW.
I. Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly
authorized official of said agency. The IEPA is the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
J. Existing Source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which
commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated
in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
K. Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in
the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
L. Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
M. Industrial User. A source of Indirect Discharge, including but not limited to, a
manufacturing, commercial or process facility, or other facility engaged in the purchase or
sale of goods, transaction of business or who otherwise renders services to the public.
(Industrial User includes, but is not limited to, Significant Industrial User as hereinafter
defined.)
N. Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
O. Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of Mt.
Vernon's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act;
the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
P. Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
Q. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit). A permit
issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System for discharge of
wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to the Act.
R. New Source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication
of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be
applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no
other source is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
or
(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such
as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b) or
(c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction
program
(i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
or
(ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
S. Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
T. Pass Through. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated adequately by the POTW
and therefore exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Mt. Vernon's NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
U. Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal
entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State, and local governmental entities.
V. pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
W. Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater
(e.g. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
X. Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or
the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of,
introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except
by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
Y. Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Z. Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
AA. Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against
the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 2.1 of this
ordinance.
BB. Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A Atreatment works,@ as defined by Section
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. '1292) which is owned by Mt. Vernon. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
CC. Sanitary Sewer. A sewer which is designed to carry sanitary and industrial wastewater, and
to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
DD. Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
EE. Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations,
etc.).
FF. Shall is mandatory. May is permissive.
GG. Significant Industrial User.
(l) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(a) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(b) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(c) Is designated as such by Mt. Vernon on the basis that it has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTWs operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, Mt. Vernon may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.
HH. Slug Load or Slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 2.1 of this ordinance.
II. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and
Budget.
JJ. Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation,
and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt.
KK. Superintendent. The person designated by Mt. Vernon to supervise the operation of the
POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a
duly authorized representative.
LL. Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended
in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
MM. AT@. As is ACyanide-T@ means total.
NN. Total Solids. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
OO. Total Suspended Solids (TSS).Total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter,
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater and other
liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136.
PP. Total Toxic Organics. The summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligrams
per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable regulations.
QQ. Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
non-compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include non-compliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operations.
RR: User or Industrial User. A source of indirect discharge.
SS. Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
TT. Wastewater Discharge Permit. The document or documents allowing discharge to the
POTW issued to a user by the POTW in accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
UU. Wastewater Hauler. Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in transporting
sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture.
VV. Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant. That portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WW. Waters of the State of Illinois. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all
other bodies or accumulations or water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois or
any portion thereof.
SECTION 2 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Prohibited Discharge Standards
A. General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW (Publicly Owned Treatment Works) any pollutant or wastewater which
causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of
the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(l) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or to cause to be
deposited or discharged, to any POTW Treatment Facility, any solid, liquid
or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved by the POTW.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater, without an NPDES permit, to
any natural outlet within the POTW or in any area under its jurisdiction.
B. Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(l) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including,
but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than
1401F (601C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or more than ten (10.0), or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the
flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch ( 2@ ) or two and fifty-four hundredths centimeters (2.54
cm) in any dimension, including, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half inch (2@) in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
waste paper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes, or tumbling and de-burring stones;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in
a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference to the
POTW or will pass through the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 1401F (601C), or which will
inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference but
in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into
the treatment plant to exceed 104oF (40oC);
(6) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil
origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes
within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
City Manager in accordance with Section 3.4 of this ordinance;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating Mt. Vernon's NPDES permit;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
(12) Storm water, foundation drain water, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, swimming
pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, noncontact
cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by
the City Manager;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial
wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City Manager in a
wastewater discharge permit;
(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW;
(17) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater
than one hundred (100) mgl;
(18) Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point
of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower
Explosive Limit of the meter. Materials for which discharge is prohibited
under this subsection include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorides, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls,
polybrominated biphenyls, carbides, hydrides, stoddard solvents, and
sulfides;
(19) Any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, cause a violation of the water quality standards or the receiving
waters of the POTW, exceed the limitation set forth in a National
Categorical Pretreatment standard (when effective) or in Section 2.4 or
create a public nuisance;
(20) In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria guidelines
or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Water Act, the Toxic Substances Control act, or
state regulations Subtitle C Part 391 applicable to the sludge management
method being used;
(21) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or
the receiving water quality standards;
(22) Any wastewater containing BOD, total solids, or suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expenses is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; provided however, that
a user may be permitted by specific written agreement with the POTW,
which agreement to discharge such BOD or TSS may provide for special
charges, payments or provisions for treating and testing equipment;
(23) Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the water
quality standards of the receiving waters of the POTW;
(24) Any discharge exceeding the standards established in 35 Illinois
Administration Code 307; or
(25) Any slug discharged to the POTW.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
2.2 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471 are hereby adopted by reference, and at least three copies of such regulations are on file
in the office of the City Clerk.
A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the
mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the City Manager may
impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(c).
B. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City Manager shall impose an
alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
C. A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user
can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13,
that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
D. A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.15.
2.3 State Pretreatment Standards
State pretreatment standards located at Title 35, Subtitle C, Chapter I, Section 307.1102 35
Illinois Administration Code 307 are hereby adopted by reference, and at least three copies of
such regulations are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
2.4 Local Limits
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
0.25 mg/1 arsenic
2.0 mg/1 barium
0.15 mg/1 cadmium
1.5 mg/1 chromium (total)
0.5 mg/1 chromium (hexavalent)
1.00 mg/1 chromium (trivalent)
500 mg/1 chloride
4.0 mg/1 copper
0.2 mg/1 cyanide
15.0 mg/1 fluoride
12.00 mg/1 iron (total)
3.0 mg/1 iron (dissolved)
0.1 mg/1 lead
1.0 mg/1 manganese
0.0005 mg/1 mercury
2.0 mg/1 nickel
100.00 mg/1 oil and grease (hexane soluble or equivalent)
6.0 Standard Units pH (permissible range, no averaging)
0.6 mg/1 phenols
1.0 mg/1 selenium
0.2 mg/1 silver
8.0 mg/1 zinc
BOD 300mg/l bio chemical oxygens demand (BOD)
250mg/l total suspended solids (tss)
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW.
All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The
City Manager may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration-based limitations above.
Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under the provisions of
this ordinance, shall not contain in excess of the following concentrations based upon techniques
described in 40 CFR part 136 (Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants). Multiple industrial wastewater discharges from a permitted facility may be
combined in a flow weighted manner to determine compliance with the following limitations
for a 24-hour composite sample.
2.5 City's Right of Revision
Mt. Vernon reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
2.6 Dilution
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The City Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases
when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
SECTION 3 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
3.1 Pretreatment Facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and
shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in Section 2.1 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA,
the State, or the City Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City Manager for
review, and shall be approved by the City Manager before such facilities are constructed. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to Mt.
Vernon under the provisions of this ordinance.
All industrial users shall obtain all necessary construction operating permits from the
IEPA. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA certified
wastewater treatment operator. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities
or method of operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the POTW prior to the industrial
user's initiation of the changes.
3.2 Additional Pretreatment Measures
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the City Manager may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
B. The City Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit
may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not
be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the City Manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to
install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
3.3 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans
At least once every two (2) years, the City Manager shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The City Manager may require any
user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the City Manager
may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the City Manager of any accidental or slug
discharge, as require d by Section 6.6 of this ordinance; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling
and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
Each industrial user having the ability to cause pass through or interference with the
POTW Treatment Facility or to violate the regulatory provisions of this ordinance shall provide
protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this ordinance. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense.
All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include compatible or
incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to cause pass through or interference with the
POTW must have detailed plans on file at the POTW showing facilities and operating procedures
to provide protection from accidental discharge. All industrial users shall complete construction of
said facilities by 180 days from the effective date of this ordinance. No industrial user who begins
contributing to or could contribute such pollutants to the POTW after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be permitted to introduce such pollutants into the POTW until accidental
discharge facilities and procedures, as appropriate, have been approved by the POTW and
installed by the industrial user. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
3.4 Hauled Wastewater
A. Septic waste shall not be introduced into the POTW by any septic tank waste
hauler.
B. Industrial waste shall not be introduced into the POTW by any industrial waste
hauler.
SECTION 4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
4.1 Wastewater Analysis
When requested by the City Manager, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within ninety (90) days of the request. The City Manager is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
4.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without
first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City Manager, except that a
significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 4.3
of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The City Manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be
deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge
permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 10 through 12 of this ordinance.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.
4.3 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in
accordance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance, must be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
4.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The City Manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the
following information:
A. All information required by Section 6.1 (B) of this ordinance;
B. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a
list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
C. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours
of operation including monthly and seasonal variations;
D. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of
production;
E. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
F. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all
sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all
points of discharge showing all pipe sizes, manholes and location of sanitary and
storm sewer leaving the building or premises, together with all connections to
lateral sanitary and storm sewers;
G. Time and duration of discharges;
H. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of
the Budget, 1972, as amended;
I. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set
forth in Section 2 of this ordinance as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR
Part 136;
J. Proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system and the name of the
IEPA certified pretreatment operator;
K. Significant Industrial User's source of intake water together with the types of usage
and disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes in each category; and
L. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for
revision.
4.5 Application Signatories and Certification
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
AI certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information
submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.@
4.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
The City Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit
application, the City Manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. The City Manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
SECTION 5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
5.1 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the City Manager. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
5.2 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the City Manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this ordinance
and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in
no event shall exceed more than five (5) years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without
prior notification to Mt. Vernon in accordance with Section 5.5 of this
ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits on daily maximum and average pollutant concentrations
from the applicable pretreatment standards (including Federal, State and
Local limits whichever is more stringent);
(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond
that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge,
and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution
control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of
the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
(8) Requirements to retain for a minimum of three years any records of
monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and for
affording the POTW access to said records;
(9) Requirements for advance notification to the POTW of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system pursuant to the terms of Section 6.5 of this
ordinance;
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as defined in this
ordinance;
(11) Requirements for reporting pretreatment sludge disposal practices;
(12) Requirements that permittee allow the POTW or its representatives ready
access upon presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts of its
premises in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in
which records required by this ordinance are kept for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of said records and for
the performance of any of their duties; and
(13) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Manager to ensure
compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
5.3 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued by the POTW to any person or industrial
user whose discharge of material to sewers, whether shown upon his application or determined
after inspection and testing conducted by the POTW, is not in conformity with POTW ordinances
and regulations or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of
Section 4. The POTW shall state the reason or reasons for denial in writing, which shall be mailed
or personally delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days after denial. If the application is
denied by the POTW, the applicant may obtain review of the denial by the City Council, provided
that the applicant shall give written notice of this request within thirty (30) days after receipt of
such denial. The City Council shall review the permit application, the written denial and such
other evidence and matters as the applicant and POTW City Manager shall present. The decision
of the City Council shall be final.
The City Manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition,
if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending
the appeal.
D. If the City Manager fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge
permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of
judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater
discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court
of Jefferson County.
5.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
The Significant Industrial User shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Where any changes are made in the Significant
Industrial User's permit, a reasonable time shall be given to achieve compliance.
The City Manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or
wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit
issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to Mt. Vernon's
POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater
discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or
operator. 5.5 Limitations on Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific Significant Industrial User for the
process activity specified in the permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner or new user in different premises or to a new or changed
operation in the same or different premises without the approval of the POTW. If the premises are
sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will maintain the operation in
the same premises, then the permit held by the seller shall be reissued by the POTW to the new
owner as a temporary permit; provided that the new owner shall immediately apply for a new
permit in accordance with this ordinance and further provided that the temporary permit shall only
be effective for ninety (90) days after the date of sale or transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the City Manager and the City Manager
approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City Manager must include a
written certification by the new owner or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
D. The POTW shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary permits as it
has for violation of other discharge permits.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit
void as of the date of facility transfer.
5.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
The City Manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the City Manager or the designated representative of the City of
significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the City Manager of changed conditions
pursuant to Section 6.5 of this ordinance;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater
discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the City Manager timely access to the facility premises and
records;
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit
application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a
permitted facility; or
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the
wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of
business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
5.7 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 4.4 of
this ordinance, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
5.8 Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
This ordinance shall apply to the POTW and to persons outside the POTW who are, by
wastewater discharge permit, contract, or agreement with the POTW, users of the POTW.
SECTION 6 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports
Industrial users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment standards shall submit
Baseline Reports to the POTW in a form prescribed and furnished by the POTW.
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical
users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit
to the City Manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B,
below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City Manager a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the
name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by
or for the facility.
(3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes. Site plans showing all pipe sizes, manholes and
location of sanitary and storm sewers leaving the building or premises,
together with all connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers.
(4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). Significant
Industrial User's source of intake water together with the types of usage and
disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes in each category.
(5) Measurement of Pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
City Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 6.10 of
this ordinance.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section 6.11 of this ordinance.
(d) Sample based on the flow of the sampled stream, as follows:
(composite samples are required where feasible)
(i) where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal
to 950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd), the industrial
user shall take a minimum of three samples within a two-week
period.
(ii) Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than
950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd) the industrial
user shall take a minimum of six samples within a two-week
period.
(e) Take the samples immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream form the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are
mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order
to evaluate compliance with the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, the industrial user shall measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula of 40 CFR Section 403.6(e). Where an alternate
concentration has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall
be submitted to the POTW.
(f) Submit, only with POTW authorization, a Baseline Report which
utilizes only historical data, so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures.
(g) Provide, for each report the time, date, and place, of sampling and
methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative
and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(7) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
Section 6.2 of this ordinance.
(8) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(9) Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the POTW.
6.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 6.1
(B) (7) of this ordinance:
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the City Manager no later than fourteen
(14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the
user to return to the established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports
to the City Manager.
6.3 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the City Manager a report containing the information described in
Section 6.1(B) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits;
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production
during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
6.4 Periodic Compliance Reports
A. All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the City
Manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean,
and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim
that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the City Manager, using the procedures
prescribed in Section 6.11 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
D. Monitoring shall be as follows:
(1) Significant Industrial Users shall provide and operate at the Significant
Industrial User's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the user's
premises but he POTW may, when such a location would be impractical
and cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be constructed in
the public street or sidewalk area land located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user.
(2) Where required by the POTW, additional control manholes or sampling
chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an
industrial user's facility suitable for the determination of compliance with
Pretreatment Standards.
(3) Whenever required by a wastewater discharge permit, any Significant
Industrial User shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber for each
separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the POTW, installed and maintained at all times
at the user's expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling
chamber to permit the POTW to take accurate composite samples for
analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently accessible
to authorized representatives of the POTW at any time.
a) Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus flume
unless a weir or similar device is approved by the POTW with a
recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid
quantity; or at the discretion of the POTW the metered water supply
to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is
substantiated to the POTW that the metered water supply and waste
quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable
adjustment agreed to by the POTW is made in the metered water
supply to determine the liquid waste quantity.
b) When required, samples shall be taken every hour or half hour, as
determined by the POTW and properly refrigerated and preserved in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and shall be composited in
proportion to the flow for a representative 24 hour sample. Such
sampling shall be done as prescribed by the user's wastewater
discharge permit.
c) The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the
frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses of samples
shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection and
verification by the POTW.
(4) Whenever required by a wastewater discharge permit, the permittee shall
pay the costs of sampling of its discharge and the costs of analyses of its
samples, whether or not the sampling and analyses are done by the
permittee or by the POTW.
(5) All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in this
ordinance shall be determined and performed in accordance with the
procedures established by the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (hereafter AAdministrator@) pursuant to
section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the Administrator. Where 40 CRF Past 136 does
not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question,
or where the Administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical
methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the
Administrator.
6.5 Reports of Changed Conditions
Each user must notify the City Manager of any planned significant changes to the user's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least
thirty (30) days before the change.
A. The City Manager may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a
wastewater discharge permit application under Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
B. The City Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 4.6 of
this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 5.4
of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited
to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
D. No permittee shall materially and substantially change the type, quality or volume
of its wastewater beyond that allowed by its permit without prior approval of the
POTW.
6.6 Reports of Potential Problems
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges,
discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a
slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. This notification shall
include the name of caller, the location and time of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
B. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the
City Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance. Failure to report accidental or
deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the
POTW, result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
C. A notice in English or the language of common use, shall be permanently posted
on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph A, above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
D. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method
of treatment is provided. This requirement includes the situation where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
6.7 Reports from Unpermitted Users
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the City Manager as the City Manager may require.
6.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the City
Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City Manager
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample
if the City Manager monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the City Manager
samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling.
6.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one
hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after
the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under Section 6.5 of this ordinance. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of Sections 6.1, 6.3, and 6.4 of this ordinance.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a
calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40
CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of
non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as
a hazardous waste, the user must notify the City Manager, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it
has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise
permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued thereunder, or any
applicable Federal or State law.
6.10 Analytical Requirements
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by EPA.
6.11 Sample Collection
A. Except as indicated in Section B, below, the user must collect wastewater samples
using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow
proportional sampling is infeasible, the City Manager may authorize the use of
time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and
volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
6.12 Timing
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports
which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
6.13 Record Keeping
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any
monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the
name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These
records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or Mt. Vernon, or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City Manager.
SECTION 7 COMPLIANCE MONITORING
7.1 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
The City Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City Manager ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the City Manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. The City Manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering
of the user's operations.
C. The City Manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at
all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense.
All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated as per
manufacturer's recommendation to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to
be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written
or verbal request of the City Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be born by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Manager access to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this ordinance.
7.2 Search Warrants
If the City Manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any
part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program of Mt. Vernon designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the City Manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court
of Jefferson County.
SECTION 8 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge
permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the City
Manager's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City
Manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other Aeffluent data@ as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
The POTW shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of confidential
information; however, neither the POTW nor its employees shall be held legally responsible for
release of information if they have acted in good faith.
SECTION 9 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
The City Manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the
municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which
sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6)
month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which
thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of
the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
C. Any other discharge violation that the City Manager believes has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public
or to the environment, or has resulted in the City Manager's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports,
including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s) which the City Manager determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
SECTION 10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
10.1 Notification of Violation
When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may serve upon that user a written Notice
of Violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the user to the City Manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City Manager to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
10.2 Consent Orders
The City Manager may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance.
Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 10.4 and 10.5 of this ordinance and
shall be judicially enforceable.
10.3 Show Cause Hearing
The City Manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City Manager and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action,
and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
The POTW may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge to the POTW which
presents or may present a danger to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, immediately issue an order to the responsible industrial user to show
cause before the City Council why the POTW should not disconnect service, revoke or suspend
the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or seek injunctive relief to prohibit the industrial
user from making the discharge to the POTW. Procedures to be followed by the City Council in
said show cause hearing shall be in accordance with Section 10.8 of this ordinance. After said
hearing, the POTW may disconnect service, revoke or suspend the wastewater discharge permit or
seek injunctive relief to prohibit the industrial user from making the discharge to the POTW.
10.4 Compliance Orders
When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user
does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount
of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order
relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
10.5 Cease and Desist Orders
When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City
Manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
10.6 Emergency Suspensions
A. Conditions for Immediate Disconnection of Service
Any industrial user is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either of the
following conditions:
(1) Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any
discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the City
Manager to present an imminent endangerment to the environment, the
POTW, health or welfare of persons; or
(2) Whenever the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit is revoked.
B. Procedures for Immediate Disconnection
(1) Notwithstanding Sections 10.1 through 10.8 of this ordinance, the City
Manager shall have the authority, after informal notice to the industrial
user, to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of
pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to present an imminent
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When the City Manager
determines that such an emergency situation exists, he shall issue a verbal
order (followed immediately by a written order) to the industrial user
stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. The
City Manager's action may include disconnection of wastewater collection
service. The City Manager shall obtain the concurrence of the POTW
attorney before initiating action. Methods of informal notice shall include,
but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between
the industrial user and POTW employees, telephone calls, letters, hand
delivered messages or notices posted at the industrial user's premises or
point of discharge.
C. Procedures for Elimination of Discharge and Reinstatement
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or
eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Manager may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate blockage or severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The City Manager may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
City Manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Section 10.7 of this ordinance are initiated against the user.
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the City Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination
hearing under Sections 10.3 or 10.7 of this ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this section.
10.7 Termination of Discharge
In addition to the provisions in Section 5.6 of this ordinance, any user who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume,
constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under Section 10.3 of this ordinance why the proposed action should
not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
10.8 Revocation or Suspension of Wastewater Discharge Permits
A. Conditions for Revocation or Suspension
Any Significant Industrial User who violates this ordinance, an Order issued pursuant to
Section 10 of this ordinance, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, or the Federal Act, or
regulations promulgated under either act, or does any of the following, is subject to having its
wastewater discharge permit revoked or suspended.
(1) Fails to fully and accurately report the wastewater constituent's and
characteristics of its wastewater discharge as determined by the industrial
user's or POTW's analysis;
(2) Fails to fully and accurately report significant changes in process activity
which could affect its wastewater discharge or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3) Refuses reasonable access to the industrial user's premises by POTW
representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(4) Tampers with, disrupts, or destroys POTW equipment;
(5) Fails to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant;
(6) Fails to report an Upset of the industrial user's treatment facilities; or
(7) Violates any condition of the wastewater discharge permit.
(8) Tampers with any portion of the city sanitary sewer.
B. Procedures for Revocation or Suspension
(1) The POTW may order any industrial user who causes or allows any action
which is subject to revocation or suspension under Section 10.8 A above to
show cause before the City Council why its wastewater discharge permit
should not be revoked or suspended. A notice shall be served on the
industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
City Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed action, and directing the industrial user to show cause
before the City Council why its wastewater discharge permit should not be
revoked or suspended. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10)
days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
(2) The City Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or
may designate any of its members or its attorney to:
(a) Issue in the name of the City Council notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
(b) Take the evidence;
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City
Council for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this ordinance, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically or by tape recording. The
transcript of said hearing will be made available to any member of the
public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual copying
charges therefore.
(4) After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to
the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing either: a) that the
wastewater discharge permit be revoked or suspended and the service be
disconnected, or b) that following a specified time the wastewater discharge
permit shall be revoked or suspended and sewer service discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have
been installed and operated properly to comply with the wastewater
discharge permit, or c) direct the user to cease the unauthorized discharge
effective after a specified period of time, or d) that such other action as
deemed necessary by the City Council to abate the discharge be done by the
industrial user. Further orders and directives as are necessary may be
issued.
(5) Following an order of revocation or suspension of its wastewater discharge
permit, the industrial user shall cease discharging to the POTW in
accordance with the terms of said Order. Failure to do so shall be prima
facie evidence of continuing harm to POTW and provide grounds for the
granting of injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders.
SECTION 11 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
11.1 Injunctive Relief
A. The POTW may institute a civil action for an injunction to restrain violations of
this ordinance.
B. The POTW may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of pollutants
to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the
health or welfare of persons, seek and obtain from the Circuit Court of Jefferson
County a temporary restraining order to preliminary injunctions to halt or prohibit
such discharge. Prior to the filing of such petition, the discharger shall be given
informal notice of the POTW intention to file such action. Methods of informal
notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: personal
conversation between discharger and the POTW employees, telephone calls,
letters, hand delivered messages or notices posted at the discharger's premises or
point of discharge. Personal contact between the POTW personnel and the
discharger shall be attempted, but shall not be condition precedent to POTW
petitioning for an obtaining a temporary restraining order.
11.2 Civil Penalties
A. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to Mt. Vernon for a civil penalty of
$1,000.00 per violation, per day. In this case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
B. The City Manager may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by Mt. Vernon.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by
the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit
gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against a user.
11.3 Criminal Prosecution
A. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
B. A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which
causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under State law.
C. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed,
or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per
violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
D. In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six
months, or both.
11.4 Remedies Nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this ordinance shall not be exclusive. The City Manager may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with Mt. Vernon's Enforcement Response
Plan. However, the City Manager may seek whatever remedies are authorized by statute, at law or
in equity against any person or industrial user violating the provisions of this ordinance. Further,
the City Manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
A. In addition to remedies available to the POTW set forth elsewhere in this
ordinance, if the POTW is fined by the State of Illinois or USEPA for violation of
the POTW NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of
discharge of pollutants, then the fine, including all the POTW legal, sampling
analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be charged to the
responsible industrial user. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other remedies the POTW may have under this ordinance, statutes, regulations,
at law or in equity.
B. If the discharge from any industrial user causes a deposit, obstruction or damage to
any of the POTW wastewater facilities, the POTW shall cause the deposit or
obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired.
The cost for such work, including material, labor and supervision, shall be borne
by the person or industrial user causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage.
C. In addition to any penalty levied under Section 11, the POTW may, where the
circumstances of the particular case so dictate, seek injunctive relief to prohibit the
user from discharging into the sanitary sewer system, or to provide such other
affirmative relief as may be appropriate.
SECTION 12 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
12.1 Performance Bonds
The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to Mt. Vernon, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the City Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
12.2 Liability Insurance
The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or
repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
12.3 Water Supply Severance
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's
expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
12.4 Public Nuisances
A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Manager. Any person creating a
public nuisance shall reimburse the City of Mt. Vernon for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying such nuisance, and shall be subject to the general provisions of Section
13.11 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, including the provision for a
lien upon real estate as described therein.
SECTION 13 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
13.1 Upset
A. For the purposes of this section, Aupset@ means an exceptional incident in which
there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of
paragraph (C), below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant
evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like
manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the City Manager
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset and if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an
upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset
only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure
of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
13.2 Bypass
A. For the purposes of this section.
(1) ABypass@ means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of a user's treatment facility.
(2) ASevere property damage@ means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable,
or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably
be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards
or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to
assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
paragraphs (C) and (D) of this section.
C. (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior
notice to the City Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the City Manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four
(24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The City
Manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
D. (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the City Manager may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this section.
(2) The City Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the City Manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this section.
SECTION 14 WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
[RESERVED]-See Article 16, Section 16.7
SECTION 15 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
15.1 Pretreatment Charges and Fees
Mt. Vernon may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating Mt. Vernon's Pretreatment Program which may include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing
such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of
collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports
submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals; and
E. Other fees as Mt. Vernon may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance
and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by Mt. Vernon.
15.2 Severability
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this ordinance is invalidated by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and
chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 16 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage,
approval, and publication, as provided by law.
SECTION 17 FALSIFICATION
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in
any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this ordinance or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance, shall be
subject to the penalties and costs provided in Section 11.
ARTICLE 17
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION 17.1 PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITION
The provisions of the within Article shall govern every subdivision of land in the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, and the unincorporated area within one and one-half
miles beyond such corporate limits, in order to promote the public health and the safety,
convenience, comfort, and general welfare of persons resident within such areas so regulated.
The within provisions shall be administered to insure orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection, and proper use of land and adequate traffic circulation, utilities and
services.
SECTION 17.2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
No land, within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon and within the
unincorporated area within one and one-half miles beyond such corporate limits, shall be
subdivided without complying with the provisions of this Article.
No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be offered for sale nor
shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be given until such subdivision plans have been
properly reviewed by the Mt. Vernon Plan Commission and officially approved by the City
Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, as hereinafter provided.
No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm. water drainage, sewerage
facilities, gas service, electric service or lighting, or grading, paving or surfacing of any street,
shall be made within any such subdivision by any owner or owners or his or their agent, or by
any public service corporation at the request of such owner or owners or by his or their agent,
until the plats for the subdivision and also the plans for the improvement have been properly
reviewed by the Plan Commission and officially approved by the City Council of Mt. Vernon as
hereinafter provided.
Where a tract of land is proposed to be subdivided in several stages over a period of
years, and the subdivider requests approval in parts, he shall at the time of submission of the first
part, submit a detailed plan of the entire tract to be eventually developed, with appropriate
sectioning to demonstrate to the Plan Commission that the total design as proposed for the entire
subdivision is feasible. The Plan Commission may give preliminary approval to the overall plan
and final approval on the parts as submitted from time to time.
The provisions of this Article shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary in
the subdivision of land.
SECTION 17.3 DEFINITIONS
As used in these regulations, the following words shall have the meanings and references
given, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Administrative Officer. The officer designated and authorized by the City Council to
enforce the Subdivision Regulations.
Alley. A permanent public serviceway or right-of-way, dedicated to public use, other
than a Street, Place, Road, Cross-Walk, or Easement, designed to provide a secondary means of
access for the special accommodation of abutting property.
Block. A unit of property entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, railroad
rights-of-way, waterways, or other barriers, or combination thereof.
Building Setback Line - Building Line. The line nearest the front or side of and across a
Lot establishing the minimum yard to be provided between the principal building or structure and
the Lot Line.
City. The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
City Clerk. The City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
Commission. The Plan Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
Comprehensive Plan. The complete plan, or any of its parts, for the development of the
City, proposed by the Commission and adopted by the Council, in accordance with the authority
conferred by Division 12, Illinois Municipal Code, as amended.
Council. The City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
County. The County of Jefferson, Illinois.
Cross-Walk. A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is reserved across a block to
provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
Cul-de-sac. (Court or Dead End Street). A short street having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
Drainage Right-of-Way. The lands required for the installation of storm water sewers or
drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or water course for preserving the channel
and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public for
specified purposes.
Final Plat. The final map of all, or a portion of, the subdivision which is presented to the
Commission for final approval in accordance with these regulations, and which, if approved,
shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.
Jurisdiction. The corporate area of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois and the unincorporated
area contiguous thereto that is within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits.
Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or development.
Performance Guarantee. Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that
certain improvements be made before the Commission or other approving body approves a Final
Plat; including performance bond, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety
agreements.
Person. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or any other group
acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
Place. An open, unoccupied, officially designated space, other than a Street or Alley,
permanently reserved as the principal means of access for abutting property.
Preliminary Plan. The drawings and documents described in Section 17.6 indicating the
proposed layout of the Subdivision which is submitted to the Planning Commission for
consideration and tentative approval.
Street. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated or otherwise legally established to
the public use, usually affording the principal means of access to abutting property. A street may
be designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, lane, drive, or other
appropriate name. For the purpose of this Article, streets shall be classified as follows:
Major Streets This type of facility serves mainly to move through traffic, but also
performs a secondary function of providing direct access to abutting land. Major streets
inter-connect principal traffic generators within a City. Illinois and U. S. marked routes, as well
as important, intra-city streets, are considered under this classification.
Collector Streets These facilities serve intercity movements of traffic such as that moving
between a subdivision and a major street. The principle difference between the collector street
and the major street is the length of trip which each principally serves. They are intended to
supply the abutting property with the same degree of land service as the local street, while at the
same time serving larger volumes of traffic.
Local Streets- The sole function of these streets is to provide access to the immediately
adjacent property. Local access streets generally carry low volumes of traffic.
Subdivider. Any person responsibly engaged in developing or improving a tract of land
which complies with the definition of a Subdivision as defined in this report.
Subdivision. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit, as part of a unit, or as
contiguous units on the last preceding transfer of ownership thereof, into two or more parcels,
sites, or lots, any one of which is less than five acres in area, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of land into
parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale
or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not
create additional building sites, shall not be considered a Subdivision; or the improvement of
one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of
structures involving the Subdivision and Allocation of land as Streets or other open spaces for
common use by the owners, occupants, or lease holders or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage, or other public utilities and facilities;
provided, however, that where no new streets or roads are involved, divisions of land for
agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are more than three acres or larger in size,
divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions, or divisions of property upon court
order shall not be considered Subdivisions.
Thoroughfare Plan. The part of the Comprehensive Plan, now or hereafter adopted which
includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth in location alignment, dimensions,
identification, and classification of existing and proposed streets, highways and other
thoroughfares.
Yard. A space of the same lot with a building, which is open, unoccupied and
unobstructed by structures, except as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 17.4 PROCEDURE
Sub-Section 1. Preliminary Considerations. In order to make the most of opportunities related to
the subdivision and to conserve time, effort, and expense, the owner or subdivider shall consult
with the Plan Commission, the City Engineer, and other public officials prior to the preparation
of the Preliminary Plat for the subdivision. The Comprehensive Plan of the City shall be
reviewed to determine how the Preliminary Plat will fit into the Comprehensive Plan.
Requirements for major and minor streets, school and recreation sites, community facilities,
shopping centers, sanitation, water supply and drainage, and the relationship to other
developments, existing or proposed in the vicinity shall be determined in advance of the
preparation of the Preliminary Plat.
Sub-Section 2. Filing of Preliminary Plats. A subdivider desiring approval of a plat of a
subdivision shall submit a written application therefore to the Plan Commission. Such
Application shall be accompanied by the information, requirements, and plans set forth in this
Article.
(a) Four copies of the completed Application for Subdivision Approval Form,
together with at least eight prints of each drawing submitted as a part of the Preliminary
Plat, shall be submitted to the City Clerk no later than two weeks prior to the Plan
Commission meeting at which consideration is desired. At the time of filing, a fee of
$35.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall immediately notify the
Secretary of the Plan Commission upon receipt of the Application and Preliminary Plat.
The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove said application for preliminary
approval within ninety (90) days from the date of application or the filing by the applicant
of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later. If such plat is
disapproved, then within said 90 days the Plan Commission shall furnish to applicant in
writing a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances of
the City, including the official map. If such plat is approved, the City Council shall accept
or reject said plat within 30 days after its next regular stated meeting following the action
of the Commission.
(b) If the Preliminary Plat is approved by the City Council, the applicant shall be
authorized to proceed with the preparation of the Final Plat. The City Clerk shall attach to
a copy of the Preliminary Plat a certified copy of the resolution approving or disapproving
the Preliminary Plat; in case of disapproval, said resolution shall give reasons and specify
aspects of nonconformance with existing ordinances.
A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the City Clerk's office and shall be
signed by the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Plan Commission.
(c) Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a one
year period from the date of approval.
(1) That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
(2) That the said applicant may submit on or before the expiration date the
whole or part or parts of said plat for final approval. In the case of a subdivision
being developed in stages, the applicant may elect to have final approval delayed
for a period not to exceed three years from the date of preliminary approval for the
remaining portions of the plat, after submission of the original part within the
above specified period.
Sub-Section 3. Approval of Final Plats.
(a) The final plat shall be submitted to the City Clerk for transmittal to the Plan
Commission for final approval. The submission shall include the plans and specifications
for the required improvements as set forth in Section 17.7, together with an estimate of
cost of the proposed improvements for performance guarantee purposes. All documents
shall bear the approving signature of the City Engineer and the transmittal to Council
shall include a letter from the City Engineer describing such approval.
(b) Upon review by the Plan Commission and the City Engineer, the final plat shall
be returned to the City Clerk for submission to the City Council with all
recommendations from the Plan Commission attached. If the final plat is approved by the
Plan Commission, the original tracing shall bear the signature of the Chairman or Vice
Chairman of the Plan Commission. The City Council shall approve such plat, if all
requirements of this Ordinance and other Ordinances of this City have been met, within
60 days from the date of filing the last required document or other paper, whichever date
is later.
(c) The City Clerk shall attach to a copy of the final plat a certified copy of the City
Council's ordinance approving or disapproving the final plat; in the case of disapproval
giving reasons and specifying aspects of non-conformance with existing ordinances. The
approved copy of the final plat shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
The approval of the final plat by the City Council shall be indicated on the
document to be filed for record by the affixing of the signatures of the Mayor and the City
Clerk. The approved final plat shall then be returned to the City Clerk to be held until
such time as the subdivider has posted the Performance Guarantee as set forth in Section
5, Sub-section 4.
SECTION 17.5 REQUIREMENTS
Sub-Section 1. Preliminary Plat. A preliminary plat shall be provided by the subdivider and
consist of the following:
(a) Location map (which may be prepared by indicating the following data on
available maps) showing:
1. Boundary line of the proposed subdivision indicated by a solid, heavy line
and the total approximate acreage involved.
2. Subdivision name and location, legal description, specifying U.S. Survey
and Township Lines, County and State.
3. Any and all thoroughfares related to the subdivision.
4. Existing elementary and secondary schools, parks and playgrounds
available for serving the area proposed to be subdivided, and other
community features.
5. Title, scale, north arrow and date.
(b) Preliminary Plat showing:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and location.
2. Names, addresses of the owner, subdivider, the City Planner, land
planning consultant, Engineer, or registered land surveyor who prepared
the plat.
3. Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of the proposed
subdivision; showing the names, including roadway widths, approximate
gradients, types of widths of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, planting strips
and other pertinent data.
4. All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision.
5. Layout of lots, showing approximate dimensions and numbers.
6. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community purposes.
7. Easements, existing and proposed, showing locations, widths, and
purposes.
8. Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions.
9. Location, size of nearest water main, sewer outlet and other pertinent
utilities.
10. Location, type and approximate size of utilities to be installed.
11. Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles and references
to known land lines.
12. Contours at vertical intervals of two (2) feet, except where the slope
exceeds 50%; elevations at top and bottom of slopes should be indicated.
13. Tree masses and all individual trees having a caliper of 12" or greater; Key
plan, legend and notes.
14. Location of existing structures.
15. A preliminary outline of the deed restrictions and covenants that would be
placed upon the subdivision.
16. Landscaping plans and proposed limits on the location and intensity of
signs, advertising and off-street parking shall be included in the case of a
proposed subdivision for industrial or commercial use.
17. Scale, North arrow and date.
The Preliminary Plat of the Subdivision shall be drawn to a scale of fifty feet to one (l)
inch or one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch, provided, however, that if the resulting drawing
would be over thirty-six inches (36") in the shortest dimensions, such other scale as
recommended by the Commission may be used.
Sub-Section 2. Final Plat. The Final Plat shall be provided by the subdivider and meet the
following specifications:
(a) The Final Plat may include all or only a part of any Preliminary Plat which has
received approval.
(b) The original drawing of the Final Plat shall be drawn on new linen, tracing cloth,
or equal, with waterproof black India Ink to a scale of fifty feet to one inch,
provided that, if the resulting drawing would be greater than thirty-six inches
(36") in the shortest dimension, a scale of up to one hundred feet (100') to one
inch (1") may be used, Four black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the
original Final Plat; or, in order to conform to modern drafting and reproduction
methods, four black; or, blue lines and a reproducible cloth of film positive of the
Final Plat shall be submitted. Prints filed with the City shall include four cloth
prints made after recording of the Final Plat as approved and bearing the official
stamp attesting the fact of the recording.
(c) All elevations shall be referenced to the established datum and the said reference
shall be clearly stated on any plans or drawings showing such datum.
(d) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
(e) The title shall be placed in the lower right corner and a suitable border line shall
be placed on all tracings with a margin of not less than one-half inch (2@) on all
sides.
(f) The following basic information shall be shown; all surveys for a final plat shall
be made under the active and personal direction of a registered professional
engineer or registered surveyor of Illinois:
1. Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more
than one foot in five thousand feet.
2. Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established street corner or
official monuments. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the
Final Plat.
3. Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the
boundaries of the tract, shown by heavy, solid lines.
4. Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary and the included
area to the nearest one hundredth of an acre.
5. Right-of-way line of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and
property lines of lots and other tracts, with accurate dimensions, bearings
and curve data, including radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, and
central angles.
6. Name and right-of-way width for each street or other right-of-way.
7. Location, dimensions and purposes of any easement, shown by light,
dashed lines.
8. Number to identify each lot or site.
9. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved
.
10. Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions.
11. Floor elevation and sitting of each proposed building.
12. Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot makers,
including elevations related to mean sea level as established by the U.S.
Geological Survey.
13. Names of owners and mortgages accepting said plat, with owner or owners
personally signing all plans or drawings.
14. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land, shown by medium
dashed and two dotted lines.
15. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record
name, date and number, shown by medium dashed and two dotted lines.
16. Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for lots. Restriction lines should be shown by
medium dashed lines.
17. Title, north arrow, scale and date.
18. Certification by registered surveyor or registered professional engineer
with registration numbers and seal affixed to all documents of the Final
Plat.
19. Certification by the registered surveyor or registered professional engineer
stating that all lots conform to the requirements of the Zoning District in
which it is located.
20. Certification by the registered surveyor or registered professional engineer
to the absence of, or presence, location and depth of mine openings,
subsurface mine workings.
21. Certificate of dedication of all public areas.
22. Certificate for approval by the Plan Commission.
23. Certificate for approval by the City Council.
Sub-Section 3. Improvement Plans and Specifications. The final Plat submission to City Council
shall be accompanied by the plans and specifications for the improvements required under
Section 17.7. The plans and profiles of all streets, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and
drainage structures, together with their drainage area, shall be prepared on standard plan and
profile sheets and shall bear the seal and signature of the registered professional engineer
responsible for their preparation.
A cross-section of the proposed streets shall be included, showing the widths of
roadways, location and width of sidewalks and the location of underground utilities. The plans
shall show the lines of all proposed sidewalks and the location of all proposed street lights. The
plans, cross sections and specifications for the proposed improvements shall be submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer prior to submission to the City Council with the Final Plat.
Four black or blue line prints of the approved documents shall be included with the Final
Plat submission. After the completion of the construction of the improvements, a set of prints
showing the as-built details and changes, if any, shall be filed with the City Engineer.
Sub-Section 4 Performance Guarantees
A Performance Guarantee Bond, or other guarantee as hereinafter described, shall be
required from the subdivider in the amount of the estimate approved by the City Engineer for the
cost of all required land improvements yet remaining to be installed. The guarantee shall be in
one of the following described forms:
A. Deposit with the City a subdivider's bond in the amount of one and one-half times
the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be completed.
B. Deposit with the City cash in the amount of one and one-half times the estimated
costs of the land improvements remaining to be completed.
C. Deposit with the City a lien to be recorded in the County Recorder's Office on all
property being subdivided, with. the provision that partial releases may be
obtained when a financial institution executes with the City an agreement to
withhold one and one-half times the estimated cost of the land improvements yet
remaining to be installed, in escrow, until such time as all land improvements
have been completed and accepted by the City. All expenses incurred in
determining the amounts apportioned against said land and the cost of releasing
each lot or tract shall be paid by the subdivider.
D. Deposit with the City other collateral equivalent to one and one-half times the
estimated cost of land improvements yet remaining to be installed, such collateral
to be approved by the City Council.
All required land improvements shall be installed and completed within a period of two
years after the recording of the final plat. Failure of the subdivider to complete all of the
improvements during such two year period shall result in forfeiture of the guarantee unless an
extension of time is granted by the City Council. In the event of failure to complete
improvements in the required time, the City may direct that no further building permits be issued
for property in the subdivision until required land improvements are provided.
SECTION 17.6 MINIMUM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
Sub-Section 1. General. The subdivision plan shall conform to design standards that will
encourage good development patterns and particularly to the principles and standards which are
generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Plan. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites,
public parks, playgrounds and other public facilities shown on the officially adopted
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
Sub-Section 2. Streets.
(a) The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land
within the subdivision. Street jobs of less than one hundred and twenty-five feet
(125') shall be avoided. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length, unless necessitated by site topography.
(b) Neighborhood streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
(c) Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usual
lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
(d) Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary of
the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for normal circulation of traffic within
the vicinity.
(e) Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley adjacent to
the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street or alley shall be platted to
the prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
(f) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their
control is definitely placed in the City Council under conditions approved by the
Plan Commission.
(g) Widths of major and collector street rights-of-way shall conform to the widths
specified in Plat 1. These widths may be increased or decreased or varied upon
approval of the Plan Commission and the City Engineer.
(h) The minimum right-of-way of local streets, including marginal access streets and
cul-de-sacs, shall be fifty feet (50'). All cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular
right-of-way with a minimum diameter of one hundred feet (100') and a minimum
diameter of seventy-five feet (75') for the vehicle turn around (i.e paved area). The
City may require a wider right-of-way in order to comply with typical street cross
section with minimum drainage swell and blank slopes.
(i) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the
required widths shall dedicate additional width along either or both sides of said
street.
(j) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly at right angles as possible.
(k) If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is less than sixty degrees (60O),
the radius of the arc of the intersection of the property lines shall be determined by
the Plan Commission.
(l) At the intersection of other streets the property line corners shall be rounded by
arcs with radii of not less than twenty feet (20'), or chords of such arcs.
(m) At intersections of streets and alleys the property lines corners shall be rounded by
arcs with radii of not less than fifteen feet (15') or chords of such arcs.
(n) Intersections of streets and alleys, the property line corners shall be rounded by
arcs with radii of not less than fifteen feet (15') or chords of such arcs.
(o) Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the Plan Commission
may apply special standards to be followed in the design of such parkways. or
streets.
(p) Whenever the subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or a
highway designated as a ALimited Access Highway@, by the appropriate highway
authorities, provision shall be made for a Marginal Access Street, or a parallel
street. at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the
highway or railroad and such streets.
(q) Horizontal visibility on curved streets and vertical visibility on all streets shall be
maintained along the center line as follows:
1. Major streets: Five hundred feet (500')
2. Collector streets and parkways: Three hundred feet (300')
3. Local streets: One hundred fifty feet. (150' )
(r) Horizontal curvature measured along the center line shall have a minim radius as
follows:
1. Major streets: Five hundred feet (500')
2. Collector streets and parkways: Three hundred feet (300')
3. Local streets : One hundred fifty feet (150').
(s) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radii to
provide smooth transitions and required sight distances.
(t) Between reversed curves on major streets there shall be a tangent of not less than
one hundred feet (100') and on collector and local streets such tangent shall be not
less than forty feet (40').
(u) Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:
1. Major streets, not greater than six percent (6%), or as approved by the City
Engineer and the Plan Commission.
2. Other streets and alleys, not greater than ten percent (10%), or as approved
by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
(v) The minimum grade of any street gutter shall be not less than three-tenths of one
percent.
(w) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be
confused with the name of an existing street; unless, the proposed street is an
extension of or in alignment with an existing street, in which case the duplication
shall be mandatory.
(x) Alleys shall be discouraged in residential areas but shall be included in
commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading and unloading or access
purposes; and, where platted, shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width.
(y) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined by
the Plan Commission.
Sub-Section 3. Blocks.
(a) Blocks shall not normally exceed twelve hundred fifty feet (1250') in length,
unless unusual circumstances justify greater length.
(b) Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of appropriate depth,
except where an interior street parallels a limited access highway, major street or
railroad right-of-way.
(c) Blocks shall fit easily into the overall plan of the subdivision and their design
must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and public areas.
(d) Within blocks of over seven hundred feet in length, the Planning Commission
may require, at or near the middle of the block, a public walk connecting adjacent
streets or other public areas, shopping centers.
Width of right-of-way for such walks shall be at least ten feet (10') and shall be intended
for the use of pedestrians only.
Sub-Section 4. Lots.
(a) All lots shall abut on a street, except lots within a Planned Business Development
established pursuant to the Planned Business District Zoning Classification of the
Schedule of District Regulations of Article 21 herein which lots shall abut either
on a street or a place.
(b) Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to straight streets and on
radial lines on curved streets. Pointed or irregular lots shall be avoided.
(c) Double frontage lots shall not be platted, except that where desired along major
streets, lots may face on an interior street and back on such thoroughfare. In that
event a planting strip, or a planting screen at least twenty feet in width should be
provided along the rear of the lot.
(d) Minimum lot areas, widths and building setback lines shall be provided in the
Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is located within the
jurisdiction, except that where a main supply system or a sanitary system is not
available, the lot area necessary to install a private water supply or sewage
disposal system on the lot, in accordance with the Illinois Department of Public
Health, shall become the minimum lot area.
(e) Wherever possible, a unit shopping center, based on sound development
standards, shall be designed in contrast to the platting of lots for individual
commercial use.
(f) Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal to permit appropriate setbacks
from both streets.
Sub-Section 5. Easements.
(a) Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities shall be provided. Such
easements shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet and where located along
interior lot lines, one-half the width shall be taken from each lot, except, however,
perimeter easements located on the perimeter of the subdivision adjacent to
private property outside the limits of the proposed subdivision may have a
minimum width of ten feet (10') where no water, sewer, or gas facilities are to be
located within perimeter easement.
Before determining the location of easements, the plan shall be discussed with the
local utility companies to assure proper placing for the installation of services.
(b) Whenever a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way channel or
stream, there shall be provided a drainage right-of-way which shall be for the
purpose of widening, improving or protecting the stream at the subdivision's
expense. The width of the drainage right-of-way shall be adequate for any
necessary channel relocations and straightenings and shall be reviewed by the City
Engineer and shall relate as closely as possible to the requirements of the
Comprehensive Plan. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection
therewith.
Sub-Section 6. Public Use Areas.
Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public use areas as shown in the
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map are located within the subdivision area, the City Council
shall require that such areas be so designated on the Final Plat. Within one year after the approval
of the Final Plat, the authority having jurisdiction shall acquire the designated land or commence
proceedings to acquire it by condemnation; otherwise, the owner may make any other permitted
use of the site as permitted by the Zoning District within which it lies.
Sub-Section 7. Topography, Natural Vegetation and Flooding.
(a) In the subdividing of any land within the jurisdiction, due regard shall be shown
for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, or other similar
elements which, if preserved, would add attractiveness to the proposed
development.
(b) The natural topography shall be retained wherever possible in order to reduce
excessive run-off onto adjoining property and to avoid extensive re-grading of the
site.
(c) Floor elevations of all buildings shall be carefully studied in relation to existing
topography, proposed street grades, existing 12" and over caliper trees, and other
pertinent site features.
(d) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use
due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances,
the Commission shall consider withholding approval of such lots.
SECTION 17.7 IMPROVEMENTS
Utility and street improvements shall be provided by the subdivider in each new
subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements described in the following
sections.
Sub-Section 1. Streets.
Streets shall be completed in accordance with the plans, profiles, specifications and
cross-sections prepared for the subdivider by a registered professional engineer and approved by
the City Engineer.
(a) The streets shall be surfaced to a minimum width of 26" face to face of curbs
according to the type of street, as specified in Plat 1, attached hereto and made a
part of this Article.
(b) The streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the dimensions required by
the cross-sections and the work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in
current edition of Illinois State Highway Specifications. Alleys shall be paved to
the right-of-way. Grading for street improvements shall not create soil slopes
exceeding a vertical rise of one foot for each two feet of horizontal distance unless
retaining walls are provided.
(c) The street surface shall be of Portland Cement, Concrete or a flexible pavement,
and shall be constructed in accordance with design characteristics at least equal to
those given below and specifications approved by the City Engineer.
(d) Prior to the construction of street or alley pavements, adequate surface and
sub-surface (if required) drainage facilities shall be installed by the subdivider.
Pipe used for drainage purposes shall be of bituminous coated corrugated metal,
reinforced concrete or extra strength vitrified clay of an approved design, size and
strength to meet the requirements of the specific conditions which may be
encountered. Minimum diameters of pipe to be used shall be as follows:
Roadway Crossdrains 15"
Entrance Culverts 12"
Perforated Underdrains 6"
(e) All construction shall be completed in accordance with the specific conditions in
the agreement for improvements and the accepted plans and specifications, and in
a manner acceptable to the authorities having jurisdiction. When changes from the
accepted plan and specifications become necessary during construction, written
approval from the authorities having jurisdiction shall be secured prior to the
execution of such changes.
(f) Adequate provision for the maintenance of all street improvements shall be made
by dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the local authorities having
jurisdiction, or by other suitable means.
Sub-Section 2. Curbs and Gutters.
(a) Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in conjunction with the street pavements on
all streets and shall be of air entrained Portland Cement Concrete at least eighteen
inches wide and not less than six inches thick where the curb abuts the street
pavement.
(b) Curb construction for concrete pavements may be integral and roll-type curbs may
be permitted where the distance between the back of the curb and the nearest
sidewalk is at least three feet on residential and feeder streets.
(c) All plans for the installation of the curb and gutter shall be approved by the City
Engineer and the Plan Commission.
Sub-Section 3 Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks on each side of a street shall be provided within a subdivision.
Sidewalks shall be of Portland Cement Concrete with a minimum thickness of
four inches and a minimum width of four feet.
(b) Crosswalks within the block shall be improved with a four foot walk of either
Portland Cement Concrete four inches thick or asphaltic concrete two inches thick
on a four inch compacted aggregate base. Extend base beyond sidewalk on either
side to distance equal to depth of base.
Sub-Section 4 Sewage Disposal and Water Supply
(a) The subdivider shall provide for the disposal of sewage in the subdivision by a
connection to the City sanitary sewer system. In all cases the subdivider shall
construct a sanitary sewer system which shall connect to the public sewerage
system of the City and provide a connection to each lot.
(.b) The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main supply
system which shall be connected to the water facility system serving the City; said
system shall provide a source of potable water as well as providing an adequate
water supply for fire protection.
(c) Plans and specifications for public and local sewer disposal and water supply
system shall be prepared for the subdivider by a registered professional engineer
in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Department of Public Health
and the City Engineer. All plans and specifications shall conform to Article 16,
Section 16.6(c), Regulations for a water system. The City Engineer's office shall
prepare and keep on file a comprehensive set of standards pertaining to the City's
requirements for a water supply system.
Private sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with the
regulations of the local health authorities and the Illinois Department of Public
Health.
(d) The subdivider shall furnish the City a complete set of plans and profiles as
approved by the various authorities.
Sub-Section 5. Storm Drainage
(a) Adequate surface and subsurface drainageways for the removal of storm water
shall be provided by the subdivider. The extent to which storm drainage facilities
shall be required shall be based upon an analysis of need prepared for the
subdivider by a registered professional engineer. The analysis shall be based upon
the rational method of computing storm water run-off, using the one-hour rainfall
to be expected at a five-year frequency. Times of concentration, soil infiltration
rates and other variable factors to be used in the analysis shall be discussed with
and approved by the City Engineer during the preliminary consideration of the
subdivision.
(b) A storm water sewer system, which shall be separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system with surface inlets, shall be provided by the subdivider in
all cases and whenever the available evidence indicates that such a system is
necessary due to the inadequacy of the natural surfaces drainage.
(c) Distance from Streams or Main Drainage Channels: Any person proposing to
locate a structure or a use within one hundred feet of any stream or main drainage
channel in any zoning district shall include with the application for a Building or
Use Permit, a statement by a competent engineer, based on a study of the
watershed area and the probable run-off, that the structure or use in the location
proposed will leave adequate space for the flow of flood water, provided,
however, that no building shall be permitted within fifty feet of the top of the bank
of any stream or main drainage channel.
(d) The subdivider shall furnish the City a complete set of plans and profiles as
approved by the various authorities.
Sub-Section 6. Public Utilities.
(a) All utility lines for telephone and electric service when carried on overhead poles,
provided for with rear and side lot lone easements. Gas mains shall be located
within easements or public rights-of-way so as not to conflict with other utilities.
(b) Where telephone and/or electric service lines are to be placed underground
throughout the subdivision, the conduit or cables shall be located within
easements or public rights-of-way in separate trenches in a manner which will not
conflict with other underground services. Furthermore, all transformers and
terminal boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the
public.
(c) All excavations for public utilities made under paved areas shall be properly backfilled
with approved granular materials thoroughly compacted in place.
Sub-Section 7. Street Lighting.
(a) Provisions shall be made by the subdivider for the adequate lighting of public
streets within the subdivision in accordance with the standard and requirements of
the City and the electric utility.
(b) Street lights shall be provided with a maximum spacing of 300 feet with concrete
or steel poles connected by underground wiring.
Sub-Section 8. Street Signs.
(a) Appropriate street signs of aluminum extrusions with reflectorized lettering
mounted on aluminum posts and as specified by the City, shall be installed by the
subdivider at all street intersections on diagonally opposite corners so that they
will be on the far right hand side of the intersection for traffic on the more
important streets.
Signs indicating both streets shall be erected at each location mounted as close to
the corner as practical, facing traffic on the cross street, with the nearest portion of
each sign not less than one foot nor more than 10 feet back from the curb line.
(b) Before the Final Plat is approved, the subdivider shall submit to the Plan
Commission a statement from the local Postmaster approving the names of the
proposed streets and of the proposed systems of postal addresses on such streets.
Sub-Section 9. Landscape Development.
(a) All unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas within the public rights-of-way or
public use areas, shall be graded and seeded in an approved manner.
(b) Street trees shall be provided by the subdivider along all streets where trees do not
exist. The trees shall be of a species suitable for local soil and climatic conditions,
adopted to street use and of at least two and on-half inch caliper. At street corners
the trees shall be located a minimum of twenty-five feet from the intersection of
the street right-of-way lines. Otherwise, they shall be located so as not to interfere
with utilities or sidewalks and placed forty to fifty feet apart. The trees shall be
placed in the grass area between the curb and the sidewalk unless this space is less
than ten feet wide or has a slope of 5 to 1, in which case the trees shall be planted
on the lots.
(c) In informal types of street patterns, informal planting of street trees in accordance
with an approved landscape development plan may be permitted.
(d) All residential lots shall have an appropriate cover of undisturbed existing
vegetation, seeding, fresh cut sod, plugs or spot sod.
Sub-Section 10. Monuments and Markers.
(a) Permanent monuments shall be set:
1. At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
subdivision.
2. At the intersection of street property lines and at the beginning and end of
all curves along street property lines.
3. In slope areas at principal changes in alignment in the boundary of the
subdivision.
(b) Markers shall be set, unless otherwise located by a monument:
1. At all points where lines intersect street right-of way lines.
2. At all angles in the lot property lines.
3. At all other lot corners.
(c) Monuments shall be of concrete with minimum dimensions of four inches and
thirty-six inches in length, and shall be marked at the top with either a copper or
steel dowel imbedded so that the top of the dowel should be flush with the top
surface at the center of the monument. Markers shall consist of galvanized steel or
wrought iron pipe or steel bars at least thirty inches in length and three-quarters of
an inch in outside diameter.
(d) Monuments and markers shall be provided by the subdivider and so placed that
the center point shall coincide with the intersection of lines to be marked and the
top level with the surface of the surrounding ground after final grading.
Sub-Section 11. Privately Developed Facilities.
Where the subdivision is to contain sewers, sewage treatment facilities, water supply
system, park areas, or other physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public
agencies, provision shall be made by trust agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and
which is acceptable to the proper public agencies for jurisdiction over the continuous
maintenance, supervision, operation and reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the
subdivision. Other restrictions not inconsistent or in conflict with the provision of this Ordinance
of the City may also be included.
Sub-Section 12. Cluster Development.
In order to promote the health and general welfare of the City and to preserve and make
available Open Space, the Plan Commission may grant a developer the right to vary the
residential density within a tract to be developed, leaving a substantial area free of building lots.
The right to vary the density shall, however, be subject to the following conditions:
(a) An overall plan of the entire tract showing roads, lot lines, lot areas, easements,
encumbrances and other relevant data shall be submitted in accordance with
Sections 17.4, 17.6 and 17.7.
(b) Overall density shall not exceed that of the Zoning District in which the land
occurs. The houses in the proposed subdivision shall be grouped in clusters, The
minimum lot area shall be two thirds of the minimum normally required in the
Zoning Districts in which the land occurs.
Minimum yard requirements in a Cluster Development shall be:
Front Yard 10 feet
Side Yard 8 feet (save that garages or carports upon adjacent lots join at the
property line or be grouped on land away from the
individual lot.)
Rear Yard 15 feet
(c) In cases where a developer has designed special groups of dwelling and garages,
the Plan Commission, after inspecting. plans and elevations, may grant smaller lot
minimum sizes than those in paragraph (b) above, provided that the sanitary
systems are approved by the City Engineer, that the overall-density does not
exceed that permitted within the Zoning District in which the land occurs, or
that the layout is not detrimental to the health and general welfare of the
community.
(d) The balance of the land not contained in the lots or within the road rights-of-way
shall be contiguous and of such condition, size and shape as to be usable for
recreation. Such land shall be held and there shall be incorporated into the deeds
of all property within the development a clause giving to the owners an interest in
such open land which shall be used for recreational purposes only. (No structure
save those incidental to the recreational use should be permitted thereon.)
Open land shall be a minimum of one and one-half acres and shall be subject to taxation.
In the case of such tracts of three or more acres the developer may petition the City to take over
the land to be used in perpetuity as Open Space.
SECTION 17.8 SPECIAL MINIMUM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
Sub-Section 1. General
If the subdivision meets the following conditions and requirements, then the Subdivider
may conform to the hereinafter described minimum design and development standards, although
the Subdivider shall conform to all development standards and requirements of Article 17 except
as expressly and specifically modified and addressed within this Section.
Sub-Section 2. Conditions and Requirements
The subdivision shall be eligible to utilize the special minimum design and development
standards of this Section if and only if the following conditions are met:
(a) The subdivision must be located within the corporate limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon or must be located within one and one-half (1 2) miles of the
corporate limits and be subject to a valid Agreement to Annex (pre-annexation
agreement) providing for annexation of all property within the subdivision upon
same becoming contiguous to the corporate limits.
(b) The subdivision must have an R- 1 Zoning Classification, Low Density
Residential District and must conform in every respect to all R-1 Zoning
Classification requirements without variance or exception.
(c) Availability of and access to the municipal sewer system of the City must be
present for immediate connection for each lot within the subdivision unless the
cost of construction for the extension and connection to the municipal sanitary
sewer system to serve all of the lots in the subdivision exceeds the sum of $5,000
per lot or the estimated cost of private sewage disposal, whichever is greater as
determined by the City and as determined pursuant to Subsection 3(d) herein.
(d) The subdivision must not have access by or require the extension of an existing
City street with curb and gutter; nor shall the subdivision be immediately adjacent
to a subdivision conforming to the minimum design and development standard of
Section 17.6 and Section 17.7.
Sub-Section 3. Modified Minimum Design & Development Standards
If the conditions and requirements of Subsection 2 are met without exception or variance,
then the subdivision shall conform to the standards of Section 17.6 and Section 17.7 herein,
except that said standards may be modified as follows:
(a) The Plat of Subdivision and the Declaration of Subdivision shall include a
restrictive covenant that the minimum floor area for any residential dwelling shall
be not less than 1,200 square feet exclusive of the garage area, and the maximum
floor area of any residential dwelling shall not be more than 2,000 square feet
exclusive of the garage area, except the covenant may provide that the restriction
governing the maximum floor area shall expire 24 months from the date that a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the City for the residential dwelling. In
addition, the minimum floor area and the maximum floor area during 24 months
from the date of the Certificate of Occupancy provided herein shall be a
requirement of this ordinance.
Alternatively, if the subdivider desires to construct a residential dwelling on one or more
lots within the subdivision that is 2,000 square feet or greater exclusive of the garage area, then
the Plat of Subdivision and the Declaration of Subdivision shall include a restrictive covenant
that the minimum floor area for any residential dwelling shall not be less than 1,500 square feet
exclusive of a garage area, which restrictive covenant shall continue without expiration, it being
the intent and requirement of this provision that if any residential unit within the subdivision has
a square footage of 2,000 feet or greater then all of the residential dwelling units within the
subdivision shall have a square footage of at least 1,500 square feet or greater.
(b) The pavement designed for streets shall conform to the standards specified within
Plat 2 of Section 17.14 as follows:
(i) 24' of 3" bituminous over 9" of compacted gravel base.
(ii) 24' of 7 2 A of Portland concrete non-reinforced.
(iii) 6' of 6" compacted gravel shoulder upon each side of the street.
(iv) An open drainage swale with slopes to be a minimum 4 to 1.
(v) The bottom of the drainage swale shall be a minimum of 2' below the edge
of the street.
(vi) No utilities shall be located within 10' of the edge of the surface of the
street.
(vii) Each driveway culvert shall be a minimum of 15" in diameter RCCP pipe
and shall extend 5 feet from the edge of the driveway surface; driveway
culverts shall have flared end sections on each end of the culvert and the
flared end sections shall not be counted as part of the 5 foot extension.
The Declaration of Subdivision shall include restrictive covenants incorporating
subparagraph (b) (iv); subparagraph (b) (v) and subparagraph (b) (vi); in addition, the
Declaration of Subdivision shall include a restrictive covenant that no fill, improvement, or other
construction shall be made at any time so as to cause any drainage swale to fail to meet the
minimum requirements provided herein. Any person who shall make any fill, construction or
improvement so as to cause a drainage swale not to meet the minimum requirement shall be
subject to a fine and shall be liable for all costs incurred in restoring the drainage swale to the
required standards.
The minimum right-of-way for local streets, including marginal access streets shall be
seventy feet (70'). All cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum
diameter of one hundred feet (100') and with a minimum diameter of seventy-five feet (75') for
the vehicle turn around (i.e. paved area). The City may require a wider right-of-way in order to
comply with typical street cross section with minimum drainage swale and bank slopes.
(c) If the proposed subdivision is contiguous with the corporate limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon, all of the proposed subdivisions shall be annexed to the City prior to
subdivision. If the proposed subdivision is not within the corporate limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon and if the proposed subdivision is not contiguous to the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon the Declaration of Subdivision shall
include a restrictive covenant that the subdivision is subject to an Agreement to
Annex providing for the annexation of all property within the subdivision to the
City of Mt. Vernon upon the property comprising the subdivision becoming
contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon; and said Agreement
to Annex shall be executed by all owners, occupants and necessary parties prior to
subdivision approval.
(d) Unless state law otherwise requires, if the cost of construction for the extension
and connection of the municipal sanitary sewer system to serve all of the lots in
the subdivision exceeds the sum of $5,000 per lot or the estimated cost of private
sewage disposal as determined by the City, whichever is greater, then private
sewage disposal may be utilized. Calculation of the costs of sewage disposal shall
be determined by the estimated number of lots based upon the smallest lot within
the proposed subdivision and based upon the area within the subdivision and
within all projected subsequent phases thereof and all contiguous real estate
owned in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by the Developer and/or
Subdivider and/or Owner including without limitation any developed or
undeveloped land and any non-subdivided and/or subdivided lands. In addition,
any tract of real estate of which the proposed subdivision formed a part as of
March 1, 2002 shall be considered in the calculation of the cost of sewage
disposal.
If each lot within the proposed subdivision is not immediately connected to the municipal
sanitary sewer system, the Declaration of Subdivision shall include a restrictive covenant that, in
the event the City of Mt. Vernon municipal sanitary sewer is extended to within 100 feet of the
subdivision boundary, the owners of lots in the subdivision will be required to extend the City of
Mt. Vernon municipal sanitary sewer through the subdivision and that each lot owner shall bear
the construction costs, proportioned by lot frontage, and shall grant at no charge an easement to
the City of Mt. Vernon at such location and in such width as determined by the City of Mt.
Vernon for the construction of the municipal sanitary sewer, unless an easement for the
municipal sanitary sewer is incorporated in the approved and recorded plat of the subdivision. A
plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer for the municipal sanitary sewer extension shall
be submitted to the City for review within 90 days of the municipal sanitary sewer becoming
available and accessible within 100 feet of the subdivision boundary. Each lot must connect to
the municipal sanitary sewer system during the construction of the extension, which shall be
completed within 180 days of the plan approval by the City. All required permits shall be
acquired prior to commencement of any municipal sanitary sewer construction activities. If the
owners of the lots fail to construct the municipal sewer or shall fail to comply with any provision
herein, all costs incurred by the City in enforcing this Ordinance, including but not limited to
attorneys' fees, engineering fees, construction costs, and all expenses of every kind shall be
personally assessed to each lot owner and a lien shall attach to each lot for said expenses.
(e) Sidewalks shall not be required unless the subdivision shall be immediately
adjacent to a subdivision with sidewalks which extend to or would reasonably be
expected to extend to or through the proposed subdivision.
(f) If the subdivision consists of 5 acres or more, storm water management (including
both erosion control and storm water detention) shall be required and detailed
upon the subdivision plans and plat.
(g) The Subdivider and/or Developer shall immediately grade and seed all unpaved
areas of any publicly dedicated right-of-way and shall maintain said areas until
acceptance of the street by city.
(h) Except as expressly and specifically modified within this sub-section, the
subdivision and the Owner and/or Subdivider and/or Developer shall comply with
all other provisions of Article 17 of the Revised Code of ordinances. With regard
to the modifications provided within this sub-section, there shall be no variance or
exceptions therefrom.
SECTION 17.9 INSPECTION
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this Article shall
be inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer or a duly designated
representative. All fees and costs connected with such inspections and in reviewing the plans and
specifications for such improvements, shall be paid for by the subdivider.
The subdivider shall pay to the City an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the estimated
cost of paving, storm drainage, sanitary sewers and site grading to defray the cost of processing
the subdivision application and for inspection of improvements during construction.
SECTION 17.10 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
When a subdivider can show that a provision of this Article would cause unnecessary
hardship if strictly adhered to and when, in the opinion of the Plan Commission because of
topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without
destroying the intent of such provision, the Plan Commission may recommend a Variance or
modification to the City Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such Variance or
modification. Any Variance thus recommended shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the
Plan Commission and the reasoning on which the departure was Justified shall be set forth. Any
variance or modification authorized by the Council should be made by resolution and a copy
thereof shall be attached and made a part of the Final Plat.
An exception may be made from the specifications and procedures in the case of a
subdivision containing not more than three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any
new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel and not in conflict with any provisions or portion of
the Comprehensive Plan, Official Maps, Zoning Ordinance, or this Article.
A plat of the proposed minor subdivision shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Plan
Commission at least one week prior to the Planning Commission meeting, at which consideration
is desired with four, black and blue line prints of the proposed minor subdivision, who in turn
will forward their recommendation and the plat to the Council for action. Action by the Council
shall take place at its next stated meeting. Approval of the Council should be indicated on the
original drawing by affixing of the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk and the plat will be
returned to the applicant to be filed for record in the Office of the County Clerk.
SECTION 17.11 PLATTING AUTHORITY
Wherever the approval, review or action of the Plan Commission is required by the terms
of the written Article, same may be fulfilled by a Platting Authority appointed by majority vote of
the entire Commission, to consist of the City Engineer and two members of the Plan Commission
appointed by its Chairman. Whenever such action of such authority shall fully satisfy any
requirements of this Article for approval, review or action by the Commission.
SECTION 17.12 BUILDING PERMIT - ZONING CERTIFICATE
No building permit or zoning certificate shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure, or improvement to the land or any lot within a
subdivision as defined herein and which has been approved for platting or re-platting until all
requirements of this Article have been complied with, and until a final signed copy of a
subdivision plat shall have been delivered to all City departments affected thereby, including the
Engineering Department, Building Inspector, Superintendent of Sewer Works, and
Superintendent of Public Works. No zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued until water
lines and any required sewer lines are installed, fire plugs are installed in an operating condition,
and until all public roads required to be constructed are in usable and passable condition.
SECTION 17.13 ENFORCEMENT
No plat or any subdivision shall be permitted to be recorded by the County Clerk or to
have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner aforementioned, provided by
the City Council.
SECTION 17.14 PLATS
CROSS SECTION
No.
of
Lanes
RO
W
1
2
3
4
Full
Width 5
Full
Media
n
6
Parking
MAJOR STREETS
A
B
C
D
4422
94'
80
68'
55
1'
1'
1'
1'
4'
4'
4'
4'
7'
7'
7'
7'
2'
2'
1'-6"
1'-6"
48'
48'
42'
28'
18'
4'
-
-
No
No
Both Sides
No`
COLLECTOR STREETS
E
F
G
222
65'
58'
50'
1'
1'
1'
4'
4'
4'
7'
7'
6'-6"
1'-6"
1'-6"
1'-6"
38'
31'
28'
-
-
-
Both sides
One side
No
LOCAL STREETS
H
2
50'
1'
4'
6'-6"
1'-6"
28'
-
Notes: Street trees to be planted in grass area (3) if space is 6' wide or wider.
(1) Maximum distance between ROW & Sidewalk edge (private side)
(2) Minimum width of sidewalk.
(3) Minimum distance between sidewalk edge (public side) & edge of curb.
(4) Minimum width of curb and/or gutter.
(5) Full width of street surface (measured back of curb to back of curb.)
(6) Median (if applicable).

ARTICLE 18
TRAFFIC, STREETS, PARKING AND PARKING METERS
SECTION 18.1 DEFINITIONS
(a) Vehicles - Every device in, upon, or by which any person, or property is or may be
transported, or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(b) Motor Vehicles - Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but not operated upon rails.
(c) Authorized Emergency Vehicle - Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police
vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments of public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of Police of this City.
(d) Bicycle - Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, either of which is 20 inches in diameter, and including any devices
generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels.
(e) Motorcycle - Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
(f) Railroad - A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated
upon stationary rails.
(g) Railroad Train - A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.
(h) Traffic - Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances,
either singly or together while using any street for purpose of travel.
(i) Right Of Way - The privilege of the immediate use of the road way.
(j) Stop - When required, means complete cessation of movement.
(k) Stop, Stopping, or Standing - When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
(1) Park - When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
(m) Person - Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation.
(n) Driver - Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
(o) Pedestrian - Any person afoot.
(p) Police Officer - Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(q) Traffic Division - The Traffic Division of the police department of this City.
(r) Street or Highway- The entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly
maintained right of way, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(s) Private Road or Driveway - Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implies permission from the owner, but
not by other persons.
(t) Roadway - That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
(u) Sidewalk - That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
(v) Alley - A public travelway of normally less than 24 feet in width used primarily for
delivery service.
(w) Through Highway - Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highway is required by law to stop before entering
or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this act.
(x) Intersection - The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one
another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
(y) Crosswalk - That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the
curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. Any portion of a
roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
(z) Safety Zone - The area of space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive
use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be
plainly visible at all times, which set apart as a safety zone.
(a-1) Curb Loading Zone - A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
(a-2) Passenger Curb Loading Zone - A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
(a-3) Freight Curb Loading Zone - A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
(a-4) Official Traffic-Control Devices - All signs, signals, marking, and devices not
inconsistent with this Article, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, marking or guiding traffic.
(a-5) Traffic-Control Signal - Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
(a-6) Business District - The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when within
any 600 feet along such roadway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes,
including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings
which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
roadway.
(a-7) Residence District - The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more
in the main is improved with dwellings or dwellings and buildings in use for business.
(a-8) Central Business (or traffic) District - All streets and portions of streets within the
Central Business District as defined elsewhere in this Article.
SECTION 18.2 POLICE ADMINISTRATION
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a Traffic Division to be
under the control of an officer of police, appointed by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division and other members of the Police Department to enforce
the street traffic regulations of this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents, and to cooperate with the officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and
in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially
imposed upon said division by this Article and the traffic articles of this City.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic articles of this City
or of the State Vehicle Laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the
final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types
of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a 5-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent 5-year period.
All such records and reports shall be public records.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted by other police officers of the department,
to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. Whenever the accidents at any particular
location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall conduct studies of such accidents and
determine remedial measures. The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing accident
reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. The
Traffic Division shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under State Law or
under any Article of this City, but all such accident reports made by drivers shall be for the
confidential use of the Police Department and the City Traffic Engineer, and no such report shall be
admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making such
report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to prove a compliance with the laws requiring
the making of any such report.
The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all
traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and complaints reported for each driver, which shall
be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Said division shall study the cases of
all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall
take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such
persons suspended or revoked. Such records shall accumulate during at least a 5-year period and
from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent 5-year
period. The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City
Manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows:
1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons
injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.
2. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety
activities of the police.
3. The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities.
The Traffic Division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be
displayed upon, or other method to be employed, to identify the vehicles in funeral processions.
SECTION 18.3 OFFICE OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER ESTABLISHED
The Office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The officer in charge of the Traffic
Division of the Police Department shall serve as City Traffic Engineer, in addition to his other
functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Article.
It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic
accidents, and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions
and to cooperate with other City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by articles of this City.
The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the City Manager, is hereby empowered to
make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic articles of this City and to
make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
SECTION 18.4 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police, to enforce all street traffic laws of this City and all of the State Vehicle Laws
applicable to street traffic in this City. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event
of a fire, or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic threat, or in the immediate vicinity. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. Every person
propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any
animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this Article applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions. of this Article which by their very nature can have no application.
No person upon roller skates or riding in, or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so
crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
as authorized by Ordinance of this City. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County, or City,
and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this Article, except as
otherwise permitted in this Article or by State Statute.
The provisions of this Article regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall
apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this Article, except as follows:
A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed
by a police officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provision of this Article.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified
directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
These exemptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust
whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the
front as a warning to others. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others.
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one
lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible, under normal atmospheric conditions, from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately
drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right hand edge of the curb of the
roadway, clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This section shall
not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death of any person or
property damage to an apparent extent of $25.00 or more, shall immediately by the quickest means of
communication, either verbally or written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department, if
such accident occurs within this City.
SECTION 18.5 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
The City Manager shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when
and as required under the traffic regulation of this City to make effective the provisions of said
regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic regulations of this City or under State Law, or to guide
or warn traffic. All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform with the manual and
specifications approved by the State Highway Department or resolution adopted by the City Council
of this City.
All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable,
be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of State Law or this Article, shall be official traffic-control devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable
thereto, placed in accordance with the traffic articles of this City, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
Article.
No provision of this Article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does
not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective, even though no signs are erected in
place.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words, AGo@,
ACaution@, or AStop@, or exhibiting different colored lights successively, one at a time, or with arrows,
the colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows:
(a) Green alone or AGo@
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may proceed
straight through to turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(b) Yellow alone or ACaution@, when shown following the green or Ago@ signal.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the respective
Agreen@ or Ago@ movement is being terminated and is thereby warned that the
Ared@ or Astop@ signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter; and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the Ared@ or Astop signal
is exhibited.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the Agreen'' or
Ago@ is shown alone (unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian Awalk@ signal).
(c) Red alone or AStop@.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the
intersection and shall remain standing until green or Ago@ is shown alone.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
Ago@ is shown alone (unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian Awalk@
signal).
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words, Awalk@ or Await@ are in
place, such signals shall indicate the following:
(a) Walk - Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction
of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of the vehicles.
(b) Wait - No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal,
but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal, shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular
traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing Red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) Flashing Yellow (caution sign). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only
with caution.
No person shall place, maintain, or display upon, or in view of, any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of the traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall
any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways or signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs. Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove
same or cause it to be removed without notice.
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to, or in fact, alter, deface, injure, knock
down, or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription,
shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(2) Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(3) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem
advisable, consistent with the traffic articles of this City.
SECTION 18.6 SPEED LAWS
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets
within the City, except as this Article, as authorized by State law, hereby declares and determines
upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be
applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this Article when
signs are in place giving notice thereof.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the
speed permitted as safe and reasonable upon the streets or roadways within the City is as established
by this Section.
a. Speeds on Certain Specified Streets:
(1) Broadway, between 19th Street and 27th Street, 30 miles per hour.
(2) Broadway, between 27th Street and 34th Street, 35 miles per hour.
(3) Broadway, between 8th Street and 12th Street, 35 miles per hour.
(4) Salem Road, between 11th Street and the North Corporate Limits, 35 miles
per hour.
(5) Main Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street, 20 miles per hour.
(6) Ninth Street, between Harrison Street and Casey Avenue, 20 miles per hour.
(7) Tenth Street, between Harrison Street and Jordan Street, 20 miles per hour.
(8) Tenth Street, between Jordan Street and Vaught Street, 25 miles per hour.
(9) All United States and State Highways, except as hereinabove established, 25
miles per hour.
(10) Wherever a highway or street is adjacent to a public or private school,
college, university, or church, the Speed permitted as safe and reasonable is
15 miles per hour, whenever school or church is in session and at all other
times as established by other subsections or this section.
(11) Veteran's Memorial Drive, between 10th Street and 17th Street, 30 miles per
hour.
(12) Veteran's Memorial Drive, between 17th Street and 26th Street, 40 miles per
hour; and between 26th Street and 42nd Street, 35 miles per hour.
(13) 42nd Street, between Veteran's Memorial Drive and Broadway, 35 miles per
hour.
(14) Lake Terrace Drive, 40 miles per hour.
(15) South 45th Street/Wells Bypass South of 625 South 45th Street, 40 miles
per hour.
(b) Streets on Which The Speed Shall Not Exceed 30 Miles Per Hour:
(1) South 10th Street, between Vaught Avenue and the South Corporate limits.
(2) Shawnee Street, between Perkins Avenue and the South Corporate Limits.
(3) Wilshire Drive.
(4) 12th Street, between Jones and Fishers Lane.
(5) 42nd Street, between Fox Creek and Richview Road.
(c) Streets on Which The Speed Shall Not Exceed 20 Miles Per Hour-East - West
(1) North Street, between 9th Street and 12th Street.
(2) Harrison Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
(3) Jordan Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
(4) Casey Avenue, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
North - South:
(1) 8th Street, between Main Street and Casey Avenue.
(2) Johnson Avenue, between North Street and Jordan Street.
(3) 11th Street, between North Street and Casey Avenue.
(4) 13th Street, between 12th Street and Broadway.
(5) 14th Street, between Main Street and Broadway.
(d) Streets on Which the Speed Shall Not Exceed 30 Miles Per Hour:
All streets not otherwise designated in this section are limited to 30 miles per hour.
(e) Streets on Which the Speed Limit Shall Not Exceed 25 Miles Per Hour:
All streets adjacent to or abutting hospitals, infirmaries, sanitariums, asylums, or other
clinical or convalescent institutions.
SECTION 18.7 ONE WAY STREETS
In order to patrol the flow of traffic in the eye of public safety, the following streets are
hereby determined and declared to be one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle
on any of the following designated streets, except as directed:
(1) Westbound only: Main Street between 4th and 14th Streets.
(2) Eastbound only: Broadway Street between 14th and 4th Streets.
(3) Northbound only: Eighth Street between Main and Jordan Streets.
(4) Southbound only: Johnson Avenue between Broadway and Main Street.
(5) Southbound only: 14th Street between Main and Broadway.
(6) Northbound only: 4th Street between Main and Broadway.
(7) Northbound only: Public alley from Casey Avenue to Jordan Avenue between
7th and 8th Streets.
(8) North and East bound only: Public alley running from Casey Avenue in the middle
of the 1800 block, north to Casey Junior High School,
east to South 18th Street in the middle of the 200
block.
(9) Alley between 10th and 11th Streets, running north and south between Main and
Broadway, will be one-way from Main Street South to Broadway.
(10) Westbound only: Main Street from intersection of Old and New Fairfield Road
to 14th Street.
(11) Eastbound only: Broadway from 14th Street to intersection of Old and New
Fairfield Road.
(12) Eastbound only: Lamar Street from 10th Street (Dr. Martin Luther King
Memorial Drive) to 6th Street.
(13) Southbound only: 6th Street from Lamar to Conger Avenue.
(14) Westbound only: Conger Avenue from 6th Street to 9th Street.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(a) Right Turn - Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(b) Left Turn - Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the center line thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway
being entered.
(c) Approach for Left Turn from Two-Way Street - Approach for a left turn from a
two-way street onto a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection, and as close to the left hand lane as practicable. A left turn from a
one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of
the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
(d) Left Turn From and Into One-Way Street - Where both streets or roadways are
one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left hand curb or edge of the roadway.
The City Manager is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such
course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or Article.
When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications.
The City Manager or Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U turns and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted,
no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such
movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
SECTION 18.8 ONE-WAY STREET SIGNS
Whenever any ordinance of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Manager
shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless
such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. Vehicular traffic
shall move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
SECTION 18.9 THROUGH STREETS
Those streets and parts of streets described hereafter are hereby declared to be through streets
for the purpose of this section:
(a) The following are hereby designated as North and South Through Streets:
(1) 4th Street - Castleton Avenue to Main Street.
(2) 6th Street - Broadway to Main Street.
(3) 8th Street - (Tolle Road) Harrison to Oakland Avenue.
(4) 9th Street - Casey Avenue to Taylor Avenue.
(5) 10th Street and Salem Road - South City Limits to North City Limits.
(6) 12th Street - South City Limits to North City Limits.
(7) 14th Street - Broadway to Main.
(8) 19th Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
(9) 22nd Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
(10) 24th Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
(11) 26th Street - South City Limits to Perkins Avenue.
(12) 27th Street - Logan Street to Broadway.
(b) The following are hereby Designated as East and West Through Streets:
(1) .Perkins Avenue and Shawnee Street - East City Limits to 26th Street
(2) Castleton Avenue- East City Limits to 4th Street.
(3) Casey Avenue - East City Limits to 12th Street
(4) Broadway - East City Limits to West City Limits.
(5) Main Street - East City Limits to 14th Street.
(6) Harrison Street - East City Limits to 9th Street.
(7) Oakland Avenue and Richview Road - 8th Street (Tolle Road) to West City
Limits.
(8) Logan Street - 12th Street to 24th Street.
Whenever any ordinance of this City designates and describes a through street, it shall be the
duty of the City Manager to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance
of this City.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections and
streets where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether
vehicles shall stop or decrease speed at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, or on any
such streets and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required and a slow or
caution sign when a decrease in speed is required.
Every sign erected pursuant to this Article shall bear the word AStop@ in letters not less than 6
inches in height and such signs shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal
illumination or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting
elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest
line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, at the nearest line of the
roadway.
When a stop sign is erected as herein provided at or near the entrance to any intersection,
every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before
entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control sign.
Whenever a sign or signs are erected upon any street or roadway displaying the word ASlow@
or ACaution@, the operator of any vehicle shall decrease the motion of such vehicle to a speed of at
least 10 miles less than otherwise established as the maximum speed in the area in which the said
vehicle is being operated and in no event shall the speed of any vehicle operated in a zone designated
as ASlow@ or ACaution@ exceed 20 miles per hour.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching said roadway.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less
than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The
foregoing shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate
approach of a railroad train.
(2) A railroad train approaching within approximately 1500 feet of the highway crossing
emits a signal audible from such distances and such railroad train by reason of its speed or
nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard.
(3) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such
crossing.
SECTION 18.10 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. No vehicle shall be
driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private
driveway, or streetcar track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the
department official in command.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated
as are required in this Article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as closely as is practical and safe. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division.
No funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles,
excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this State, and the
forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street, except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as are set forth
herein which may apply.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back same nor leave the curb with a forward movement
unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular
attached seat or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other
than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. Any person riding upon any
bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or
himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or garage shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley,
sound the horn of said vehicle, and shall exercise unusual care in driving upon said sidewalk or cross
such line.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or
temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone.
SECTION 18.11 RIGHT-OF-WAY
Except as hereinafter provided, motor vehicles traveling upon public highways shall give the
right of way to vehicles approaching along intersecting highways from the right and shall have the
right of way over those approaching from the left.
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right
of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so
close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal, when is as required by this Article, may make such left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall yield the right of way
to the vehicle making the left turn.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction unless such movement can be made safely and without backing into traffic or
otherwise interfering with traffic.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a AU@ turn at any place where such
turns are prohibited.
Upon the sounding of gongs or warning devices used upon fire apparatus or fire patrol
vehicles, drivers shall drive their vehicles as near to the right curb as is reasonably possible and shall
remain standing until such fire apparatus has passed. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within
the block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the
roadway, except as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under
the rules governing such movement.
(2) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or
repair.
(3) Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable
thereon; or
(4) Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
(5) Whenever there is single track paved road on one side of the public highway and
two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder, shall give the
right of way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite direction shall pass each other to the right and
upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction; each driver shall
give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the
same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special rules hereinafter stated.
(a) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the
roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
(b) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an
overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible
signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
(c) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which
is making or about to make a left turn. The driver of a vehicle may overtake, and, allowing
sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, either upon the
left or upon the right on a street or roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for four or more lines of moving traffic, when such movement can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or
passing on the right. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the
right on a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction
of movement, where the street or roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width
for two or more lanes of moving traffic.
(d) No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking
and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly
visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event,
the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming
within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
(e) No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be
driven to the left side of the street or roadway under the following conditions:
(1) When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway.
(2) When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel, or when
approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
(f) The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a
vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway.
(g) When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on
the right.
(h) The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield
the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having
so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left
turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite
direction, shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(i) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and
shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained such movement can
be made with safety.
(j) When Signals Are Required
(1) No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street or alley
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then
only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any
pedestrians shall be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate
signal in the manner provided by this Article, in the event that any other
vehicle may be affected by such movement.
(2) A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than
the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
(3) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first
giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of
any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such
signal.
(k) Signal by Hand or Arm or Signal Device
The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand or arm or by a signal
lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand or arm signal would
not be visible, both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then said signals must be given by such
lamp or device. All signals herein required to be given by the hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Left Turn - hand and arm extended horizontally.
(2) Right Turn- hand and arm extend upward.
(3) Stop or decrease speed - hand and aim extended downward.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such
entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(1) Driver’s License -No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets or roadways of
the City unless such person has a valid driver's license or permit as an operator or chauffeur
issued by the State of Illinois, except those persons exempted from driver's license and
permit requirements as provided by the laws of the State of Illinois.
(m) Stop Signs - Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
which has entered the intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely
on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time often the driver is
moving across or within the intersection, but said driver having so yielded may proceed at
such time as a safe interval occurs.
SECTION 18.12 TRAINS
(a) It is unlawful for a railroad corporation to permit any train, railroad car, or engine to obstruct
public travel at any grade crossing where a railroad intersects with a public street or alley for a period
in excess of ten minutes, except where such train, railroad car or engine cannot be moved by reason
of circumstances over which the railroad corporation has no control.
(b) It is unlawful for any railroad employee to willfully or intentionally permit any train, railroad
car or engine to obstruct public travel at any grade crossing where a railroad intersects with a public
street or alley for a period in excess of ten minutes, except where such train, railroad car or engine
cannot be moved by reason of circumstances over which the railroad employee has no control.
SECTION 18.13 PEDESTRIANS
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in this Article, but
at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in
this Article.
(a) When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle
shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from
the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a
curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that
it is impossible for the driver to yield.
(b) When Passing Not Permitted at Crosswalk - Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to
cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon
the right half crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a
route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where the pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not
cross at any place except in a crosswalk. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. No person shall stand in a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
SECTION 18.14 REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this State declaring
rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic regulations of this City applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this Article and except as to those provisions of
laws and articles which by their nature can have no application.
(a) A person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control
signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is
permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign,
except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in
which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(c) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
(d) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time that the number for which
it is designed and equipped.
(e) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand
side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(f) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast, except
on paths or parts of the roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(g) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle
riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(h) No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions then existing.
(i) No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle
upon a roadway.
(j) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(k) No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the
curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycles, or against a building, or at
the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(l) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk, street or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, if it constitutes a hazard to
traffic or pedestrians, and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey
the same.
(m) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
(n) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front
and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle.
(o) No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device
capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a
bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren
or whistle.
(p) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make
the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(q) No person shall operate, park, store, or own any bicycle within the City of Mt.
Vernon without first registering the bicycle with the Police Department of the City
and having the registration number stamped or placed thereon.
Upon written application by an owner (or, if the owner is under 18 years of age, then by his
parent or other adult guardian), and upon payment of a One Dollar fee, the Police Department of the
City of Mt. Vernon shall stamp or place a registration number on the frame of each bicycle, and shall
keep a record of each application, the name and address of the owner of the bicycle and the
registration number.
When any bicycle is transferred from one owner to another, the new owner shall make a
written application to the Police Department for transfer of registration, but no fee shall be imposed
for the change of registration.
Any person who fails to register his bicycle and obtain a registration number thereon or who
fails to change a registration upon transfer of a bicycle, thereby implicitly consents to confiscation
and retention of the bicycle by the Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon until the Department
determines the lawful owner of the bicycle and the bicycle is properly registered. Any confiscated
bicycle may be delivered by the Police Department to the owner as shown by the registration records.
The burden of proof as to ownership shall be upon the individual asserting ownership of the bicycle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, or alter any registration number
without first reporting same to the Police Department.
Any police officer or other agent of the City shall not be held to answer or be liable for
damages in any action arising from enforcement of this ordinance.
SECTION 18.14A REGULATIONS FOR SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND PLAY
VEHICLES
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
a. Business district or property shall mean any area having a business zoning
classification or any property used for a commercial, business or industrial activity or purpose.
b. Residential district or property shall mean any area having a residential zoning
classification or any property used for single family or multiple family dwellings or other residential
use.
c. Play vehicle means any coaster, scooter, roller skates, tricycle, toy wagon, sled,
toboggan, unicycle or any other non-motorized device with wheels or rollers upon which a person
may ride; however, this definition shall not apply to wheel chairs and strollers or other devices
designed and used for the purpose of transporting children, infants, physically challenged, or
incapacitated persons or to bicycles, or to trailers, wagons, carts or other devices intended and used
for transporting merchandise or materials, so long as they are used for the purpose for which they are
intended.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle upon any business
property or property situated within a business district except for such business property as may be
operated as a skating rink or otherwise designated and specifically posted with signs permitting such
activity.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle upon any public
sidewalk, except sidewalks (including the crosswalk area upon a roadway) situated within a
residential zoning district or upon residential property.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle upon any public
street (excluding a crosswalk within a residential area); except however, a person 13 years of age or
older may operate a skateboard or roller skates upon a public street within a residential zoning
district or upon residential property if there is no sidewalk adjacent to such street, provided however,
street riding shall be done as far to the right of the road as possible and in the same direction as
traffic. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall operate a skateboard or roller skates upon any
street or other public property during the hours of dusk to dawn, nor at any time upon any street
posted with a sign prohibiting the operation of skateboards, roller skates, or play vehicles.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle upon any public
parking lot, nor upon any other public property unless signs are posted specifically permitting such
activity.
No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, or play vehicle upon private
property except with the permission of the owner, lessee or person in control or possession of the
property.
No person operating a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle shall attach himself or herself
to any vehicle at any time or place.
No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle in such a manner so as to
damage or injure any publicly or privately owned property, including but not limited to, any table,
bench, structure, tennis court, parking stop, retaining wall or other improvement which may suffer
damage by such use.
Any person operating a skateboard, roller skates or other play vehicle must yield the right-ofway
to any pedestrian or lawfully operated motor vehicle, unless otherwise specifically provided by
law.
The City Manager is authorized to erect signs upon any sidewalk, street or other public
property prohibiting the operation of skateboards, roller skates or play vehicles. No person shall
operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle in violation of any sign.
No parent, guardian, legal custodian or other person having care or control of a minor shall
authorize or knowingly permit the minor to violate this Ordinance; violation of this Ordinance by a
minor after verbal or written notice or warning to the parent, guardian, legal custodian, or other
person in control of the minor shall constitute prima facie evidence that the parent, guardian, legal
custodian or other person in control of the minor has authorized or knowingly permitted the minor to
violate this ordinance.
Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor
more than $200.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
occasion during which a violation occurs; multiple offenses may occur on the same day if a violation
occurs or continues after an offense has been cited. Complaint for the offense of unlawful operation
of a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle may be made by a traffic citation complaint or by other
written complaint.
SECTION 18.15 PARKING
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street or roadway other than parallel with the
edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right hand
wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as
otherwise provided in this Article.
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted
and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal
Aid or State Highway, or immediately adjacent thereto within the City, unless the State Highway
Department has determined by resolution, or by traffic capacity study, the results of which are on file
with the City, that the roadway is of sufficient width or conditions are such as to permit angle
parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
Upon these streets which have been signed or marked by the City Traffic Engineer for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the
roadway indicated by such signs or markings. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime
upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need to be displayed upon such
parked vehicle. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
SECTION 18.16 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED
PLACES
(a) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk.
2. In front of a public or private driveway.
3. Within an intersection.
4. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
5. On a crosswalk.
6. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection.
7. Within 30 feet upon approach to any flashing beacon stop sign or traffic
control signal located at the side of the roadway.
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point on
the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the City
Traffic Engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings.
9. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing.
10. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or within 75 feet of
said entrance (when properly signposted).
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping,
standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel.
14. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
15. At any place where parking may have been prohibited by ordinance duly
enacted prior to the effective date of this ordinance or hereinafter enacted, the
City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to erect signs indicating no
parking on any street where parking may have been prohibited by such an
ordinance or where the effective regulations of traffic, health, safety and
welfare of public may require.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(c) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway or free
movement of vehicular traffic.
(d) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement
of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(e) No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or roadway for the principal purpose
of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale or storing same.
(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by
an emergency.
(f) The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that
side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation, except when loading or discharging upon that side of a
street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place,
except as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section.
(g) The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as
indicated by such signs when the width of the street does not exceed 30 feet, When official signs
prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
(h) The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs
placed, not exceeding 100 feet in length, in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. When
official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop,
stand, park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(i) The City Manager is hereby authorized to reserve spaces for handicapped
parking on public streets and public property and to post official signs indicating such reserved
handicapped parking; and private property owners are hereby authorized to reserve spaces for
handicapped parking on private lots and private property and to post official signs indicating such
reserved handicapped parking; all as provided herein and in Section 5.12 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
When official signs reserving handicap parking spaces are erected as authorized
herein, no person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any such designated space unless the
vehicle shall:
(1) Bear registration plates or a special decal or device issued to a physically
handicapped person pursuant to Section 3-616 or Section 11-1301.2 or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to Section 3-609 of the AIllinois Vehicle Code@; and
(2) Be operated by the handicapped or disabled person to whom the special registration
plates, special decal device, or visor card were issued or by a person acting under the
express direction of a handicapped or disabled person while the handicapped or
disabled person is present.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any unauthorized vehicle
to stop, stand, or park in a space specifically reserved for handicapped parking by the posting of an
official sign; such violation shall constitute the offense of Aunauthorized parking in a handicapped
zone@ and shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. Said offense maybe charged by means of a
citation or Ahang-on@ ticket.
(j) The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs designating and reserving
parking areas within the City of Mt. Vernon for use by the Police Department during the course of
official police business. Said signs shall indicate no parking or shall indicate reserved for police.
When official signs are erected as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in
any such designated place or in violation of such sign.
SECTION 18.17 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight
curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the
hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. The City Manager shall not
hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person, unless such
person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of the
zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time in any place
marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb
loading zones are effective, except for a period not to exceed five minutes.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for
the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a
freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In
no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
SECTION 18.18 EQUIPMENT
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise; no motor vehicle shall be operated upon any street unless the
same is provided with a muffler in efficient and actual working condition.
(b) It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon any street or alley unless said
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in efficient working condition.
(c) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle, the lights of which do not conform to
the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of Illinois.
(d) Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient signaling device in
efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be sounded when necessary
to give timely warning of approaching vehicle, but such horn or signaling device
shall not be sounded for any purpose other than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren,
gong signaling device or musical horn.
(e) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or is in such a condition
that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway essential to
the safe operation of the vehicle. Any vehicle which is so constructed or loaded that
the driver's view of the roadway to the rear is obstructed, shall be equipped with a
mirror so attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind him.
(f) The driver of a bus (hackney) or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop, (hackney stand), or taxicab
stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such
vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers.
(g) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, (or other
than a hackney in a hackney stand), or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when
any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except
that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus, (hackney) or taxicab waiting to enter or about to
enter such zone.
SECTION 18.19 DRIVING REGULATIONS
(a) Any person who drives any vehicle with a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
(b) Repealed.
(c) No person shall transport, carry, or possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or
about any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
(d) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the municipality in negligent or careless
manner or so as to unnecessarily endanger life and property.
(e) No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottles, glass,
nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle upon such street or alley. Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or
thrown upon any street or alley any destructive, harmful, or injurious material, shall
immediately remove same or cause it to be removed.
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or alley shall
remove any glass or injurious or harmful substances dropped on the street or alley
from such vehicle.
(f) No vehicle shall be driven or moved on a street or alley unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its cargo from dropping, shifting, leaking,
or otherwise escaping therefrom.
(g) No person shall operate upon any street or alley any vehicle with any cargo unless
said cargo and any covering thereon is securely fastened to prevent said covering or
cargo from coming loose, detached or becoming in any manner a hazard to any street,
alley, or the users thereof.
(h) No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of said vehicle is running and no
person operating or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the key.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or encumber any street, alley,
or sidewalk by standing, sitting, or remaining upon the same or to cause persons to
assemble thereon or by placing merchandise or any article or thing thereon so as to
prevent the free and convenient passage of persons or vehicles upon and over the
entire area of such street, alley, or sidewalk, nor shall any person obstruct or endanger
the free passage of persons or vehicles along any street, alley, or sidewalk by playing
any game therein or thereon.
(j) Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parking or stopping in
violation of any of the laws imposed by ordinance of this City and if any officer of
the City shall observe such violation, such police officer shall attach to such vehicle a
notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked or operated
in violation of a provision of any such ordinances which said notice shall contain the
license number of such vehicle, the date and time thereof, other information relative
to the violation alleged and any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation, and further
instructing such owner or operator to report to the City of Mt. Vernon in regard to
such violation.
Such owner or operator may, within forty-eight hours of the time when such notice
was attached to such vehicle, pay to the City of Mt. Vernon as a penalty for and in
full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). The failure of such
owner or operator to make such payment within said forty-eight hours shall render
such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for the violation of any of
the City ordinances.
(k) Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove without notice to
the owner a vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage
designated or maintained by the Police Department or otherwise maintained by the
City under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated;
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway or
in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
2. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction
to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of
physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for
its custody or removal.
3. When any vehicle is left unattended on a street and is so parked illegally as to
constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
4. When any vehicle is illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle
creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or
obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle.
5. When any vehicle reasonably appears to be lost or stolen.
6. When any vehicle cannot be removed by its operator or when any vehicle is
required to be placed into the custody of law enforcement because of the
arrest of the operator or other occupant of the vehicle or because of the
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code or violation of any other provision of
local, state or federal law.
The owner of any motor vehicle removed by authorization of the Mt. Vernon Police
Department shall be responsible for all towing (including storage) charges and the
administrative fee imposed by Section 18.19 (n) herein, except for that removal
pursuant to Subparagraph 2 and 5 of subsection (k) shall not be subject to the
administrative fee unless the owner or operator shall have been issued a violation of
the Illinois Vehicle Code or of any other provision of local, state, or federal law.
(l) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in Section (k) and
the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration record in the vehicle the
name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause
to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the
reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed.
The officer shall also keep and maintain a record of the vehicle removed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's
series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number,
and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall
also include the date and hour of removal, reason for removal, and name of officer
authorizing the removal.
In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such
notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. Whenever an officer removes a
vehicle from a street under Section (k) and does not know and is not able to ascertain
the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the
owner as hereinbefore provided and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the
owner within a period of three (3) days, then and in that event the officer shall
immediately send or cause to be sent written reports of such removal by mail to the
State Department whose duty it is to register vehicles and shall file a copy of such
notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored.
Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and
place from which removed and reason for such removal, name of the garage or place
where the vehicle is stored.
Such vehicle shall then be processed and disposed of in accordance with Section 18.19 (m) of
the Revised Code.
(m) The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway or street in this
municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth within the Revised Code. The
abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property other than a highway in
view of the general public anywhere in this City, is unlawful except on property of the owner or
bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
When an abandoned vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in
this State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police Department
when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the City.
A vehicle shall be presumed to be an Aabandoned vehicle@ for the purposes of this Section
when:
1. The vehicle or any part thereof is parked or left unattended on private property
without authorization of the owner of the property or on public property other than a highway in
view of the general public for a period of seven days or more; or
2. The vehicle or any part thereof is parked or left unattended on a highway or street
within the City 10 hours or more.
An abandoned vehicle may be authorized to be removed or towed by the members of the
police department, provided however, that prior to the removal of an abandoned vehicle, written
notice personally served or written notice by certified mail return receipt requested shall be given to
the registered owner. Said notice shall identify the vehicle, identify the location of the vehicle, state
the factual basis for towing and presumption of abandonment, and advise that, unless the vehicle is
removed by the owner within 72 hours, it will be removed by the police department as an abandoned
vehicle. Said notice shall also state that the owner may appear before the Building Official for the
City of Mt. Vernon within the 72 hours and show cause why the vehicle should not be removed as an
abandoned vehicle. In addition, a notice shall be placed upon the vehicle identifying the vehicle as an
abandoned vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be removed by the Police Department after a
lapse of 72 hours from the date appearing on the notice unless the vehicle is removed by the owner or
unless the owner contacts the Building Official for the City of Mt. Vernon and shows cause why it
should not be removed.
When removal of a vehicle from either public or private property is authorized by order of the
Police Department pursuant to subsection 18.19 (m), the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for
all towing costs( including storage) and the administrative fee imposed by Section 18.19 (n) herein.
3. When a vehicle is authorized to be removed, the Police Department shall keep and
maintain a record of the vehicle removed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade
name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and
number, and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The records shall also
include the date and hour of removal, location removed from, location removed to, reason for
removal, and the name of the officer authorizing the removal.
When the Police Department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other
legally entitled person, they will cause the State Motor Vehicle Registration records to be searched
by a directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required
ownership information.
The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the State Police to be searched by
a directed communication to the State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When
the State Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the National
Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the State Police. The information
determined from these record searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notice by
certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person, advising that the vehicle has been removed by
the Police Department, advising where the vehicle has been removed to, advising as to the legal or
factual basis for the determination that the vehicle was abandoned, requesting a disposition be made,
and setting forth public sale information.
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle
cannot be identified from the registration files of the State or from the registration files of a foreign
state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State Police for the purpose of identifying
the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to possession of the vehicle.
The information obtained by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law
enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner.
At any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the
owner or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the
Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right of possession of the vehicle. No vehicle
shall be released to the owner or other person under this Section until all towing and storing charges
have been paid; provided, however, that the owner or such person may appear before the Building
Official for the City of Mt. Vernon and show cause why he should not be required to pay the towing
and storage charges.
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle seven years of age or newer
remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the Police Department
having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice
of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior
to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete
description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to
reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification given after removal of the vehicle has been
returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due to the addressee having moved or
being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of the State, the sending of the
certified notice pertaining to the sale of the vehicle will not be required.
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any
means provided for in this Ordinance, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by the Ordinance without notice to the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is impounded as specified by
this Ordinance, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of 10 days for the purpose of determining
ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by mail, by public service or in person for a
determination of disposition; and an examination of the State Police stolen motor vehicle files for
theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the 10-day period without the benefit of
disposition information being received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize
the disposition of the vehicle as junk, except that if in the opinion of the Police Officer processing
the vehicle it has a value of $200 or more and can be restored to safe operating condition, the Police
Chief or his designee may authorize its purchase as salvage, provided the requirements of State law
are met.
A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a person desiring to
restore it.
When a motor vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered
owner or other legally entitled person or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed
of as provided by this Ordinance, a report of the transaction will be retained by the Police
Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the City is authorized to be removed by
the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth in this Ordinance, the proceeds of the public sale or
disposition after the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges shall be deposited in the
municipal treasury.
Any Police Officer, towing service owner, operator, or employee shall not be held to answer
or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or
his legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Ordinance.
n) Except as otherwise provided within the Section 18.19 (k) when any vehicle is removed or
towed pursuant to the authorization of the Mt. Vernon Police Department, an administrative fee of
$100.00 shall be imposed and collected prior to release of the motor vehicle to its owner or other
authorized person; collection of said administrative fee shall be effected pursuant to the towing
policy and procedures of the Mt. Vernon Police Department.
SECTION 18.20 STREET PARKING
a) In order to regulate and to promote the safety of traffic upon the streets of Mt.
Vernon, there are hereby established and fixed certain zones to be known as non-metered parking
zones in and upon the following streets:
(1) The north and south side of Broadway from Eighth Street to Ninth Street; and the
north side of Broadway from Seventh Street to Eighth Street.
(2) The south side of Broadway from Ninth Street to Twelfth Street.
(3) The south side of Broadway from Thirteenth Street to Fourteenth Street.
(4) The north and south side of Main Street from Eighth Street to Ninth Street.
(5) The north side of Main Street from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
(6) The north and south side of Main Street from Tenth Street to Twelfth Street.
(7) The north side of Jordan Street from Eighth Street to Johnson Street.
(8) The north and south side of Jordan Street from Johnson Street to Twelfth Street.
(9) The north and south side of Harrison Street from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
(10) The east and west side of Ninth Street from Harris on to Main Street.
(11) Repealed.
(12) The east and west side of Ninth Street from Broadway to Casey Street.
(13) The west side of Tenth Street from North Street to Harrison Street.
(14) The east and west side of Tenth Street from Harris to Street to Main Street.
(15) The west side of Tenth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
(16) The east and west side of Tenth Street from Broadway to Casey Street.
(17) The east and west side of Eleventh Street from Harrison Street to Jordan Street.
(18) The south side of Harrison from 811 Harrison to 825 Harrison, inclusive.
(19) The west side of 7th Street from Main to Broadway.
(b) The City Manager shall cause parking signs to be installed and maintained in said
zones at such locations as he shall from time to time designate and determine to be proper for the
effective regulation and safety of traffic within the provisions of this Article and its amendments and
in accordance with directions of the City Council when the Council elects to exercise jurisdiction by
specific Council action.
Parking signs installed in the parking zones as provided for herein shall be placed upon the
curb immediately adjacent to the parking spaces, which parking spaces shall be designated by lines
or markings painted or placed upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking space, and each
vehicle parked shall be parked within the lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or street.
It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this Article to park any vehicle across any
such line or marking or to park any vehicle in any position so that same shall not be entirely within
the area designated by said line or marking.
When a parking space in any parking zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk any
vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that such vehicle is heading in the same
direction as the traffic lane nearest such curb or sidewalk; when a parking space in any parking zone
is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the
front part of such vehicle nearest to the curb or sidewalk.
(c) Parking at the parking spaces at the location specified in Subsection (a) shall be and is
hereby limited to a period of two hours. Parking shall be without charge. The time limit for parking
in said zones at said parking spaces shall be in effect from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on each day of
every week, except Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. Parking in said zones at said parking
spaces shall be without limitations on Saturday, Sunday, legal holidays, and on weekdays from 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(d) The City Manager shall cause signs prohibiting parking to be installed at such spaces
in front of each movie picture theater located within the said non-metered parking zone as he shall
determine from time to time to be proper for the effective regulation and safety of traffic, which
signs shall prohibit parking in front of said movie picture theaters during the time said theaters are
open to the public. The provisions of this Article establishing and regulating loading zones shall
control the use of said parking spaces.
(e) Prohibited parking zones are hereby established in and upon the following
streets:
1. The East side of 10th Street from Main to Broadway
2. The South side of Main Street from the West side of Jefferson County
Courthouse steps to 10th Street
3. The South side of Mannen Street from 27th Street to Logan Street.
4. The West side of 19th Street from Logan Street to Perkins Avenue.
5. The East side and the West side of 22nd Street from Broadway to Perkins
Avenue.
6. The East side and the West side of 24th Street from Broadway to Perkins
Avenue.
7. The East side of 26th Street from Perkins Avenue to Forest Avenue.
8. The East side and the West side of 26th Street from Forest Avenue to
Veterans Memorial Drive.
9. The South side of Casey Avenue from 19th Street to 27th Street.
Parking within the said above prohibited zones shall constitute the offense of parking in a
prohibited zone and shall be punishable by a penalty of $10.00 if paid within 72 hours of the
violation; in addition, failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours of the violation shall render the
owner or operator of the vehicle subject to the penalty stated within Article 22, Section 22.6 of the
Revised Code. Said offense of parking in a prohibited zone may be charged by means of citation of
Ahang-on@ ticket.
There is also hereby established a non-metered reserved parking zone for use by official
vehicles of the Jefferson County Sheriffs Department and Judges of the Second Judicial Circuit in
and upon the west side of Ninth Street from Main Street to Broadway. Parking by authorized
vehicles at said non-metered reserved spaces shall be without charge and without time limitation.
Parking by non-authorized vehicles at said non-metered reserved parking spaces shall constitute the
offense of parking in a prohibited zone and shall be punishable as provided herein.
There is hereby established a non-meter parking zone along the East side of Ninth Street,
from Main Street to Broadway; parking is hereby limited within the above non-metered parking
zone on weekdays (except legal holidays) from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to a period of thirty minutes,
except that parking shall be for a period of two (2) hours for a vehicle displaying a Aplacard permit@
issued by the City Clerk as hereinafter provided. Upon written authorization from the City Manager,
the City Clerk shall issue a Aplacard permit@ for parking within the parking spaces along the East side
of Ninth Street from Main Street to Broadway; the City Manager is hereby authorized to determine
each business having direct frontage on the East side of Ninth Street from Main Street to Broadway
and is authorized to direct, upon receipt of a written request from such a business owner, issuance of
up to two Aplacard permits@ per business, for use exclusively by customers of said businesses. Each
Aplacard permit@ shall be numbered, designated as to a specific business, limited in authorization to
two hours, and shall constitute a license revocable by City at any time without cause upon written
notice to the business to whom the placard has been issued. A Aplacard permit@ must be displayed in
clear view, in the left front window of the vehicle during all times that the vehicle is parked or
parking by said vehicle shall be limited to a period of thirty minutes. Parking in the zone beyond the
legal time limit shall be subject to the same penalty as imposed for parking in a two hour zone.
(f) Parking shall be and is hereby prohibited along the curb in front of any drive-in
United States mailbox for a longer period of time than that required to deposit mail. The violation of
the provisions of this section shall subject the owner or operator of such improperly parked vehicle to
the penalty set forth herein for parking in a prohibited zone.
(g) It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person
to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or permitted by such person
to be parked beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space within the
parking zone as herein described and established; same shall constitute the offense of prohibited
parking. Parking beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space shall
constitute a separate offense for each individual violation of the period of legal parking time (e.g.
every two hours within a two-hour zone, every 30 minutes within a 30-minute zone).
The offense of prohibited parking in a two-hour zone, a 30-minute zone, or other timelimited
zone shall be punishable by a penalty of $10.00 if paid within 72 hours of the violation; in
addition, failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours of the violation shall render the owner or operator
of the vehicle subject to the penalties stated within Article 22, Section 22.6 of the Revised Code.
(h) It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to
deface, injure, tamper with, open, willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking
sign installed under the provisions of this Article.
(i) That within the parking zones established by this Article, there are located
commercial enterprises dealing primarily in services and of a public service nature; when said
commercial enterprises do not have access to their places of business by alleyways or private ways,
the City Manager may designate a parking space or spaces as a loading zone, if he determines same
to be necessary for the efficient regulation and safety of traffic, subject to the direction and control of
the City Council when the Council elects to exercise jurisdiction by specific Council action.
That the City Manager shall cause to be painted or placed upon the curb or street lines
indicating the area and extent of the loading zones designated and established in accordance with this
Section and the loading and unloading of persons, equipment, goods, or merchandise, when a loading
zone is provided, outside the indicated area of the designated and established loading zone shall be
unlawful and constitute a violation of this Article.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article to use any designated and established
loading zone for the parking of any vehicle or vehicles or to allow any vehicle to remain in any
designated and established loading zone for a longer period of time than that reasonably required for
the actual loading and unloading of persons, equipment, goods, and merchandise and shall subject
the owner or operator of any such improperly parked vehicles or vehicles improperly allowed to
remain in said parking zone to the penalties prescribed herein for prohibited parking in a prohibited
zone.
(j) It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon, acting in
accordance with instructions issued by the City Manager, to report the violations of any provisions of
this Section in regard to parking.
(k) The parking regulations provided within this section may be enforced by placement of
a chalk mark upon the tire or other mark upon the vehicle to identify the vehicle and to determine
whether said vehicle has parked in violation of the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful and
a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to remove, hide, destroy, alter, wipe,
tamper with, or conceal any chalk mark or other mark placed upon any person's tire or vehicle by a
police officer or other parking enforcement agent of the City or to otherwise interfere, obstruct, or
prevent any police officer or other parking enforcement officer of the City from enforcing the
provisions of this Section. This interference with parking enforcement shall be punishable by a
penalty of $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense, and $200.00 for each
subsequent offense.
SECTION 18.20A PARKING LOTS
1. The provisions of this Section shall regulate and control the motor vehicle parking
lots heretofore or hereafter acquired by the City of Mt. Vernon. Each of such municipal parking
lots now or hereafter acquired or established shall be under the supervision of the City Manager;
provided, that violations of the ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be under the supervision
of the Chief of Police and enforced by the Police Department.
2. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot in violation of
any ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, or so to park contrary to rules established by the City
Council and City Manager for the use of such parking lot, or in any manner or place other than those
designated and marked Parking Lanes or the directions of any parking lot custodian who may be
hereafter employed at any such parking lot. No commercial or freight carrying vehicle or truck nor
any trailer shall be parked in any City parking lot.
3. The municipal parking lot located at Tenth Street and Harrison Street is hereby
designated as Lot A; the parking lot located within the 100 block of Main Street is hereby designated
as Lot B; the parking lot located at Tenth Street and Jordan is hereby designated as Lot C; the
parking lot located within the 300 block of South Eleventh Street is hereby designated as Lot D; the
parking lot located within the 300 block of S. Ninth Street is hereby designated as Lot E; the parking
lot located within the 800 block of Main is hereby designated as Lot F; and the parking lot located at
Johnson Alley and Broadway (800 block of Broadway) is hereby designated as Lot G.
4. The City Manager shall cause parking meters to be installed, maintained, and
operated in a parking lot and at such locations as he shall from time to time determine to be proper
for the effective regulation and safety of traffic and parking, and shall further cause parking lanes to
be designated in each such parking lot. It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this Article
to park any vehicle across any said parking lane or marking or to park any vehicle in any such
position so that same shall not be entirely within the areas designated by such line or marking.
In any municipal parking lot where meters are installed, it shall be unlawful for
any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by
such person to be parked without first inserting a coin into the meter controlling the parking space
used or to park for a period longer than covered by such coin; same shall constitute a meter violation
and shall constitute the offense of overtime or illegal parking and shall be punishable as follows: a
penalty of $4.00 if paid within 72 hours of the violation; a penalty of $8.00 if paid after expiration of
72 hours of the violation; in addition, failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours of the violation shall
render the owner or operator of the vehicle subject to the penalties stated within Article 22, Section
22.6 of the Revised Code.
It shall be unlawful to park in any municipal parking lot where a fee is provided
by Ordinance without paying such fee.
5. The time limit for parking in municipal parking lot controlled by meters and the
charge for parking in such spaces shall be the following times and charges:
a. The time limit for parking in municipal parking Lot A, Lot B, and Lot D shall be
controlled by meters and the charge for parking in such spaces shall be the following times and
charges:
(1) Two-hour parking for two ten-cent coins of money of the United States or its
equivalent.
(2) Five-hour parking for a twenty-five cent coin of money of the United States or
its equivalent.
(3) Ten-hour parking for two twenty-five cent coins of money of the United States
or its equivalent.
b. Except for leased spaces, the time limit for parking in municipal parking lots F and G
shall be controlled by meters, and the charge for parking in such spaces shall be the following times
and charges.
(1) One-hour parking for a five-cent coin of money of the United States or its
equivalent.
(2) Two-hour parking for a ten-cent coin of money of the United States or its
equivalent.
(3) Five-hour parking for a twenty-five cent coin of money of the United States or
its equivalent.
(4) Ten-hour parking for two twenty-five cent coins of money of the United States
or its equivalent.
c. The time limit and charge for each particular metered parking space within said zones
shall be specified in the legend on the parking meter installed at such parking space and each parking
meter shall be equipped with a clearly visible signal device which indicates whether or not parking
time is expired or unexpired; and if unexpired, the amount of unexpired time remaining. When
parking in any parking space regulated by a meter, the vehicle shall be parked so that the front part of
such vehicle is nearest to such parking meter.
d. The time limit for parking in said zones at such parking places and the charge made
for the use of each parking space as hereinabove provided shall be in effect from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00
p.m. on each day of every week, except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Parking on Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays and from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. of each weekday shall be without time
limitation and without charge.
6. Parking in municipal parking Lot C and Lot E shall be without charge and
without time limitation; provided no continuous period of parking upon said lots shall exceed 24
hours.
7. Fourteen spaces within Parking Lot B shall be reserved for use by motor vehicles of
employees of the City of Mt. Vernon bearing an official parking sticker; however, all of the
provisions herein relating to parking and parking lots shall apply to said parking spaces. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park his motor vehicle within a reserved parking space unless said vehicle
displays the valid and proper parking sticker; same shall constitute the offense of parking in a
prohibited zone.
Thirty spaces in Lot F and G shall be leased to individuals for the exclusive use of said individuals;
said spaces shall be leased in the manner determined by the City Manager and shall be leased for
$25.00 per quarter provided however that enforcement of lessee's rights shall be effected by lessee by
lawful means, and enforcement shall not be effected by the City.
Thirty-six spaces within Lots F & G shall be leased to businesses and commercial establishments for
the exclusive use of said establishments and for use by persons having the lessee's permission and
authorization; said spaces shall be leased in the manner determined by the City Manager and shall be
leased for $25.00 per month provided however that enforcement of lessee's rights shall be effected by
lessee by lawful means, and enforcement shall not be effected by the City.
SECTION 18.20B PARKING EXEMPTION FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS
A motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special decal or device issued to a
handicapped person pursuant to Section 3-616 or Section 11-1301.2 or to a disabled Veteran
pursuant to Section 3-609 of AThe Illinois Vehicle Code@ or bearing a registration plate or special
decal or device of another jurisdiction issued under a comparable Statute is exempt from any
provisions under the Revised Code of Ordinances imposing time limitations on parking except
limitation of one-half hour or less on any street or highway zone or any parking lot or parking place
which is owned, leased, or owned and leased by a municipality or a municipal parking utility.
However, said vehicle is otherwise subject to the laws which prohibit parking in no-stopping and nostanding
zones in front or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus
stops, and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic
hazard, and is prohibited from parking where an official sign controlling an area expressly prohibits
parking at any time or during certain hours; any vehicle parked in such prohibited area shall
immediately be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by the officer. The parking exemption and privileges granted hereunder are strictly
limited to the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued and
to the persons acting under the express direction of the handicapped or disabled person while the
handicapped or disabled person is present.
SECTION 18.21 EXCAVATIONS
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made an opening, ditch or
excavation in or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places of the City for the
laying of any pipes already laid, or for any other purpose whatsoever, except upon condition that a
permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the City Clerk for such purpose.
(b) Any company, corporation of person desiring to lay, lower, change, or remove any
gas, water or other pipe or pipes or to make connection therewith or to make any change, alteration
or improvement in the right of way on any street, shall first apply to the City Clerk for a permit to
enter upon such street, avenue, alley or other public place of the City. Such application shall
accurately describe the premises sought to be broken, dug or excavated and the applicant shall agree
to guard properly the place which may be dug, broken or excavated so as to protect the City from
loss and all persons from accident or injury and to complete the work to be done with reasonable
dispatch and in accordance with specifications and standards furnished by the City Clerk at the time
the permit is issued, or in the case of a public utility, two copies of such current specifications and
standards may be filed by the City Clerk at the local office of the utility. The application shall be
signed by the person, persons, firm or corporation by their or its duly authorized agent; and in
addition to the other requirements therein described shall recite that the person, persons, firm or
corporation to whom the same is issued, will indemnify the City against any loss or damage in any
way resulting to the City by the granting of the permit to such applicant.
The permit shall be issued by the Clerk, in triplicate, and one copy shall remain on file in the
Clerk's office and two copies shall be delivered to the person, persons, firm or corporation, making
application or to their or its duly authorized agent, and one of the said two copies shall at all times,
when any work is in progress concerning which the permit was issued, be at the location of said work
in the custody of the person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be and remain responsible
for the proper reconstruction of the right of way or any street, avenue, alley, or other public place
described in the said permit issued to them in accordance with the specifications and standards
hereinabove described for a period of one year from the date that the said permit is issued.
(c) It shall further be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made an opening,
ditch or excavation in or upon any curbing adjacent to any street, avenue or other public place in said
City for any purpose whatsoever without first having obtained a permit from the City Clerk for such
purpose.
(d) Any person who shall desire to make any opening in or to remove any portion of a
curb adjacent to any public street, avenue, or other public place shall first apply to the City Clerk for
a permit. Such application shall accurately describe the premises sought to be broken, dug, excavated
or removed. No such permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall agree to either replace said
curb in as good condition as before or if said applicant desires, to replace said curb with a driveway
or other means of ingress and egress to said premises from the street, avenue or other public way,
then said applicant shall agree to construct said driveway of a hard surfaced material such as asphalt
or concrete according to specifications approved by the City Engineer.
(e) The City Clerk shall collect a fee in the amount of $25.00 for each permit issued
hereunder. Said fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit.
SECTION 18.22 USE OF PUBLIC GROUNDS
That no person shall place or park or cause to be placed or parked, any automobile, truck, or
other vehicle or any article of merchandise whatsoever, for the purpose of offering for sale,
displaying or storing the same, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds within the
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 18.23 SOLICITATION WITHIN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS
Solicitation on highways within the City of Mt. Vernon from an occupant of any vehicle is
hereby expressly permitted, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) Solicitation on highways shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is
required to come to a full stop.
(b) The soliciting agency must be registered with the Attorney General as a charitable
organization as provided by AAn act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable
purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an appropriation therefor; approved July 26,
1963 as amended.”
(c) The soliciting agency must be engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.
(d) The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injury to any person or property during
solicitation which is caused or related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
(e) Each person engaged in an act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or older and
shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
(f) Each soliciting agent and soliciting agency shall comply fully with the provisions of
Section 11-1006 of Chapter 95 2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes as the same may be amended from
time to time.
SECTION 18.24 TOW TRUCKS
Tow Truck is hereby defined to mean every truck designed or altered or equipped for and
used to push, tow, or draw disabled vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, tow bar, tow line, or
auxiliary axle and
to render assistance to disabled vehicles.
Every tow truck, except those owned by governmental agencies, shall have displayed on each
side thereof a sign with letters not less than 2 inches in height contrasting in color to that of the
background stating the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and operator thereof.
Every tow truck shall be equipped with: (1) one or more brooms and shovels; (2) one or more
trash cans at least 18 inches in height; and (3) one fire extinguisher of a dry chemical or carbon
dioxide type with an aggregate rating of at least 4-B, C units, and bearing the approval of a
laboratory qualified by the Division of Fire Prevention for this purpose.
Every owner or operator and driver of a tow truck shall remove or cause to be removed all
glass and debris deposited upon any street or highway by the disabled vehicle being serviced and
shall in addition spread dirt or sand upon that portion of any street or highway where oil or grease
has been deposited by the disabled vehicle being serviced.
Every tow truck operator shall in addition provide an indemnity bond or insurance policy
which shall indemnify or insure the tow, truck operator for his liability for loss or damage to any
disabled or damaged vehicle towed or stored by the tow truck operator in an amount not less than
$5,000.00 for any one accident or claim. Any such bond or policy shall be issued only by a bonding
or insuring firm properly qualified to do business at such in the State of Illinois and a certificate of
such bond or policy shall be carried in the cab of each tow truck.
Any operator or owner of a tow truck which fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall be subject to the penalties of Section 22.6 of the Revised Code. Moreover, no officer,
employee, or agent of the City during the course of his employment shall utilize the services of any
tow truck which fails to comply with the provisions of this Section, unless the requirements of public
health and safety under a particular circumstance reasonably dictate otherwise.
SECTION 18.25 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE
In addition to any other penalty or provision herein, any person who has failed to satisfy any
fine or penalty imposed by final judgment for ten or more violations of standing and parking
regulations shall be subject to the suspension of his driver's license in accordance with the provisions
of Illinois Revised Statutes, Ch. 95-1/2, Sec. 6-306.5.
Upon a person's failure to satisfy any fine or penalty imposed by final judgment for ten or
more violations of local standing and parking regulations, the City Manager or such person as
designated by him to enforce said regulations shall make a certified report to the Illinois Secretary of
State, which report shall contain the following:
(1) The name, last known address, and driver's license number of the person who failed to
pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such
person in the State of Illinois.
(2) The name and mailing address of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(3) A statement that the City of Mt. Vernon has sent a notice of impending driver's
license suspension as prescribed by Section 18.25 of the Revised Code of Ordinances to the person
named in the report at the address recorded with the Secretary of State, the date on which such notice
was sent, and the address to which such notice was sent.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension sent to the person liable for the fine or
penalty shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the
notice's date will result in the City of Mt. Vernon's notifying the Secretary of State that the person's
driver's license is eligible for suspension pursuant to this Ordinance and pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat.,
Ch. 95-1/2, Sec. 6-306.5: The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by
first-class United States mail, postage prepaid to the address recorded with the Secretary of State.
Suspension of any driver's license hereunder shall be in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch.
95-1/2, Sec. 6-306.5 and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Secretary of
State.
Whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously reported fine or
penalty or whenever it is determined that the original report was in error, the City Manager or such
person as designated by the City Manager to enforce standing and parking regulations shall notify the
Secretary of State of the payment or of the error.
A certified copy of the notification by the City of Mt. Vernon to the Secretary of State shall
be given upon request at no additional charge to the person named therein.

ARTICLE 19
MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
SECTION 19.1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the term Amobile home@ shall have the same meaning as defined within
Article 21, Section 21-124, of the Revised Code of Ordinances, City of Mt. Vernon.
SECTION 19.2 STANDARDS
All mobile homes placed upon any lot within the jurisdiction of the City after August 22,
2017, except a mobile home placed upon lands zoned R-MH (which lands and mobile home are
subject to Article 19A of the Revised Code of Ordinances), must have been manufactured not more
than 10 years prior to the date of the Application for Building Permit permitting placement of the
mobile home upon said lot and must comply with the construction standards of the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, which
compliance shall be verified by the presence of the permanently attached HUD seal/emblem on the
home. In addition, no mobile home shall be placed, or remain, upon any lot unless said mobile home
shall meet the following health and safety requirements:
(a) Each mobile home shall have all wheels, tongues, and hitch mechanisms removed or
retracted.
(b) The base of the mobile home shall be completely enclosed with mortared brick,
mortared concrete blocks, a poured concrete foundation on a footing of 1 foot by 1 foot, a basement
wall, or other commercial skirting, provided that said skirting shall not be of vinyl, plastic, or metal
construction. All skirting shall be weather resistant; shall be uniform in construction, style, and color;
and shall be compatible with the siding of the mobile home.
(c) The mobile home chassis shall be undamaged, and free from defects and
deterioration. The chassis shall be properly anchored to the floor system with approved fasteners.
The chassis shall accommodate all live loads and dead loads of the structure. The belly wrap, or
bottom board, between the chassis and floor system shall be intact, with no holes or opening to
ensure the structures thermal envelope. All structural members of the mobile home shall be free from
deterioration.
(d) The mobile home shall be placed upon and supported by piers, runners, or a solid slab
which meet the following requirements:
(i) Piers. The minimum size requirement per pier used shall be two (2) feet
by two (2) feet by two (2) feet (2’ x 2’ x 2’) deep, if a round pier is used the
minimum size requirements shall be eighteen (18) inches in diameter and twenty-four
(24) inches in depth. The distance from the center of a pier to the center of another
pier shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
(ii) Runners. Runners shall be at least thirty (30) inches wide by six (6)
inches deep with two (2) three-eights (3/8) inch reinforcing rods installed the entire
length of each runner. The runners shall be placed beneath the center of the I-beams
of the mobile home. If a crossbeam type of runner is preferred, the beams shall be a
minimum size of ten (10) feet from the center of a beam to a center of a beam.
(iii) Solid Slab. The minimum depth of a solid slab shall be six (6) inches
with reinforcing wire mesh in the concrete. A footing of one (1) foot by one (1) foot
deep is required around the perimeter of the solid slab.
(e) The pitch of the roof of the mobile home shall be within a range of three-twelfths
(3/12) pitch to five-twelfths (5/12) pitch and the mobile home shall have properly draining and
functioning guttering encircling the entire roof of the mobile home.
(f) Each mobile home shall have a porch at its primary access entrance having a
minimum size of not less than 92 inches in width and 60 inches in depth, not including stairs. In
addition, each mobile home shall have a porch or deck at its secondary access entrance of not less
than 48 inches in width and 48 inches in depth, not including stairs. Every stair, porch, deck or other
appurtenance attached to the mobile home shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair and
constructed in accordance with all applicable State and local codes. Every stair, porch, deck or other
appurtenance shall have rails if more than 30 inches above the ground surface. Concrete blocks,
lumber, or other materials shall not be stacked or used as stairs or a porch.
(g) Each mobile home shall have a minimum of two off street parking sites. Each parking
space shall comply with the requirements of Article 21, Section 21-124, definition of “parking space,
off street”.
(h) The minimum setup elevation for a mobile home shall be 32 inches.
(i) Each mobile home shall have lap siding.
(j) The minimum size of the mobile home shall be 800 square feet, exclusive of any
porch, garage, or other non-dwelling space.
(k) Every mobile home shall have smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, and fire
extinguishers installed and in good working condition in accordance with manufacturer
specifications and in accordance with all applicable laws, codes, and regulations.
(l) The plumbing system, electrical system, heating and air conditioning system, and all
other equipment and systems must be safe, sanitary, and in good working condition, and installed
and operated in accordance with manufacturer specifications and in accordance with all applicable
laws, codes and regulations.
(m) The exterior walls and roof shall be structurally sound and tight and free from defects
which might admit rain or dampness. All exterior surface materials shall be uniform in color,
maintained weatherproof, and shall be properly surface coated when required to prevent
deterioration. Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to be weather tight. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with
approved glazing materials and without open cracks or holes. Every window, other than stationary
windows, shall be easily opened and closed and shall be capable of being held in position by the
window’s hardware and shall have a locking device; every window, other than stationary windows,
shall have screens and the screens shall fit tightly into the tract of the window. All floors, walls,
windows, doors, ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, sanitary, and
structurally sound operable condition. All exterior doors, doors assemblies, and hardware shall be in
good working condition; all entrances to the mobile home shall have locks that tightly secure the
door; all exterior doors shall be sealed with proper weather stripping and weather resistant to outside
elements.
(n) All interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, and sanitary condition.
Surfaces shall be free from peeling, chipped, flaking, or abraded paint, and free from cracked or
loose plaster, and free from damage or deteriorated wall panels. Every interior door shall properly fit
within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed and be properly and securely
attached to jambs, header or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
(o) Each mobile home utilizing gas shall be connected to the mobile home site outlet by a
listed flexible mobile home connector of sufficient capacity to supply gas to the connected load.
Approved rigid pipe and fittings shall be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home
site gas outlet if the distance between the mobile home site gas outlet and mobile home gas service
connection exceeds six (6) feet. All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters, valves, or other exposed
equipment shall be protected from physical damage by vehicles or other causes.
(p) The mobile home shall be used only as a residential dwelling unit. No mobile home
shall be used as a storage building upon any lot at any time nor shall any mobile home be used as, or
for, a commercial or business structure or use. The area underneath a mobile home shall not be used
for storage.
(q) All mobile homes shall be securely anchored in accordance with the tiedown
requirements of the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act 210 ILCS 120/1, et seq.
All mobile homes lawfully placed, in full compliance with applicable ordinances, and
existing on August 22, 2017 may be continued in use even though such mobile home does not
conform to the construction and installation requirements of this Section provided there is no
physical change to the mobile home other than normal maintenance and repairs; if there is a physical
change other than normal maintenance and repair, then the mobile home must comply with the
standards of this Section. All mobile homes shall comply with the maintenance requirements that the
mobile home be structurally sound and weatherproof and that all features and systems of the mobile
home be properly installed, in good working condition, and in compliance with all applicable
Ordinances, Codes, and regulations.
SECTION 19.3 BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION
It shall be unlawful to place a mobile home within the jurisdiction of the City without first
obtaining a Building Permit permitting placement of the mobile home. The fee for the Building
Permit shall be as provided within Article 5, Section 5.9 of the Revised Code or Ordinances.
The application for Building Permit shall be upon such forms and shall comply with such
procedures as prescribed by the City of Mt. Vernon pursuant to the Revised Code of Ordinances and
the applicable Ordinances and Codes of the City of Mt. Vernon.
Each application for a Building Permit for a mobile home shall include proof satisfactory to
the Building Inspector of the City of Mt. Vernon of all matters needed to determine inspection
requirements as hereinafter set forth.
No Building Permit for placement of a mobile home within the jurisdiction of the City shall
be issued until after the following inspection requirements have been satisfied:
(a) If the mobile home is new and has not been previously set up or occupied and
if the Certificate of Origin, Certificate of Title, Purchase Agreement, or other
evidence satisfactory to the Building Inspector establishing such fact is filed with the
Application for Building Permit, no physical inspection of the interior and exterior of
the mobile home shall be required, provided the Building Permit application shall
include not less than five (5) quality color photographs of the interior rooms of the
mobile home and not less than five (5) quality color photographs of the exterior of
the mobile home, which photographs shall become the property of the City.
(b) If the requirements of subparagraph (a) above are not met, then the interior
and exterior of the mobile home shall be subject to inspection by the Building
Official (or his designee) of the City of Mt. Vernon to determine whether said mobile
home meets the Mobile Home Standards as set forth within this Article. The fee for
inspection, which shall be paid prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, shall be
$30 if the mobile home is situated within Jefferson County, Illinois and $50 plus the
prevailing standard mileage rate under the U. S. Internal Revenue Code per mile for
travel to and from the site where the mobile home is inspected if said site is not
situated within Jefferson County, Illinois; the inspection fee shall be in addition to the
fee for the Building Permit.
(c) Notwithstanding any provision herein, the City of Mt. Vernon reserves the
right to inspect any mobile home for which an application for Building Permit is
filed. If an inspection is conducted and if a misrepresentation or other inaccuracy in
the information provided under paragraph (a) above is discovered then the inspection
fee shall be assessed and paid in addition to any penalties imposed under this
Ordinance.
SECTION 19.4 MOBILE HOME USE
A mobile home shall be used only as a residential dwelling unit. No mobile home shall be
used as a storage building upon any lot at any time nor shall a mobile home be used as a commercial
or business structure or use.
SECTION 19.5 ENFORCEMENT
When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection Department of the City or
the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that exists which violates the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Inspection Department or the City Manager or the designee of any
of them is hereby authorized to serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the owner and
occupant of the mobile home alleged to be in violation, which such Notice shall describe the alleged
violation and shall require the owner and occupant to remedy the violation within a reasonable time
of not more than 10 days after service of such Notice. The Notice shall be served in writing, either
personally or to the last known address of such person or persons; or, if no address is known, by
posting Notice upon the mobile home. In the event the owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or refuse
to remedy the violation within 10 days after the service of Notice, then the City may proceed to
remedy the violation, including the institution of legal action against the owner and/or occupant for
an Order authorizing removal of the mobile home or for imposition of a fine or for issuance of an
injunction and for such other remedies as provided by law. All costs and expenses incurred by the
City in obtaining removal of the mobile home or in otherwise remedying the violation shall be
assessed and shall be a lien against the mobile home subject of the proceeding and shall be assessed
against the owner and occupant of the mobile home. Costs and expenses shall include but shall not
be limited to: inspection and reinspection fees; title searches; postage or service fees; costs of Notice
preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time
for equipment to and from the property; other costs associated with the remedying of the violation;
the cost of disposal of materials, debris, or other such items; administrative and clerical costs; all
reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation, institution, enforcement, collection, or
foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by
the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder. Costs assessed against a mobile home may be
recovered by the City by public sale of the mobile home pursuant to and in accordance with such
order as may be entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois within the enforcement
action, provided no such sale shall occur until after Notice is given to each party known to have a
lien or other interest in said mobile home.
SECTION 19.6 PENALTY
Any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with the provisions of this Article will
be subject to a fine of not less than $5.00 or more than $200.00 for each separate offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day on which such violation
occurs or continues.
ARTICLE 19A
MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 19A.1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AManufactured Home@ shall have the same meaning as “Dwelling, Mobile Home” as defined
within Article 21, Section 21-124 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The term Manufactured Home
and Mobile Home shall be synonymous terms. Neither use of a permanent foundation nor removal of
wheels, towing devices, or any other alteration shall qualify a manufactured home as a modular unit
or as a conventional single-family dwelling.
AManufactured Home Development@ shall mean and include an area of land on which two or
more occupied manufactured homes are placed, either free of charges or for revenue, together with
any building, structure, or improvement used as part of the equipment of such development.
SECTION 19A.2 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MANUFACTURED HOME
DEVELOPMENT
It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or operate any manufactured home development
within the jurisdiction of the City without first having obtained a license therefor. The license shall
be an annual license expiring on April 30 of each year. Application for such license shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk. The City Building Inspector shall review all license applications; no license
shall be issued until the manufactured home development has been inspected by the City Building
Inspector or his designee and approved as meeting the requirements of this Article and Article 21,
Section 21-203 “Planned Manufactured Home Development (R-MH)” of the Revised Code of
Ordinances. Each manufactured home development shall be inspected at least as often as annually
prior to renewal of the annual license. The license fee shall be as provided within Section 19A.6
herein.
All licenses to construct, all licenses to operate, and all licenses to make alterations within a
manufactured home development shall be prominently displayed in the office of the Manufactured
Home Development. Licenses issued hereunder may be transferred by the licensee; provided,
however, that such transfer shall not be effective until a Notice of License Transfer identifying the
new license holder by name, address, tax number, and telephone number is filed with the Office of
the City Clerk.
SECTION 19A.3 BUILDING PERMIT, INSPECTION, AND CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY FOR MANUFACTURED HOME
It shall be unlawful to place a manufactured home within a manufactured home development
within the jurisdiction of the City without first obtaining a Building Permit permitting placement of
each manufactured home and without complying with the standards established by Article 19 and
Article 21, Section 21-203 Planned Manufactured Home Development (R-MH) Standards of the
Revised Code of Ordinances, provided that if there shall be a conflict or a difference in the standards
or the provisions of this Article 19A and of Article 21, Section 21-203, then Section 21-203 shall
control. An applicant for Building Permit shall be entitled to a Building Permit if the Manufactured
Home Development within which the manufactured home is to be placed is licensed and in good
standing and if the manufactured home complies with the standards and requirements identified
herein. After placement of the manufactured home within the development, the manufactured home
shall be inspected by the Inspection Department to determine compliance with this Article. The fee
for the Building Permit shall be as provided within Article 5, Section 5.9 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances and the fee for each inspection shall be $30.00 per manufactured home. No manufactured
home shall be occupied without a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the City. There shall be no fee
for issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
SECTION 19A.4 RESTRICTED USE AND RESTRICTED AGE
Only structures meeting the definition of manufactured home shall be permitted within a
manufactured home development for residential occupancy. No travel trailer nor other structure
lacking toilet, bath, or shower facilities nor any nonpermanent shelter nor any other vehicle
(including recreational) designed or used solely for sleeping purposes shall be permitted for
occupancy at any time within a manufactured home development.
Except as provided below, no Building Permit shall issue permitting a manufactured home to
be placed within a manufactured home development for any manufactured home manufactured more
than 3 years prior to the date of the Application for Building Permit for placement of the
manufactured home within the manufactured home development. Said date of manufacture shall be
established only by the HUD seal/emblem affixed to the manufactured home in accordance with the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended.
A manufactured home placed within a currently existing and licensed Mobile Home Park
established prior to August 7, 2017 shall not be subject to the age restriction of three (3) years
provided above, but shall be subject to an age restriction of 10 years prior to the date of the
Application for Building Permit for placement of the manufactured home and shall be subject to the
building permit provisions and inspection requirements within Article 19, Section 19.3, of the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 19A.5 ZONING
All manufactured home development shall be situated within the Planned Manufactured
Home District, R-MH zoning, as provided within Article 21 of the Revised Code and shall comply
with the performance standards set forth within Section 21-203 for said zoning classification.
SECTION 19A.6 LICENSE FEE
The annual license fee shall be $100.00 for each manufactured home development plus
$10.00 for each manufactured home site in excess of 25 within the manufactured home development,
provided the annual license fee in no case shall exceed $1,000.00. The license fee shall be payable on
or before May 1 of each year.
SECTION 19A.7 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
In order to obtain a license to construct a new manufactured home development, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk a written application and plan documents, including the following:
(a) The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, plus the names and addresses of
the partners if the applicant is a partnership and the names and addresses of the officers if the
applicant is a corporation.
(b) The address, location, and legal description of the tract of land upon which it is proposed
to construct, operate and maintain a manufactured home development.
(c) The name of the manufactured home development.
(d) Detailed plans and specifications sealed by a registered engineer or architect licensed to
practice in the State of Illinois which include a general plot plan of the manufactured home
development with all sites and structures shown, the water supply system, the sewage disposal
system, the electrical system, the fuel supply systems, the lighting system, the method of disposal of
solid waste, all streets and sidewalks, swimming and bathing facilities, fire hydrants and details of all
accessory and auxiliary structures.
(e) The number of manufactured home sites proposed to be constructed or licensed.
(f) A statement of the fire-fighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the
manufactured home development.
(g) A plan review fee of $100.00; the fee shall be nonrefundable and shall be in addition to
the required license fee.
No changes to the water, sewage, fuel, or electrical systems other than normal maintenance,
or any relocation or modification of any site, or the expansion of the number of sites in the
development, or any relocation or modification to any access or to any parking space or to any
recreational, open, or storage space shall be made without first submitting a new license application
(regardless of whether any additional licensing fees are due) and without first obtaining any required
Building Permits.
An application for a license to alter a licensed manufactured home development shall be
submitted to the City for any changes to the water, sewage, fuel, or electrical systems other than
normal maintenance, the relocation of sites or the expansion of the number of sites in the
development. Detailed plans and specifications shall be provided to show compliance with this Act
and the promulgated rules. A plan review fee of $50.00 shall accompany the application. This fee
shall not be refundable.
An application to reduce the number of licensed sites shall be submitted to the City no later
than 10 days prior to the proposed date of reduction. The specific sites no longer required to be
licensed, and either the method of disconnecting the required utilities or a description of the method
of immobilizing the manufactured homes shall be provided. The licensee shall be responsible for
ensuring that all utilities at vacated spaces are disconnected or sealed, as prescribed by the City.
Upon receipt, and after review, of an application for a license to construct a new
manufactured home development, an application to renew a license to operate and maintain a
manufactured home development, or an application for a license to alter a licensed manufactured
home development, the City shall, if the development is, or the proposed development will be, in
conformity with this Article issue a license to construct or a license to renew or a license to alter an
original license, as the case may be. If the application for a license to construct or a license to renew
or a license to alter an original license is declined, the City shall give the reasons therefore in writing
to the applicant; and if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and
re-submit it for approval.
Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the City.
however, the City shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice specifying
the way or ways in which such licensee fails to comply with the ordinances of the City pertaining
thereto. Said notice shall require the licensee to correct the deficiency or violation specified in such
notice within 10 days or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the City. If the licensee
fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, within the time specified or such
extended period of time, the City may revoke or suspend such license.
SECTION 19A.8 SUPERVISION
Every manufactured home development shall be managed by a responsible individual whose
name, address, and telephone number shall be on file at all times with the City Clerk; the duty of the
manager, attendant, or caretaker shall be to maintain the development, its facilities, and equipment in
a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition and to comply with the provisions of this Article and all other
ordinances and laws relating to manufactured home development. The manager, attendant, or
caretaker of the manufactured home development shall, in addition to the licensee and owner of the
manufactured home development, be responsible for any violation of the provisions of this Article or
other ordinance and law relating to the manufactured home development.
SECTION 19A.9 SITES (SPACES)
Each manufactured home shall be allotted a site of not less than 5000 square feet. Each
individual manufactured home site shall abut or face on a driveway or clear, unoccupied space of not
less than 20 feet in width which space shall have unobstructed access to a public street. There shall
be an open space of at least 15 feet between the sides of every manufactured home and at least 15
feet between the ends of every manufactured home. No manufactured home shall be parked closer
than 5 feet to the side lot lines of a manufactured home development if the abutting property is
improved property or closer than 10 feet if the abutting property is a private road or closer than 15
feet if the abutting property is a public street, provided that in no event shall the front setback for
each manufactured home be less than 15 feet. No accessory building shall be placed within the
setback areas described above. Said minimum setback requirements shall not be subject to variance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, mobile home parks established, existing, licensed and
lawfully operated and in full compliance with applicable ordinances and state law as of January 1,
2003 and as of August 7, 2017 may continue utilizing existing spaces provided the following
requirements are met: Each mobile home shall be allotted a site of not less than 1,000 square feet if
licensed as of January 1, 2003 or not less than 2,300 square feet if licensed after January 1, 2003 but
prior to August 7, 2017. No mobile home shall be parked closer than 5-feet to the side lot lines of a
mobile home park, if the abutting property is improved property, or closer than 10-feet to a public,
alley or building. Each individual mobile home site shall abut or face on a driveway or cleared
unoccupied space of not less than 20-feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a
public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least 10-feet between the sides of every
mobile home and at least 5-feet between the ends of every mobile home. If a mobile home park in
existence prior to August 7, 2017 alters its mobile home spaces or the plan of the mobile home park,
then the mobile home park shall meet the requirements set forth within the first paragraph of Section
19A.9. If a mobile home park in existence prior to August 7, 2017 ceases to operate for a period of
30 days, thereafter all spaces shall comply with the requirements set forth within the first paragraph
of Section 19A.9.
SECTION 19A.10 RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Each manufactured home within a Manufactured Home Development, except a
nonconforming manufactured home as hereinafter permitted, shall comply with the following
restrictions and requirements:
(a) The manufactured home shall have all wheels and hitch mechanisms removed or
retracted.
(b) The base of the manufactured home shall be completely enclosed with commercial
skirting, mortared brick, mortared concrete blocks, a poured concrete foundation on a footing of one
foot by one foot, or basement wall. All skirting shall be weather resistant; and uniform in
construction, style and color; and shall be compatible with the siding of the manufactured home.
(c) The manufactured home shall be placed upon and supported by piers, runners, or a
solid slab which meet the following requirements:
(i) Piers. The minimum size requirement per pier used shall be two (2) feet by two
(2) feet by two (2) feet (2’ x 2’ x 2’) deep, if a round pier is used the minimum size
requirements shall be eighteen (18) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches in
depth. The distance from the center of a pier to the center of another pier shall not
exceed ten (10) feet.
(ii) Runners. Runners shall be at least thirty (30) inches wide by six (6) inches deep
with two (2) three-eights (3/8) inch reinforcing rods installed the entire length of each
runner. The runners shall be placed beneath the center of the I-beams of the
manufactured home. If a crossbeam type of runner is preferred, the beams shall be a
minimum size of ten (10) feet from the center of a beam to a center of a beam.
(iii) Solid Slab. The minimum depth of a solid slab shall be six (6) inches with
reinforcing wire mesh in the concrete. A footing of one (1) foot by one (1) foot deep
is required around the perimeter of the solid slab.
(d) The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home shall be within a range of threetwelfths
(3/12) pitch to five-twelfths (5/12) pitch, and the roof shall have architectural shingles.
(e) The manufactured home shall have properly draining and functioning guttering
encircling the entire roof of the manufactured home.
(f) The interior walls of the manufactured home shall be of drywall construction.
(g) The manufactured home shall have a porch at its primary access entrance having a
minimum size of not less than 100 square feet, not including stairs; in addition, each manufactured
home shall have a porch or deck at its secondary access entrance of not less than 30 square feet in
size, not including stairs. All porches and stairs shall comply with the applicable building and safety
codes.
(h) All manufactured mobile homes shall have lap siding.
(i) The minimum size of the manufactured home shall be 800 square feet exclusive of
any porch, garage, or other non-dwelling space.
(j) Every manufactured home must have at least one approved smoke detector in
operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes; in addition, each
manufactured home must contain at least one ten pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher in working order
and easily accessible from the interior of the manufactured home.
(k) The plumbing system, electrical system, heating and air conditioning system, and all
other equipment and systems must be safe, sanitary, and in good working condition, and installed
and operated in accordance with manufacturer specifications and in accordance with all applicable
laws, codes and regulations.
(l) The exterior walls and roof shall be structurally sound and tight and free from defects
which might admit rain or dampness. All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition, or
metal siding, shall be uniform in color, maintained weatherproof, and shall be properly surface
coated when required to prevent deterioration. Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed
and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to be weather tight. Every
window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks
and holes.
(m) Each manufactured home utilizing gas shall be connected to the manufactured home
site outlet by a listed flexible mobile home connector of sufficient capacity to supply gas to the
connected load. Approved rigid pipe and fittings shall be used between the flexible connector and the
manufactured home site gas outlet if the distance between the manufactured home site gas outlet and
manufacture home gas service connection exceeds six (6) feet. All gas outlet risers, regulators,
meters, valves, or other exposed equipment shall be protected from physical damage by vehicles or
other causes.
(n) The manufactured home shall be used only as a residential dwelling unit. No
manufactured home shall be used as a storage building upon any lot at any time nor shall any
manufactured home be used as, or for, a commercial or business structure or use. The area
underneath a manufactured home shall not be used for storage.
Any manufactured home lawfully placed, in full compliance with applicable ordinances, and
existing on August 7, 2017 may be continued in use even though such manufactured home does not
conform to the restrictions and requirements of this Section subject to the following: (i) the
manufactured home must comply with the standards and requirements of Article 19 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances; (ii) any legal non-conforming manufactured home may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than normal maintenance and repairs; (iii) a nonconforming
manufactured home shall not be replaced unless the replacement fully complies with all
of the requirements of this Section, except for subparagraphs (d), (f), (g), and (h).
SECTION 19A.11 ACCESSORY OR AUXILIARY BUILDINGS
Within the Manufactured Home Development, the owner or operator of the Manufactured
Home Development or a party contracting with said owner or operator may construct maintenance or
storage areas dedicated solely for use by the Manufactured Home Development or by the residents of
the Manufactured Home Development. Said maintenance or storage area shall either be completely
enclosed in a building complying with all applicable building codes or, if not within an enclosed
building shall be within an enclosed secured fence which shall be screened by appropriate
landscaping or other screening approved by the City Council so that the visibility of said storage
and/or maintenance area from manufactured homes and public street is minimized to the greatest
extent reasonably possible. The Manufactured Home Development may also have auxiliary buildings
or facilities such as a swimming pool or recreation facilities for use solely by residents of the
Manufactured Home Development and their guests. No auxiliary or accessory building, facility, or
area within a Manufactured Home Development shall be operated as a commercial business open to
the public, nor shall any such building, facility, or area be adjacent to a public street within the
Manufactured Home Development. Individual manufactured home sites may have one garage or
storage building, but said garage or storage building shall comply with all applicable codes and shall
be located only in a side yard or rear yard and shall not be located within the setback areas required
by Article 21, Section 21-203.2.3.
SECTION 19A.12 WATER SUPPLY
An adequate supply of potable water for drinking and domestic purposes from a municipal
water supply shall be supplied to each manufactured home within the manufactured home
development. The potable water system within the manufactured home development shall comply
with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
SECTION 19A.13 DRAINAGE
Each manufactured home development shall be so located that it shall be well drained. No
water shall be permitted to puddle or remain upon any property, including without limitation any
yard or ditch, within the manufactured home development, except recreational bodies of water, a
detention pond, or naturally occurring stream.
SECTION 19A.14 SEWER FACILITIES
All sewage and other water-carried waste for each manufactured home shall be disposed of
into the municipal sewage system. The sanitary sewer facilities within the manufactured home
development shall have sewer backflow valves and the sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the
State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
SECTION 19A.15 GARBAGE
A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and watertight containers with lids for garbage
shall be supplied. Garbage containers shall be placed no further than 250 feet apart and shall be
emptied at least once a week and shall not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul
smelling or a breeding place for flies. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner that
creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health. The manufactured home development shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
SECTION 19A.16 VERMIN AND OTHER NUISANCES
No insect, vermin, rodent, or other nuisance animal or pest harborages shall be permitted to
exist in the manufactured home development. No condition creating a nuisance shall be permitted
within a manufactured home development.
SECTION 19A.17 LIGHTS
The manufactured home development shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all
times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. Outdoor security lights shall be
placed no further than 200 feet apart.
SECTION 19A.18 DUST CONTROL
All private streets, alleys, common driveways, access routes, and public or common parking
areas in every manufactured home development must be maintained in a passable and safe condition
at all times and shall be a hard surface and meet the following standards: (a) six inches of rock and
two inches of asphalt or equivalent in concrete; (b) provide for disposal of storm water and insure
such water shall not flow onto adjoining property or sidewalks; (c) traffic flow direction shall be
appropriately marked; (d) comply with the requirements of the applicable zoning classification.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, public and private streets, alleys, commons driveways, access routes
and public or common parking areas in a manufactured home development established and existing
prior to January 1, 2003 and continually in existence thereafter may be constructed or repaired by
rock (chip) and oil if the existing surface is not asphalt or concrete.
SECTION 19A.19 TIEDOWN REQUIREMENTS
Each manufactured home placed within a manufactured home development shall be securely
anchored in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act, 210 ILCS
120/ 1, et seq. The owner of each manufactured home development shall make available to the owner
of each manufactured home moved within or into the manufactured home development a copy of the
Mobile Home Owners Tiedown Guide Pamphlet prepared by the Illinois Department of Public
Health.
SECTION 19A.20 UTILITY HOOKUP
The licensee of every development shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good
repair and condition all sanitary, electrical, and utility hookups in the development. Electrical and
utility hookups for each individual mobile home site shall be provided, and the installation shall be
in accordance with all state and local codes and ordinances.
SECTION 19A.21 REGISTER
A register shall be maintained by the manager of each manufactured home development.
Such register shall include: (a) the name and address of the owner of each manufactured home and
every occupant of such manufactured home; (b) the make, model, year of manufacture, and serial
number of each manufactured home; (c) the square feet or floor space contained in the manufactured
home; and (d) the date of entry of such manufactured home into the development. The register shall
be signed by the owner or occupant of the manufactured home. The registration records shall be
neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be destroyed until six years have
elapsed following the date of removal of the manufactured home from the development. The
registration shall be available for inspection upon request by all law enforcement officers and by
inspectors and agents of the City.
SECTION 19A.22 ENFORCEMENT, ABATEMENT, AND LIEN
When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection Department of the City or
the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that exists which violates the
provisions of this Article, the Inspection Department or the City Manager or the designee of any of
them is hereby authorized to serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the owner and
occupant of the mobile home alleged to be in violation, which such Notice shall describe the alleged
violation and shall require the owner and occupant to remedy the violation within a reasonable time
of not more than 10 days after service of such Notice. The Notice shall be served in writing, either
personally or to the last known address of such person or persons; or, if no address is known, by
posting Notice upon the manufactured home. In the event the owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to remedy the violation within 10 days after the service of Notice, then the City may proceed
to remedy the violation, including the institution of legal action against the owner and/or occupant
for an Order authorizing removal of the manufactured home or for issuance of an injunction and for
such other remedies as provided by law. All costs and expenses incurred by the City in obtaining
removal of the manufactured home or in otherwise remedying the violation shall be assessed and
shall be a lien against the manufactured home subject of the proceeding and shall be assessed against
the owner and occupant of the manufactured home. Costs and expenses shall include but shall not be
limited to: inspection and re-inspection fees; title searches; postage or service fees; costs of Notice
preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time
for equipment to and from the property; other costs associated with the remedying of the violation;
the cost of disposal of materials, debris, or other such items; administrative and clerical costs; all
reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation, institution, enforcement, collection, or
foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by
the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder. Costs assessed against a manufactured home
may be recovered by the City by public sale of the manufactured home pursuant to and in accordance
with such order as may be entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois within the
enforcement action, provided no such sale shall occur until after Notice is given to each party known
to have a lien or other interest in said manufactured home.
SECTION 19A.23 PENALTY
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall also be subject to the penalties
as provided within Section 22.6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Article shall also be subject to an action for injunction and injunctive relief.
ARTICLE 19B
TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
SECTION 19B.1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ATravel Trailer@ shall mean a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation purposes.
ATravel Trailer Park@ shall mean and include an area of land on which one or more travel
trailers are placed for occupancy for any period, either free of charge or for revenue, together with
any building, structure, or enclosure used as part of the equipment of such park. The placement of a
travel trailer upon a lot for storage only of the travel trailer shall not constitute a travel trailer park,
provided said travel trailer shall not be occupied at any time upon said lot.
ADependent Mobile Home@ shall mean a structure which does not have toilet and bath or
shower facilities.
AMobile Home@ shall have the same meaning as defined within Article 21, Section 21-124 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances. Neither use of a permanent foundation nor removal of wheels,
towing devices, or any other alteration shall qualify a mobile home as a conventional single-family
dwelling.
SECTION 19B.2 RESTRICTED USE
No travel trailer, dependent mobile home, or nonpermanent shelter or other vehicle designed
or used for sleeping purposes, excluding mobile homes as defined herein, shall be permitted for
occupancy at any time except within a travel trailer park, nor shall same be placed on any lot for
permanent habitation, nor shall same be used as a storage building upon any lot.
SECTION 19B.3 LICENSE AND REGULATIONS
Travel trailer parks shall be licensed and subject to the same regulations as provided within
Article 19 for mobile home parks, except no Building Permit shall be required for a travel trailer and
except that with regard to the licensing of a travel trailer park a license shall be obtained and fee paid
for each site proposed to be used for a travel trailer whether in use or whether occupied or not. Travel
trailers and travel trailer parks shall also be subject to the additional following regulations:
(a) An adequate supply of water of safe and sanitary quality shall be furnished for each
travel trailer. In the event there shall be a common faucet or drinking fountain or other water source,
it shall be conveniently located in the park. No common drinking cup shall be permitted.
(b) Each travel trailer park shall provide toilets and baths or showers which shall comply
with the provisions of any ordinances or other codes relating thereto with separate accommodations
for men and women.
(c) All sewage and other water-carried waste shall be disposed of in a safe and sanitary
manner and so that no odors are emitted, and so that no water is permitted upon the park grounds,
and so that no nuisance is created.
(d) Electrical outlets shall be provided for each individual site, and the installation shall
be in accordance with all state and local codes.
(e) If community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries, or other facilities are provided, such
facilities and equipment must be maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other transporting device
from any travel trailer or otherwise to affix said travel trailer permanently to the ground so as to
prevent ready removal of such travel trailer.
SECTION 19B.4 ENFORCEMENT
When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection Department of the City or
the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that exists which violates the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Inspection Department or the City Manager or the designee of any
of them is hereby authorized to serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the owner and
occupant of the travel trailer alleged to be in violation, which such Notice shall describe the alleged
violation and shall require the owner and occupant to remedy the violation within a reasonable time
of not more than 10 days after service of such Notice. The Notice shall be served in writing, either
personally or to the last-known address of such person or persons; or, if no address is known, by
posting Notice upon the travel trailer. In the event the owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or refuse
to remedy the violation within 10 days after the service of Notice, then the City may proceed to
remedy the violation, including the institution of legal action against the owner and/or occupant for
an Order authorizing removal of the travel trailer or for imposition of a fine or for issuance of an
injunction and for such other remedies as provided by law. All costs and expenses incurred by the
City in obtaining removal of the travel trailer or in otherwise remedying the violation shall be
assessed and shall be a lien against the travel trailer subject of the proceeding and shall be assessed
against the owner and occupant of the travel trailer. Costs and expenses shall include but shall not be
limited to: inspection and reinspection fees; title searches; postage or service fees; costs of Notice
preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time
for equipment to and from the property; other costs associated with the remedying of the violation;
the cost of disposal of materials, debris, or other such items; administrative and clerical costs; all
reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation, institution, enforcement, collection, or
foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by
the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder. Costs assessed against a travel trailer may be
recovered by the City by public sale of the travel trailer pursuant to and in accordance with such
Order as may be entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois within the enforcement
action, provided no such sale shall occur until after Notice is given to each party known to have a
lien or other interest in said travel trailer.
SECTION 19B.5 PENALTY
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties as
provided within Section 22.6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE 20
STORM DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
20- 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the hazard to public health and safety caused
by excessive storm water runoff, to enhance economic objectives, and to protect, conserve and
promote the orderly development of land and water resources within the regulatory area. This
ordinance regulates:
a. Storm water drainage improvements related to development of lands located
within the corporate limits of the City and all areas within one and one-half (1 2) miles of the
corporate limits as existing now or in the future.
b. Drainage control systems installed during new construction and grading of lots
and other parcels of land.
c. Erosion and sediment control systems installed during new construction of
grading of lots and other parcels of land.
d. The design, construction and maintenance of storm water drainage facilities and
systems.
e. Existing storm water drainage systems where the inclusion of improvements is
feasible.
It is recognized that drainage systems serving the City of Mt. Vernon and adjacent areas
may not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey storm water runoff resulting when land
changes from open or agricultural use to a more urbanized use. It is further recognized that
deposit of sediment from developments during and after construction can reduce capacities of
storm sewers and drainage systems and result in damages to receiving lakes and streams.
Therefore, it shall be the policy of the City Council that the storage and controlled release of
storm water runoff shall be required of all new development, any redevelopment and other new
construction in the regulated areas as stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance. The release rate of
storm water from developed lands shall not exceed the release rate from the land area in its
undeveloped state.
Because topography and the availability and adequacy of outlets for storm runoff vary
with almost every site, the requirements for storm drainage tend to be an individual matter for
any project. It is recommended that each proposed project be discussed with the City Engineer' s
office at the earliest practical time in the planning stage.
20-2. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed as additional requirements to minimum
standards required by other ordinances of the City. In the case of conflicting requirements, the
most restrictive shall apply.
20-3. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
In addition to the requirements of this ordinance, compliance with the requirements set
forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon and other applicable ordinances with
respect to submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement
plans, building and zoning permits, construction inspections, appeals, and similar matters, and
compliance with applicable State of Illinois statutes and regulations shall be required.
20-4. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
Capacity of a Storm Drainage Facility - The maximum flow that can be conveyed or
stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to public or private property.
Channel - A natural or artificial watercourse which periodically or continuously contains
moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. It has a defined
bed and banks which serve to confine the water.
Compensatory storage - An artificial volume of storage within a flood plain used to
balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the flood plain.
Contiguous - Adjoining or in actual contact with.
Council - The City Council of Mt. Vernon, Jefferson County, Illinois, and any
subordinate employee or agent to whom they shall specifically delegate a responsibility
authorized by this Ordinance.
Critical Duration Storm - The storm duration which requires the greatest detention
storage. In the Rational Method, the critical duration storm is equal to the time of concentration
being analyzed. For computer modeling, the critical duration storm is equal to or greater than the
time of concentration of the watershed being modeled.
Culvert - A closed conduit used for the passage of surface drainage water under a
roadway, railroad, canal, or other impediment.
Detention Basin A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of storm water to a
prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the excess waters that accumulate behind
the outlet.
Drainage Area - The area from which water is carried off by a drainage system; a
watershed or catchment area.
Drop manhole - A manhole having a vertical drop greater than two feet between the inlet
pipe and the outlet pipe. A vertical drop pipe shall be located immediately outside the manhole.
Dry Bottom Detention Basin - A basin designed to be completely dewatered after having
provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
Duration - The time period of a rainfall event.
Engineer - A subordinate or agent of the Council to whom the Council has delegated
responsibility. The City Engineer serves as a subordinate or agent to the Council having chief
engineering responsibilities.
Erosion - Wearing away of the land by running water, waves, temperature changes, ice, or
wind.
Flood Elevation - The elevation at all locations delineating the maximum level of high
waters for a flood of given return period and rainfall duration.
Flood or Flood Waters - The water of any watercourse which is above the banks of the
watercourse. It also means the water of any lake which is above and outside the banks thereof.
Flood Hazard Area - Those flood plains which have not been adequately protected from
flooding caused by the regulatory flood, and are shown on the Flood Hazard or Floodway-Flood
Boundary Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration or maps provided to the City by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood Plain - The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may hereafter be
covered by flood water from the regulatory floodway and floodway fringe.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Fringe - That portion of the flood plain lying outside the floodway which is
inundated by the regulatory flood.
Footing Drain- A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall foundation
to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
Grade - The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, etc., or natural ground
surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage the vertical rise (or fall) bears to the
corresponding horizontal distance.
HEC-1 - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Flood Hydrograph Package.
Impact Areas - Areas defined and mapped by the Council which are unlikely to be easily
drained because of one or more factors including but not limited to any of the following: soil
type, topography, land where there is not adequate outlet, a floodway or flood plain, land within
100 feet of each bank of any regulated drain or within 100 feet from the centerline of any
regulated tile ditch.
Impervious - A term applied to material through which water cannot pass, or through
which water passes with difficulty.
Inlet - An opening into a storm sewer for the entrance of surface storm water runoff, more
completely described as a storm sewer inlet.
Junction Chamber - A converging section of conduit, usually large enough for a person to
enter, used to facilitate the flow from one or more conduits into a main conduit.
Lateral Storm Sewer - A sewer that has inlets connected to it but has no other storm sewer
connected.
Manhole - Storm sewer structure through which a person may enter to gain access to an
underground storm sewer or enclosed structure.
Major Drainage Area - Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of more than ten
square miles Rural classification or one square mile Urban classification. Designs shall be in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Division of Water Resources
Standards.
Minor Drainage System - Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of less than ten
square miles Rural classification or one square mile Urban classification.
Off Site - Everything not on site.
On Site - Located within the controlled or Urbanized area where runoff originates.
Outfall - The point or location where storm runoff discharges from a sewer or drain. Also
applies to the outfall sewer or channel which carries the storm runoff to the point of outfall.
Peak Flow - The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit
resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.
Radius of Curvature - Length of radius of a circle used to define a curve.
Rainfall Intensity - The cumulative depth of rainfall occurring over a given duration,
normally expressed in inches per hour.
Reach - Any length of river, channel or storm sewer.
Regulated Area - All of the land under the jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon. This
includes all areas within the corporate limits of the City and all areas within one and one-half
miles of the corporate limits as existing now or in the future.
Regulatory Flood - That flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or exceed
on the average of once in a one hundred (100) year period, as calculated by a method and
procedure which is acceptable to the Council. If a permit from the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources Office of Water Resources for construction in the floodway is required (see Section
6), then the regulatory flood peak discharge should be calculated by a method acceptable to the
Council and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources. This
regulatory flood is equivalent to a flood having a probability of occurrence of one percent (1%) in
any given year.
Regulatory Floodway - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood
plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge efficiently the
peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
Release Rate - The amount of storm water released from a storm water control facility per
unit of time.
Return Period - The average interval of time within which a given rainfall event will be
equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a return period of 100 years has a one percent
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
Runoff Coefficient - A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which appeared as
runoff and reaches the storm sewer system to the total amount of rain falling. A coefficient of 0.5
implies that 50 percent of the rain falling on a given surface appears as storm water runoff.
Sediment - Material of soil or rock origin, transported, carried or deposited by water.
Siphon - A closed conduit or portion of which lies above the hydraulic grade line,
resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and requiring a vacuum within the conduit to start
flow. A siphon utilizes atmospheric pressure to effect or increase the flow of water through a
conduit. An inverted siphon is used to carry storm water flow under an obstruction such as a
sanitary sewer.
Stilling Basin - A basin used to slow water down or dissipate its energy.
Storage Duration - The length of time that water may be stored in any storm water control
facility, computed from the time water first begins to be stored.
Storm Sewer - A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
Storm Water Drainage System - All means, natural or man-made, used for conducting
storm water to, through or from a drainage area to any of the following: conduits and appurtenant
features, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, street and pumping stations.
Storm Water Runoff - The water derived from rains falling within a tributary basin,
flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
TR-20 - Natural Resources Conservation Services Technical Release 20 - Project
Formulation Hydrology.
TR-55 - Natural Resources Conservation Services Technical Release 55 - Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
Tributary - Contributing storm water from upstream land areas.
Urbanization - The development, change or improvement of any parcel of land consisting
of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational or public
utility purposes.
Watercourse - Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch natural or man-made drainageway
in or into which storm water runoff or floodwaters flow wither regularly or intermittently.
Watershed - see Drainage Area.
Wet Bottom Detention Basin (Retention Basin) - A basin designed to retain a permanent
pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
20-5. STORM WATER CONTROL POLICY
It is recognized that the smaller streams and drainage channels serving the City of Mt.
Vernon may not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey storm water runoff resulting from
continued urbanization. Accordingly, the storage and controlled release rate of excess storm
water runoff shall be required for any development, redevelopment and new construction located
within the regulated area not exempt under this ordinance. No improvement location permit shall
be issued for the construction or extension of any proposed or existing building in the regulated
area until the required drainage plans have been approved in writing by the Council, except for
the following exemptions:
(a) Construction or extension of a single family dwelling house or an
extension of a single family dwelling house or an accessory use building thereto;
(b) Construction or extension of a duplex dwelling house or an accessory use
building thereto;
(c) Construction or extension in that area of the City designated Primary
Business District (B-1 Zoning Classification); or
(d) Construction, extension or replacement of a building or buildings on a site
of 20,000 square feet or less.
(e) Extension or replacement of any existing building that does not increase
the existing rate of runoff.
The exceptions (a) through (e) above, however, shall not be applicable to a project if
located in a previously designated Impact Area as established per Section 18 of this ordinance.
The release rate of storm water from development, redevelopment, and new construction,
as stipulated above, may not exceed the peak rate of runoff from the land area in its undeveloped
state. The developer must submit to the Council, detailed computations of runoff before and after
development, redevelopment or new construction. These computations must show that the peak
runoff rate after development, redevelopment, or new construction, for the 10 year and 100 year
return period of critical duration must not exceed the undeveloped peak runoff rate for either
return periods. The computation method used in determining storm water runoff for land areas up
to and including 5 acres may be the ARational Method.@ Other proven hydrograph techniques
and/or computer drainage modeling methods may be used for determining storm water runoff for
both areas smaller and larger than 100 acres.
20- 6. PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION IN THE FLOODWAY
The State of Illinois requires U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Illinois Department of
Natural Resources Office of Water Resources, and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
approval of any construction in a floodway, and of any works for flood control. This includes
bridges, dams, levees, dikes, floodwalls, wharves, piers, dolphins, booms, weirs, bulkheads,
jetties, groins, excavations, fills or deposits of any kind, utility lines, or other building, structure
or obstruction. Also, any ditch work (new construction, deepening or modification) within one
half mile of a public freshwater lake of 10 acres or more in area.
The approval of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Illinois Department of Natural
Resources Office of Water Resources, and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, in writing,
must be obtained before beginning construction.
20-7. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
The following information and data provided by an Illinois licensed professional engineer
or land surveyor engaged in storm drainage design shall be submitted to the Council at the time
of application for 1) each proposed major subdivision or planned development lying within the
Regulated Area prior to Final Plat approval by the Planning Commission, or 2) a building permit
for any development, redevelopment, or new construction on real estate which lies within the
Regulated Area which has not previously received drainage approval or is not exempt from the
requirements of this Ordinance.
A. Topographic and Soils Maps
A topographic map of the land to be developed and such adjoining land whose
topography may affect the layout or drainage of the development. The contour intervals shall be
one foot when slopes are less than four percent and shall be two feet when the slope exceeds four
percent and shall be five feet when the slope exceeds 10 percent. On this map, the following shall
be shown:
(1) The locations of streams and other flood water runoff channels, the extent
of the flood plains at the established 100 year flood elevation where available (regulatory
floodway), and the limits of the floodway, all properly identified.
(2) The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins, their
flood plains, lines of inflow and outflow if any.
(3) The location of regulated drains, farm drains, inlets and outfall, if any of
record.
(4) Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfall, if any of record.
(5) Septic tank systems and outlets, if any of record.
(6) Seeps, springs, flowing and other wells, that are visible or of record.
(7) Provide soils map of proposed development indicating soil name and their
hydrologic classification when Soils Conservation Service (SCS) hydrologic methods are used.
B. Preliminary Drainage Plan
A comprehensive plan, in preliminary form (or in combined preliminary and final form),
designed to handle safely the storm water runoff and to detain the increased storm water runoff
must be submitted to the Council. The plan shall provide or be accompanied by maps or other
descriptive materials indicating the feasibility of the drainage plan and showing the following:
(1) The extent and area of each watershed affecting the design of detention
facilities as shown on United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Maps or other more detailed
maps as required by the Council.
(2) The preliminary layout and design of proposed storm sewers, the outfall
and outlet locations and approximate elevations, the receiving stream or channel and its 100 year
return period water elevation.
(3) The location and design of the proposed street system, especially including
depressed pavements used to convey or temporarily store overflow from the heavier rainstorms,
and the outlets for such overflow.
(4) The locations, cross sections and profiles of existing streams and flood
plains to be maintained, and new channels to be constructed.
(5) The materials, elevations, waterway openings, and the basis for design of
proposed culverts and bridges.
(6) Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged, or
otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be built and the basis of their design.
(7) The estimated depth and amount of storage required in the new ponds or
basins.
(8) The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces existing and
expected to be constructed when the development is completed.
(9) Any interim plan which is to be incorporated into the development
pending completion of the development and the final drainage plan.
C. Valley Cross Section
One or more typical cross sections must be provided showing all existing and proposed
channels or other open drainage facilities carried to a point above the 100 year high water
elevation; showing the elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes thereto, together
with the high water elevations expected from the 100 year storm under the controlled conditions
called for by this ordinance; and showing the relationship of structures, streets and other
facilities.
D. Site Plan
A plan drawn to scale showing dimensions of the site with existing and proposed
facilities must be provided. All plan views shall include, but may not be limited to, the following
information when applicable:
1) A North arrow; 2) The scale used; 3) Site location map; 4) Property boundaries with
bearing and distance; 5) Property owner/developer; 6) Building setback lines; 7) Location of all
existing and proposed facilities/utilities; 8) Topography in the area affected by construction.
E. Final Drainage Plans
Upon approval of the preliminary drainage plans by the Council, final drainage plans
shall be submitted to the Council. The final plans shall provide or be accompanied by
calculations, maps and/or other descriptive material showing the following:
(1) The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage channels in
the development.
(2) The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the basis of
their design, outfall and outlet locations and elevations, the receiving stream or channel and its
high water elevation, and the functioning of the drains during high water conditions.
(3) The parts of the proposed street system where pavements are planned to be
depressed sufficiently to convey or temporarily store overflow from storm sewers and over the
curb runoff resulting from the heavier rainstorms and the outlets for such overflow.
(4) Existing streams and flood plains to be maintained, and new channels to
be constructed, their locations, cross sections and profiles.
(5) Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, their materials, elevations,
waterway openings and basis of their design.
(6) Existing detention basins and ponds to be maintained, enlarged, or
otherwise altered and new basins or ponds to be built and the basis of their design.
(7) The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces existing and
expected to be constructed when the development is completed.
(8) The slope, type and size of all sewers and other waterways.
(9) For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with
corresponding water surface elevations and a plot or tabulation of the basin outflow rates for
those water surface elevations.
A written report must be included with each preliminary and final drainage plan. The
report will contain a summary description of: (a) the significant drainage problems associated
with the project; (b) the analysis procedure used to evaluate these problems and to propose
solutions; (c) any assumptions or special conditions associated with the use of these procedures;
(d) the proposed design of the drainage control system; and (e) the results of the analysis of the
proposed drainage control system showing that it does solve the project's drainage problems.
The following additional documents should be submitted with all applications submitted
for approval:
(1) A hydraulic report detailing existing and proposed drainage patterns on the
subject site. The report should include a description of the present land use as well as proposed
land use. Any off-site drainage entering the site should also be addressed. This report should be
comprehensive and detail all the design steps which the design engineer took during the design.
(2) All hydrologic and hydraulic computations should be included in the
submittal. These calculations should include, but not be limited to: runoff curve numbers or
runoff coefficients; runoff calculation; stage-discharge relationships; times of concentration; and
storage volume.
(3) Copies of all computer runs. These computer runs should include both the
input and the outputs. A floppy diskette with input files will expedite the review process.
(4) A set of plan drawings stamped by a Registered Professional Engineer
showing all proposed detention areas, storm sewers, inlets, outfall structures, open ditches,
culverts and bridges.
(5) A set of exhibits should be included showing the drainage subareas and a
schematic detailing of how any computer model inputs were set up.
(6) A conclusion report summarizing the hydraulic design and detailing how
this design satisfies the Mt. Vernon Storm Water and Sediment Control Ordinance.
F. Submittal and Consideration of Plans
The Council and/or its Engineer shall attempt to approve or disapprove any preliminary
plans, final plans and/or construction plans within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete
submittal unless applicant requests to a time extension. All approvals and disapprovals shall be
in writing.
G. Engineering Review Fees
As a condition of and prior to approval of final drainage plans by the Council, the
applicant shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon the actual costs incurred by the City in respect to
the review of all preliminary plans, final plans and/or construction plans by a licensed
professional engineer in excess of the first four (4) hours of such review and consultation.
The City shall furnish to the applicant in writing prior to the approval of the applicant's
final drainage plan a written statement specifying the total cost of professional engineering fees
incurred by the City in connection with the review of applicant's plans, including the total hours
expended by such professional engineer, and the amount required to be paid by applicant prior to
approval of final drainage plans by the Council. As a condition of and prior to approval of final
drainage plans, applicant shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon Clerk the sum set forth in said
statement representing the cost of professional engineering services in excess of the following
number of hours thereof incurred by the City in connection with the review of applicant's
preliminary and final drainage plans and accompanying information and data: Four (4) hours for
individual site plans, subdivisions, and/or other projects that involve storm water drainage plans
and/or calculation.
20- 8. DETERMINATION OF RUNOFF QUANTITIES
Runoff quantities shall be computed for the area of the parcel under development plus the
area of the watershed flowing into the parcel under development. The quantity of runoff which is
generated as the result of a given rainfall intensity may be calculated as follows:
A. Areas up to and Including 100 Acres
For areas up to and including one hundred (100) acres and for sites with no depressional
storage, the Rational Method may be used. In the Rational Method, the peak rate of runoff, Q, in
cubic feet per second is computed as:
Q = CIA, where
C = runoff coefficient, representing the characteristics of the drainage area and defined as
the ratio of runoff to rainfall.
I = average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the time of
concentration (tc) for a selected rainfall frequency.
A = tributary drainage area in acres.
Guidance to the selection of the runoff coefficient AC@ is provided by Table 1 and Table
1A which show values for different types of surface and local soil characteristics. The composite
AC@ value used for a given drainage area with various surface types shall be the weighted average
value for the total area calculated from a breakdown of individual area having different surface
types.
Table 2 provides runoff coefficients and inlet times for different land use classifications.
In the instance of undeveloped land situated in an upstream area, a coefficient or coefficients
shall be used for this area in its present or existing state of development.
Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the rainfall frequency curves shown in Figure
1 or from data shown in Table 5A. The time of concentration (tc) to be used shall be the sum of
the inlet time and flow time in the drainage facility from the most remote part of the drainage
area to the point under consideration. The flow time in the storm sewers may be estimated by the
distance in feet divided by velocity of flow in feet per second. The velocity shall be determined
by the Manning formula.
Inlet time is the combined time required for the runoff to reach the inlet of the storm
sewer. It includes overland flow time and flow time through established surface drainage
channels such as swales, ditches and sheet flow across such areas as lawns, fields, and other
graded surfaces. It may be computed by using Figure 2.
B. Areas in Excess of 100 acres
The runoff rate for area in excess of 100 acres shall be determined by methods described
in Section 15, Subsection G.
20- 9. AMOUNT OF RUNOFF TO BE ACCOMMODATED BY VARIOUS PARTS OF
DRAINAGE FACILITY
Various parts of a drainage facility must accommodate runoff water as follows:
A. Minor Drainage System
The minor drainage system such as inlets, catch basins, street gutters, swales, sewers and
small channels which collect storm water (runoff) must accommodate peak runoff from a 10-year
return frequency storm. Duration, for sizing these conveyances, using the rational method shall
be equal to the time of concentration. The Rational Method is acceptable for storm sewer design,
as long as the TR-55 time of concentration methodology is used. Determination of hydraulic
capacity for storm sewers sized by Rational Method analysis should be done using Manning's
Equation.
When using the HEC-1, TR-20 or comparable computer program, the design should use
the Huff First Quartile (50%) rainfall distribution with no greater than a one hour storm duration;
however, these minimum requirements must be satisfied:
(1) The allowable spread of water on Collector Streets is limited to
maintaining two clear 10 foot moving lanes of traffic. One lane is to be maintained on Local
Roads, while Places can have a water spread equal to one-half of their width.
(2) Open channels carrying peak flows greater than 30 cubic feet per second
shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff for a 50-year return period storm within the
drainage easement.
(3) Culverts shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff from a 50-year
return frequency storm when crossing under roads which are part of the functional classification
and are classified as primary or secondary arterial streets.
B. Major Drainage Systems
Major drainage systems are defined in Section 4, and shall be designed in accordance
with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water
Resources, and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Standards as described in Section 6.
20-10. LEVEL OF PROTECTION FOR URBAN AREAS
First floor elevations of all buildings shall be such that all floors including basements
shall have two feet of free board above the 100 year flood elevation or at the flood protection
grade.
20-11. STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS
All storm sewers, whether private of public, and whether constructed on private or public
property shall conform to the design standards and other requirements contained herein.
A. Manning Equation
The hydraulic capacity of storm sewers shall be determined using Manning's Equation:
V = (1.486/n )(R 2/3)(s 1/2), where
V = mean velocity of flow in feet per second
R = the hydraulic radius in feet, A/P, cross sectional area / wetted perimeter
s = the slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot
n = roughness coefficient
The hydraulic radius, R, is defined as the cross sectional area of flow divided by the
wetted flow surface or wetted perimeter. Typical An@ values and maximum permissible velocities
for storm sewer materials are listed in Table 3. Roughness coefficients (n) values for other sewer
materials can be found in standard hydraulics texts and references.
B. Minimum size
The minimum size of all storm sewers shall be 12 inches. Rate of release for detention
storage shall be controlled by an orifice plate or other devices, subject to approval of the Council,
where the 12 inch pipe will not limit rate of release as required.
C. Grade
Sewer grade shall be such that, in general, a minimum of two feet of cover is maintained
over the top of the pipe. Pipe cover less than the minimum may be used only upon approval of
the Council. Uniform slopes shall be maintained between inlets, manholes and inlets to
manholes. A minimum drop of 0.1 foot through manholes and inlets should be provided. Final
grade shall be set with full consideration of the capacity required, sedimentation problems and
other design parameters. Minimum and maximum allowable slopes shall be those capable of
producing velocities of two and one-half and 15 feet per second, respectively, when the sewer is
flowing full.
D. Alignment
Storm sewers shall be straight between manholes insofar as possible. Where long radius
curves are necessary to conform to street layout, the minimum radius of curvature shall be no less
than 100 feet for sewers 42 inches and larger in diameter. Deflection of pipe sections shall not
exceed the maximum deflection recommended by the pipe manufacturer. The deflection shall be
uniform and finished installation shall follow a smooth curve.
E. Manholes
Manholes shall be installed to provide access to continuous underground storm sewers for
the purpose of inspection and maintenance. Manholes may be used as inlet or drainage structures
and shall be provided at the following locations:
(1) Where one or more storm sewers converge.
(2) At the point of beginning or at the end of a curve, and at the point of
reverse curvature (PC, PT, PRC).
(3) Where the pipe size changes.
(4) Where an abrupt change in alignment occurs.
(5) Where a change in grade occurs.
(6) At suitable intervals in straight sections of sewer.
The maximum distance between storm sewer manholes, unless otherwise approved by the
Council, shall be as follows:
Size of Pipe Maximum Distance
(inches) (feet)
12 through 42 400
48 and larger 600
F. Inlets
Inlets or drainage structures shall be utilized to collect surface water through grated
openings and convey it to storm sewers, channels or culverts. Inlet design and spacing shall be in
accordance with Section 8-300 of the Illinois Department of Transportation Drainage Manual or
other approved design procedure. The inlet grate opening provided must be adequate to pass the
design 10 year flow with 50% of the sag inlet areas clogged. An overflow channel from sag inlets
to the overflow channel or basin shall be provided at sag inlets, so that the maximum depth of
water that might be ponded in the street sag shall not exceed 7 inches. Inlets may be used as
manholes at locations where the pipe sizes do not exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter.
Inlet design and spacing may be done using the Rational Method. Use of the HEC-12
computer program is also an acceptable method. Gutter spread on continuous grades may be
determined using the modified Manning's equation, or by using the attached Figure 3, Flow in
Triangular Gutter Sections.
20-12. WORKMANSHIP AND MATERIALS
A. Workmanship
The specifications for the construction of storm sewers shall not be less stringent than
those set forth in the latest edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation's AStandard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction@.
B. Materials
Storm sewer manholes, inlets, pipe and fittings used in storm sewer construction shall
conform to the materials shown in the latest edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation's
AStandard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction@.
C. Special Hydraulic Structures
Special hydraulic structures required to control the flow of water in storm runoff drainage
systems include junction chambers, drop manholes, inverted siphons, stilling basins, or other
special structures. The use of these structures shall be limited to those locations justified by
prudent planning and by careful and thorough hydraulic engineering analysis.
20-13. OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS
All open channels, whether private or public, and whether constructed on private or
public land, shall conform to the design standards and other design requirements contained
herein.
A. Manning Equation
The waterway for channels shall be determined using Manning's Equation.
Q = AV = A (1.486/n) (R 2/3) (s 1/2), where
A = waterway area of channel in square feet
Q = discharge in cubic feet per second, cfs
V, R, s and n are explained in Paragraph 11A
B. Channel Cross Section and Grade
The required channel cross section and grade are determined by the design capacity, the
material in which the channel is to be constructed, and the requirements for maintenance. A
minimum depth may be required to provide adequate outlets for subsurface drains, tributary
ditches, or streams. The channel grade shall be such that the velocity in the channel is high
enough to prevent siltation, but low enough to prevent erosion. Velocities less than 1.5 feet per
second should be avoided because siltation will take place and ultimately reduce the channel
cross section. The maximum permissible velocities in vegetal-lined channel are shown in Table
4. Developments through which the channel is to be constructed must be considered in the design
of the channel section.
C. Side Slopes
Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than 2 to 1. Flatter slopes may be required
to prevent erosion and for ease of maintenance. Where channels will be lined, side slopes shall be
no steeper than 1-2 to 1 with adequate provisions made for weep holes. Side slopes steeper
than 1-2 to 1 may be used for lined channels providing that the side lining and structural
retaining wall are designed and constructed with provisions for live and dead load surcharge.
D. Channel stability
(1) Characteristics of a stable channel are:
(a) It neither aggrades nor degrades beyond tolerable limits.
(b) The channel banks do not erode to the extent that the channel cross
section is changed appreciably.
(c) Excessive sediment bars do not develop.
(d) Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts, bridges or
elsewhere.
(e) Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of uncontrolled
surface flow to the channel.
(2) Channel stability shall be determined for an aged condition and the
velocity shall be based on the design flow or the bank full flow, whichever is greater, using An@
values for various channel linings as shown in Table 3. In no case is it necessary to check channel
stability for discharges greater than that from a 100-year return period storm.
(3) Channel stability must be checked for conditions immediately after
construction. For this stability analysis, the velocity shall be calculated for the expected flow
from a ten-year return period storm on the watershed, or the bank full flow, whichever is smaller.
The An@ value for newly constructed channels in fine-grained soils and sands may be determined
in accordance with the National Engineering Handbook 5, Supplement B, Soil Conservation
Service, and shall not exceed 0.025. The allowable velocity in the newly constructed channel
may be increased by a maximum of 20 percent to reflect the effects of vegetation to be
established under the following conditions:
(a) The soil and site in which the channel is to be constructed are
suitable for rapid establishment and support of erosion controlling vegetation.
(b) Species of erosion controlling vegetation adapted to the area, and
proven methods of establishment are shown.
(c) The channel design includes detailed plans for establishment of
vegetation on the channel side slopes.
E. Drainage of Waterways
Vegetated waterways that are subject to low flows of long duration or where wet
conditions prevail shall be drained with a tile system or by other means such as paved gutters.
Tile lines may outlet through a drop structure at the end of the waterway or through a standard
tile outlet.
F. Establishment of New Drain
When the Council determines it is necessary to establish a new drain, each developer
must provide the necessary information and meet the requirements of this ordinance.
G. Appurtenant Structures
The design of channels will provide all structures required for the proper functioning of
the channel and the laterals thereto and travelways for operation and maintenance. Recessed
inlets and structures needed for entry of surface and subsurface flow into channels without
significant erosion or degradation shall be included in the design of channel improvements. The
design is also to provide the necessary flood gates, water level control devices, and any other
appurtenance affecting the functioning of the channels and the attainment of the purpose for
which they are built.
The effect of channel improvements on existing culverts, bridges, buried cables, pipelines
and inlet structures for surface and subsurface drainage on the channel being improved and
laterals thereto shall be evaluated to determine the need for modification or replacement.
Culverts and bridges which are modified or added as part of channel improvement projects shall
meet reasonable standards for the type of structure, and shall have a minimum capacity equal to
the design discharge or governmental agency design requirements, whichever is greater.
H. Disposition of Spoil
Spoil material resulting from clearing, grubbing and channel excavation shall be disposed
in such a manner which will:
(1) Minimize overbank wash.
(2) Provide, for the free flow of water between the channel and flood plain
unless the valley routing and water surface profile are based on continuous dikes being installed.
(3) Not hinder the development of travelways for maintenance.
(4) Leave the right-of-way in the best condition feasible, consistent with the
project purposes, for productive use by the owner.
(5) Improve the aesthetic appearance of the site to the extent feasible.
(6) Be approved by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, or US Army Corps of Engineers (whichever is applicable) if
deposited in the floodway.
20-14. CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS
A. Construction
Specifications shall be in keeping with the proceeding standards and shall describe the
requirements for proper installation of the project to achieve its intended purpose.
B. Materials
Materials acceptable for use as channel lining are:
(1) Grass
(2) Revetment riprap
(3) Concrete
(4) Hand-laid riprap
(5) Precast cement concrete riprap
(6) Grouted riprap
(7) Gabions
Other lining materials may be used with prior approval of the Council. Materials shall
comply with the latest edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation's AStandard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction@.
20-15. STORM WATER DETENTION
The following shall govern the design of any improvement with respect to the detention
of storm water runoff.
A. Acceptable Detention Methods
The increased storm water runoff (peak rate) resulting from a proposed development
should be detained on-site by the provisions of appropriate wet or dry bottom reservoirs, by
storage on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns or other acceptable techniques. Measures which
retard the rate of overland flow and the velocity in runoff channels shall also be used to control
the runoff rate partially. Detention basins shall be sized to store excess flows from storms with a
ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year return period. Control devices shall limit the discharge
to a rate no greater than that prescribed by this ordinance (see Sections 15F and 15G).
B. Time of Concentration
All storm water management projects within the City of Mt. Vernon must be done using
the time of concentration methodology outlined in the SCS TR-55 manual. The TR-55 method
examines the factors which affect time of concentration including surface roughness, channel
shape and flow patterns along with watershed slope. Through the examination of sheet, shallow,
concentrated and open channel flows, a more refined time of concentration may be determined,
The methodology represents the best attempt of a Federal Agency to standardize times of
concentration procedures.
C. Design Storm
Design of storm water detention facilities shall be based on a return period of once in 10
years and once in 100 years. The storage volume and outflow rate shall be sufficient to handle
storm water runoff from a critical duration storm, as defined in Sections 15F and 15G. Rainfall
depth-duration-frequency relationships and intensity-duration-frequency relationships shall be
those given in Tables 5 and 5A.
D. Allowable Release Rate
Design of storm water detention facilities shall be based on the allowable release rate of
storm water originating from a proposed development and shall not exceed the amount specified
in Section 5 - Storm Water Control Policy, and as described in Sections 15F and 15G.
In the event the natural downstream channel or storm sewer system is inadequate to
accommodate the release rate provided in Table 5A, then the allowable release rate shall be
reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity of the receiving downstream channel or storm
sewer system and additional detention as determined by the Council shall be required to store
that portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or waterways. The area
will be considered an impact drainage area subject to the provisions of Section 18 of this
Ordinance.
If more than one detention basin is involved in the development of the area upstream of
the limiting restriction, the allowable release rate from any one detention basin shall be in direct
proportion to the ratio of its drainage area to the drainage area of the entire watershed upstream
of the restriction.
E. Drainage System Overflow Design
Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to convey the storm water runoff from all
upstream tributary areas through the development under consideration for a storm of 100 year
design return period calculated on the basis of upstream land in its undeveloped state. An
allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate provided, shall be made for upstream
detention when such upstream detention and release rate have previously been approved by the
Council and evidence of its construction can be shown.
F. Determination of Storage Volume - Rational Method
The Rational Method may be used to determine the 10-year return period undeveloped
release rate for sites of less than five (5) acres of commonly owned contiguous property where no
depressional storage exists.
Step Procedure
1. Determine total drainage area in acres AA@.
2. Determine composite runoff coefficient ACu@ based on existing land use
(undeveloped).
3. Determine time of concentration ATc@ in minutes based on existing
conditions.
4. Determine rainfall intensity AIu@ in inches per hour, based on time of
concentration and using Figure 1 or from data given in Table 5A for the ten (10) year return
period.
SPACE BELOW INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
5. Compute runoff based on existing land use (undeveloped), and ten (10)
year return period:
Qu = CuIuA
6. Determine composite runoff coefficient ACd@ based on developed
conditions and a one hundred (100) year return period.
7. Determine the one hundred (100) year return period rainfall intensity AId@
for various storm durations Atd@ up through the time of concentration for the developed area
using Table 5A.
8. Determine developed inflow rates AQd@ for various storm durations Atd@
measured in hours.
Qd = CdIdA
9. Compute a storage rate AStd@ for various storm durations Atd@ up through
the time of concentration of the developed area.
Std = Qd - Qu
10. Compute required storage volume ASR@ in acre-feet for each storm
duration Atd@. This assumes a triangular hydrograph of duration (2td) hours with the peak flow of
Std and td hours.
SR = Std (td/12)
11. Select the largest storage volume computed in step 10 for detention basin
design.
G. Determination of Storage Volume - Hydrograph Methods
Methods other than the rational method for determining runoff and routing of storm water
may be used to determine the storage volume required to control storm water runoff. The SCS
TR-20 computer model with the SCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve number calculation
methodologies, and Huff Third Quartile (50%) rainfall distribution (Table 6) must be used to
determine the 10-year return period pre-development release rate for sites of five (5) acres or
more and for sites with existing depressional storage. The SCS TR-20, and SCS TR-55 models
are approved by the Council for appropriate use in analysis of the runoff and routing of storm
water. The use of these models or other approved procedures can be defined in an eight step
procedure to determine the required storage volume of the detention basin.
Step Procedure
1. Calibrate the hydrologic/hydraulic model that is to be used for prediction
of runoff and routing of storm water.
2. Determine the critical storm duration. The critical duration storm for
computer modeling shall be equal to or greater than the time of concentration for the watershed
being modeled.
3. Determine the ten (10) year, undeveloped peak flow. Denote this flow by
Qu10.
4. Determine the one hundred (100) year runoff hydrograph (Hd100) for
developed conditions.
5. Determine the hydrograph that must be stored (Hs100) by subtracting a
flow up to Qu10 from the hydrograph (Hd100) found in step 4.
6. Determine the volume of water (Vs) to be stored by calculating the area
under the hydrograph Hs100.
7. The detention basin must be designed to store the largest volume (Vs)
found for any storm duration analyzed in step 6.
8. Approved routing techniques may be used to determine the final detention
storage required.
H. General Detention Basin Design Requirements
Basins shall be constructed to detain temporarily the storm water runoff which exceeds
the maximum peak flow rate authorized by this Ordinance. The volume of such storage provided
in these basins, together with such storage as may be authorized in other on-site facilities shall be
sufficient to control excess runoff from the one hundred (100) year storm.
The following design principles shall be observed:
(1) The maximum volume of water stored and subsequently released at the
design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of 48 hours unless additional
storms occur within the period.
(2) The maximum planned depth of storm water stored (without a permanent
pool) shall not exceed four feet.
(3) All storm water detention facilities shall be separated by not less than 25
feet from any building or structure to be occupied.
(4) All excavated excess spoil may be spread so as to provide for aesthetic and
recreational features such as sliding hills, sports fields, etc. Detention pond side slopes no steeper
than 6 horizontal to 1 vertical for safety, erosion control, stability and ease of maintenance shall
be permitted.
(5) Safety screens having a maximum opening of 4 inches shall be provided
for any pipe or opening to prevent children or large animals from crawling into the structures.
(6) Danger signs shall be mounted at appropriate locations to warn of deep
water, possible flooding conditions during storm periods and other dangers that exist. Fencing
shall be provided if deemed necessary by the Council.
(7) Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate as simply as possible
and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for proper operation. They shall limit
discharges into existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed the
predetermined maximum authorized peak flow rate.
(8) Emergency overflow facilities such as a weir or spillway shall be provided
for the release of exceptional storm runoffs or in emergency conditions should the normal
discharge devices become totally or partially inoperative. The overflow facility shall be of such
design that its operation is automatic and does not require manual attention.
(9) Grass or other suitable vegetative cover shall be provided throughout the
entire basin area. Grass should be cut regularly at approximately monthly intervals during the
growing season or as required.
(10) Debris and trash removal and other necessary maintenance shall be
performed on a regular basis to assure continued operation in conformance to design.
(11) Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
(12) No residential lot or any parts thereof shall be used for the storage of
water, either temporary or permanent, without approval of the Council.
I. Dry Bottom Basin Design Requirements
Detention basins which will not contain a permanent pool of water shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Provisions shall be incorporated to facilitate complete interior drainage of
dry bottom basins, to include the provisions of natural grades to outlet structures, longitudinal
and transverse grades to perimeter drainage facilities, paved gutters, or the installation of
subsurface drains.
(2) The detention basin shall, whenever possible, be designed to serve a
secondary or multipurpose function. Recreational facilities, aesthetic qualities (open spaces) or
other types of use shall be considered in planning the detention facility.
J. Wet Bottom Basin Design Requirements
Where a part of a detention basin will contain a permanent pool of water, all the items
required for detention storage shall apply except that the system of drains without a positive
gravity outlet required to maintain a dry bottom basin will not be required. A controlled positive
outlet will be required to maintain the design water level in the wet bottom basin and provide
required detention storage above the design water level. However, the following additional
conditions shall apply:
(1) Basins designed with permanent pools or containing permanent ponds
shall have a water area of at least one-half acre. If fish are to be maintained in the pond, a
minimum depth of approximately 10 feet shall be maintained over at least 25 percent of the pond
area. The remaining pond area shall have no extensive shallow areas, except as required by
subsection (3) below.
(2) In excavated lakes the underwater side slopes in the lake shall be stable. In
the case of valley storage, natural slopes may be considered to be stable.
(3) A safety ledge four to six feet in width is required and must be installed in
all ponds approximately 30 to 36 inches below the permanent water level. In addition, a similar
maintenance ledge 12 to 18 inches above the permanent water line shall be provided.
(4) A safety ramp exit from the pond is required in all cases and shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet and exit slope of 6 horizontal to 1 vertical. The ramp shall be of a
material that will prevent its deterioration due to vehicle use and/or wave action.
(5) Periodic maintenance is required in ponds to control weed growth and
larval growth. The pond shall also be designed to provide for the easy removal of sediment which
will accumulate during periods of pond operation. A means of maintaining the designed water
level of the pond during prolonged periods of dry weather is also required.
(6) For emergency use, basin cleaning, or shoreline maintenance, facilities
shall be provided or plan prepared for auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage.
(7) Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided, if
required. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities shall be
submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance
of aeration facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the Council.
(8) The perimeter of wet bottom detention basins, defined by the high water
contour which represents the high water elevation, shall be a minimum horizontal distance of 10
feet from high voltage electric lines.
K. Roof Top Storage
Detention storage requirements may be met in total or in part by detention on flat roofs.
Details of such designs are to be included in the building permit application and shall include the
depth and volume of storage, details of outlet devices and downdrains, and elevations of
emergency overflow provisions.
L. Parking Lot Storage
Paved parking lots may be designed to provide detention storage of storm waters on all or
a portion of their surfaces. Depths of storage must be limited to a maximum depth of six (6)
inches so as to prevent damage to parked vehicles and so that access to parked vehicles is not
impaired. Locate the deepest ponding zones at remote and least used portions of the parking lot.
M. Facility Financial Responsibilities
The construction cost of storm water detention systems and facilities as required by this
ordinance shall be part of the cost of land development.
N. Facility Maintenance Responsibility
Maintenance of detention/retention facilities during construction and thereafter shall be
the responsibility of the land developer/owner. Assignment of responsibility for maintaining
facilities serving more than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to
property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body. This determination
shall be made before the final drainage plans are approved.
Storm water detention and retention basins may be donated to the City of Mt. Vernon or
other unit of government approved by the City, for ownership and permanent maintenance
providing:
(1) The City or other governmental unit is willing to accept responsibility and
the City Council accepts operation and maintenance in writing by appropriate resolution.
(2) The facility has been designed and constructed according to all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
(3) All improvements have been constructed, approved and accepted by the
City for the land area served by the basin.
(4) Retention ponds containing a permanent pool of water have all slopes
between the permanent pool and high water line sodded and the remaining land area hydroseeded
using a method approved by the Council; are equipped with electrically driven aeration devices,
if required to maintain proper aerobic conditions and sustain aquatic life; provide suitable access
acceptable to the responsible government agency; and have the high water line not closer than 25
feet to any property line.
(5) Dry detention ponds shall have all slopes, bottom of the basin and areas
above the high water line hydroseeded; and shall have the high water line not closer than 25 feet
to any development boundary.
O. Inspections
All public and privately owned detention storage facilities shall be subject to inspection
by representatives of the City.
P. Corrective Measures
If deficiencies are found upon inspection, the owner of the detention/retention facility
shall be required to take the necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to
do so, the City may undertake the work and the owner shall be personally liable for all costs
incurred by the City and the real estate shall be subject to a lien for said costs, which lien may be
foreclosed by the City with all the costs and expenses therefore, including reasonable attorney's
fees being assessed against the owner and the real estate.
Q. Joint Development of Control Systems
Storm water control systems may be planned and constructed jointly by two or more
developers as long as compliance with this Ordinance is maintained. Developers are encouraged
to plan and construct these systems on a joint or regional basis.
R. Installation of Control Systems
Runoff and erosion control systems shall be installed as soon as possible during the
course of site development. Detention/retention basins shall be designed with an additional 6
(six) percent of available capacity to allow for sediment accumulation resulting from
development and to permit the pond to function for reasonable periods between cleanings. Basins
should be designed to collect sediment and debris in specific locations so that removal cost are
kept to a minimum. The Council will require temporary and permanent erosion control plans to
be submitted as a part of the construction plans.
S. Detention Facilities in Flood Plains
If detention storage is provided within a flood plain, only the net increase in storage
volume above that which naturally existed on the flood plain shall be credited to the
development. No credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the regulatory flood at
the location unless compensatory storage is also provided.
T. Off-Site Drainage Provision
When the allowable runoff is released in an area that is susceptible to flooding, the
developer may be required to construct appropriate storm drains through such area to avert
increased flood hazard caused by the concentration of allowable runoff at one point instead of the
natural overland distribution. The requirement of off-site drains shall be at the discretion of the
Council.
U. Erosion Control
Erosion control plans shall be submitted as part of the construction plans and
specifications and shall include the following:
(1) A complete copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Control Plan
filed with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(2) Temporary erosion control measures necessary during the initial
construction and establishment phases up to final site grading and seeding.
(3) A permanent erosion control plan of all the graded and non-hard surface
areas within the proposed development, as planned for completion, up to and including seeding
of the final lot on which business or residential dwellings are to be placed.
(4) Details concerning removal of temporary erosion control devices after the
initial establishment of adequate vegetative cover.
(5) Maintenance procedures, as part of the continuing plan, to keep all of the
land under adequate cover and erosion at an acceptable minimum.
20- 16. Certifications Required
After completion of the project and before final approval and acceptance can be made, an
AAs Built@ set of plans prepared and certified by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the
Council for review. These plans shall include all pertinent data relevant to the completed storm
drainage system and shall include:
(1) Pipe size and pipe material.
(2) Invert elevations.
(3) Top rim elevations.
(4) Lengths of all pipe structures.
(5) Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume.
(6) Certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage system
substantially complies with construction plans as approved by the Council.
All such submitted plans shall be reviewed for compliance by the Engineer or
other City designee. Upon approval of the submitted plans, such approval shall be evidenced in
writing to the person submitting the plans.
20-17. Changes in Plan
Any revision to, and/or significant change or deviation from the detailed plans and
specifications after formal approval by the Council shall be filed in duplicate with and approved
by the Council prior to implementation of the revision or change. Copies of the revisions or
changes, if approved, shall be attached to the original plans and specifications.
20-18. Determination of Impact Drainage Areas
The Council is authorized, but is not required to classify certain geographical areas as
Impact Drainage Areas and to enact and promulgate regulations which are generally applied. In
determining Impact Drainage Areas, the Council shall consider such factors as topography, soil
type, capacity of existing regulated drains and distance from adequate drainage facility. The
following areas shall be designated as Impact Drainage Areas, unless good reason for not
including them is presented to the Board:
A. A floodway or flood plain as designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
B. Land within 100 feet of each bank of any stream or main drainage channel.
C. Land within 100 feet of the centerline of any stream or main drainage channel
now in conduit.
D. Land subject to flooding and/or areas that have previously exhibited drainage
deficiencies.
Land where there is not an adequate outlet, taking into consideration the capacity and
depth of the outlet, may be designated as an Impact Drainage Area by resolution of the Council.
Special requirements for development within any Impact Drainage Area shall be included in the
resolution.
20-19. Other Requirements
A. Sump Pumps
Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge groundwaters or other storm waters shall
be connected to the storm sewer where possible or discharged into a designated storm drainage
channel. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage
shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function only,
either the discharge of storm waters or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
B. Down Spouts
All down spouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to the
storm sewer. No down spouts or roof drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
C. Footing Drains
Footing drains shall be connected to storm sewers where possible or designated storm
drainage channels. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
D. Basement Floor Drains
Basement floor drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.
20- 20. Regional Drainage Plans
The Council may establish a regional drainage plan or Interim Regional Drainage Plan
which controls drainage requirements within a specified drainage area.
A. Regional Drainage Plan or Interim Drainage Plan shall specify:
1. A description of the region; 2. The basis for the region having a Regional
Drainage Plan; 3. Potential areas of ground water discharge and recharge; 4. What modifications
or waivers of this Ordinance apply in the region; and 5. What additional drainage or drainage
plan requirements, beyond those in this Ordinance, apply in the region.
B. A Regional Drainage Plan or Interim Drainage Plan may provide:
1. For regional detention and/or storage of storm water; 2. For design or performance
standards to ensure water quality; 3. For design requirements to ensure compatibility with the
plan for regional detention and storage; and 4. For a charge, in land or dollars, based upon the
size and nature of the development, for the use of regional storm water detention and/or storage
facilities for new development.
20- 21. Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on historical records engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger storms may occur or storm water runoff depths may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from storm
water damage. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Mt. Vernon or
any officer or employee thereof for any damage which may result from reliance on this
Ordinance or on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
20- 22. Corrective Action
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Mt. Vernon from taking such lawful
action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All costs connected therewith
shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
20-23. Exempt Projects
Any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision (major or minor) or construction
project thereon, which has had its drainage plan approved by the Council prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
20- 24. Appendix - Tables and Figures
A. Table 1 - Urban Runoff Coefficients Urban Runoff Coefficients
Type of Surface
Runoff Coefficient AC@
Asphalt
0.82
Concrete
0.85
Roof
0.85
Lawn (sandy)
Flat
(0-2% Slope)
0.07
Rolling
(2-7% Slope)
0.12
Steep
(greater than 7%)
0.17
Lawns (Clay)
Flat
(0-2% Slope)
0.16
Rolling
(2-7% Slope)
0.21
Steep
(greater than 7%)
0.3
1. The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5 to 10 year
frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall be
modified as follows:
Return Period (yrs)
Multiply AC@ by
25
1.1
50
1.2
100
1.25
B. Table 1A - Rural Runoff Coefficients
Rural Runoff Coefficients
Type of Surface
Runoff Coefficient AC@
Woodland (Sandy)
Flat (0-5% Slope) 0.1
Rolling
(5-10% Slope)
0.25
Steep
(greater than 10%)
0.3
Woodland (Clay)
Flat
(0-5% Slope)
0.3
Rolling
(2-10% Slope)
0.35
Steep
(greater than 10%)
0.5
Pasture (Sandy)
Flat
0.1
Rolling
0.16
Steep
0.22
Pasture (Clay)
Flat
0.3
Rolling
0.36
Steep
0.42
Cultivated (Sandy)
Flat
0.3
Rolling
0.4
Steep
0.52
Cultivated (Clay)
Flat
0.5
Rolling
0.6
Steep
0.72
1. The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5 to 10 year
frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall be
modified as follows:
Return Period (yrs)
Multiply AC@ by
25
1.1
50
1.2
100
1.25
C. Table 2 - Runoff Coefficients AC@ by Land Use and Typical Inlet Times
Runoff Coefficients AC@ By Land Use and Typical Inlet Times
Land Use Runoff Coefficients Inlet Times
Flat
Rolling
Steep
(minutes)
Commercial (CBD)
0.75
0.83
0.91
5
Commercial (Neighborhood)
0.54
0.6
0.66
Industrial
0.63
0.7
0.77
Garden Apartments
0.54
0.6
0.66
37750
Churches
0.54
0.6
0.66
Schools
0.31
0.35
0.39
Semi Detached Residential
0.45
0.5
0.5
Detached Residential
0.4
0.45
0.5
37908
Quarter Acre Lots
0.36
0.4
0.44
Half Acre Lots
0.31
0.35
0.39
Parkland
0.18
0.2
0.22
To be Computed
1. Flat terrain 0-2% slopes.
2. Rolling terrain 2-7% slopes.
3. Steep terrain greater than 7% slopes.
4. Interpolation, extrapolation and adjustment for local conditions shall be based on
engineering experience and judgment. Final calculations shall be based on the
actual conditions that will exist after development.
5. The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5 to 10 year
frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall be
modified as follows:
Return Period (yrs)
Multiply AC@ by
25
1.1
50
1.2
100
1.25
D. Table 3 - Typical Values of Manning's n
Typical Values of Manning's n
Material
Desirable
Manning's
n
Maximum
Velocities
Closed Conduits
Concrete
0.013
15 f.p.s.
Vitrified Clay
0.013
15 f.p.s.
Brick
0.015
15 f.p.s.
Cast Iron
0.013
15 f.p.s.
PVC or PE Pipe
0.011
15 f.p.s.
Circular Corrugated Metal Pipe,
Annular Corrugations, 2 2/3 x 2 in.
Unpaved
0.024
7 f.p.s.
25% Paved
0.021
7 f.p.s.
50% Paved
0.018
7 f.p.s.
100% Paved
0.013
7 f.p.s.
Concrete Culverts
0.013
Open Channels
Concrete, Trowel Finish
0.013
Concrete, Broom or Float Finish
0.015
Gunite
0.018
Riprap Placed
0.03
Riprap Dumped
0.035
Gabion
0.028
New Earth (Uniform, Sodded, Clay)
0.025
Existing Earth
(Fairly Uniform, With Some Weeds)
0.03
Dense Growth of Weeds
0.04
Dense Weeds and Brush
0.04
Swale With Grass
0.035
E. Table 4 - Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal - Lined Channels
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal - Lined Channels
Permissible Velocity
Erosion Resistant
Soils
Cover
Slope
Range
Easily
Eroded
Soils
(percent)
(f.p.s.)
(f.p.s.)
Bermuda grass
37625
8
6
37750
7
5
over 10
6
4
Bahia
Buffalo grass
Kentucky Bluegrass
37625
7
5
Smooth Bromegrass
37750
6
4
Blue Grama
over 10
5
3
Grass Mixture
37625
5
4
Reed Canary grass
37750
4
3
Sericea Lespedeza
Weeping Lovegrass
37625
3.4
2.5
Yellow Bluestem
Redtop
Alfalfa
Red Fescue
Common Lespedeza
5
6
Sudangrass
37625
3.5
2.5
(1) From Soil Conservation Service, SCS-TP-61, Handbook of Channel Design for
Soil & Water Conservation.
(2) Use velocities exceeding 5 feet per second only where good covers and proper
maintenance can be obtained.
(3) Do not use on slopes steeper than 10 percent except for vegetated side slopes in
combination` with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center section.
(4) Do not use on slopes steeper than 5 percent except for vegetated side slopes in
combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center section. 5
(5) Annuals B use on mild slopes or as temporary protection until permanent covers
are established.
(6) Use on slopes steeper than 5 percent is not recommend.
F. Table 5 - Rainfall Depths for Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Rainfall Depths For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Duration
Depth
Return (inches)
Period (years)
2
5
10
25
50
100
5 min.
0.38
0.48
0.55
0.69
0.81
0.93
10 min.
0.7
0.88
1.02
1.27
1.48
1.7
15 min.
0.85
1.08
1.25
1.56
1.81
2.09
30 min.
1.17
1.47
1.73
2.14
2.48
2.86
60 min.
1.49
1.88
2.2
2.72
3.15
3.63
2 hrs.
1.85
2.36
2.72
3.41
3.96
4.56
3 hrs.
2.02
2.56
2.96
3.71
4.29
4.95
6 hrs.
2.37
3
3.47
4.34
5.03
5.8
12 hrs.
2.75
3.48
4.02
5.04
5.84
6.72
18 hrs.
2.91
3.68
4.25
5.33
6.17
7.11
24 hrs.
3.16
4
4.62
5.79
6.71
7.73
48 hrs.
3.6
4.52
5.28
6.48
7.58
8.62
72 hrs.
3.92
4.92
5.75
7.05
8.23
9.4
5 days
4.48
5.57
6.5
7.91
9.16
10.57
10 days
5.74
7.09
8.07
9.54
10.68
11.79
G. Table 5A - Rainfall Intensities for Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Rainfall Intensities For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Intensities (inches/hour)
Duration Return Period (years)
2
5
10
25
50
100
5 min.
4.56
5.76
6.6
8.28
9.72
11.16
10 min.
4.2
5.28
6.12
7.62
8.88
10.2
15 min.
3.4
4.32
5
6.24
7.24
8.36
30 min.
2.34
2.94
3.46
4.28
4.96
5.72
60 min.
1.49
1.88
2.2
2.72
3.15
3.63
2 hrs.
0.92
1.18
1.36
1.7
1.98
2.28
3 hrs.
0.67
0.85
0.99
1.24
1.43
1.65
6 hrs.
0.4
0.5
0.58
0.72
0.84
0.97
12 hrs.
0.23
0.29
0.34
0.42
0.49
0.56
18 hrs.
0.16
0.2
0.24
0.3
0.34
0.4
48 hrs.
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.14
0.16
0.18
72 hrs.
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.1
0.11
0.13
5 days
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.09
10 days
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
H. Table 6 - Huff 50% Rainfall Distribution, Median Time Distributions of Heavy
Storm Rainfall at a Point
CUMULATIVE PERCENT OF STORM RAINFALL FOR A GIVEN STORM
CUMULATIVE PERCENT
OF STORM TIME
THIRD QUARTILE
5
3
10
6
15
9
20
12
25
15
30
19
35
23
40
27
45
32
50
38
55
45
60
57
65
70
70
79
75
85
80
89
85
92
90
95
95
97
I. Figure 1 - Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves for Southeast Illinois.
(IDOT Drainage Manual Figure 4-202d)
RAINFALL INTENSITY vs. DURATION
SOUTHEAST ILLINOIS
I.S.W.S BULLETIN-70
Figure 4-202d
DURATION (MINUTES) Page 9
J. Figure 2 - Time of Concentration for Small Drainage Areas.
K. Figure 3 - Flow in Triangular Gutter Sections.
ARTICLE 21
ZONING
21-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
21-101 STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT
It is the intent of this ordinance to divide the City and the land lying contiguous to
and within one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits, into zones, or
districts, for the purpose of restricting and regulating therein the location, erection,
constriction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures, and land
for trade, industry, residence, and other specified uses; to regulate the intensity of
the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces
surrounding such buildings; to establish building lines and the location of
buildings designed for specified industrial business, residential and other uses
within such areas; to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform
therein; to prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of
such districts, respectively; to prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling
of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to limit congestion in the public streets
by providing for off-street parking and loading and unloading of vehicles;
providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, building and
structures; to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and
other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of
land; to conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City; and
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
21-102 SHORT TITLE
This amended ordinance, including the zoning District Maps made a part hereof
shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the AZoning Ordinance of the
City of Mount Vernon, Illinois@.
21-103 TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF THIS ORDINANCE
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to that land located within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and the land lying contiguous
to and within one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits as they may exist
from time to time.
21-10 4 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL
ZONING MAP
21-104.1 Official Zoning Map - The territorial limits described in Section 21-103 are
hereby divided into districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be part of this ordinance.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City of Mt. Vernon under
the following words: AThis is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
referred to in Section 21-104 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois. (the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois)@,
together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. The official zoning map
indicating current zoning district boundaries shall be located in the office of the
City Clerk.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Illinois Municipal
Code, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the
Official Zoning Map, such chances shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, with an
entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: ABy official action of the City
Council the following (change) changes were made in the Official Zoning Map:
(Date, Ordinance Number , Brief description of Change),@ which
entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter
shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons
shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under
Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
21-104.2 Annual Updating of Copies of the Official Zoning Map- In the event there
have been changes in the Official Zoning Map in any calendar year, the
Administrative Official hereinafter provided for shall prepare and publish or print
copies of the Official Zoning Map reflecting zoning district boundaries as of
December 31. Such copies shall be printed prior to March 31 of the succeeding
year, and shall bear the following words. AThis is a copy of the Official Zoning
Map reflecting zoning district boundaries as of December 31, 19 A. Fees for
such copies of Official Zoning Map shall be established in accordance with
Section 21-115 of this Ordinance. Regardless of the existence of copies of the
Official Zoning Map, the Official Zoning Map located in the Office of the City
Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water
areas, buildings, and other structures in the territorial limits.
21.104.3 Replacement of Official Zoning Map- In the event that the Official Zoning Map
becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new
Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The
new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.
The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City of Mt. Vernon under
the following words: AThis is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being
replaced) as part of Ordinance No. of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois@.
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally destroyed,
the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved,
together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
21-105 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
21-105.1 Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.
21-105.2 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
21-105.3 Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as
following such City limits, as they may exist from time to time.
21-105.4 Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway
between the main tracks.
21-106 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED
District regulations shall be as set forth in the Schedule of District Regulations,
Section 21-300, hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
ordinance, and in Section 21-109 of this ordinance, entitled, ASupplementary
District Regulations.@
21-107 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land,
and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:
21-107.1 No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building
or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved or
structurally alerted except in conformity with all regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located.
21-107.2 No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: to exceed the
height or bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a
greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards,
side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner
contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
21-107-3 No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying
with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street
parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or any other lot.
21-107.4 No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this ordinance.
21-107.5 Any land which shall come within an area within one and one-half miles beyond
the corporate limits, by reason of annexation of other lands to the City, shall be
and is hereby classified and zoned as A-G General Agriculture District, unless and
until such classification may be amended by ordinance.
21-108 NON-CONFORMING LOTS, NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND,
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, NON-CONFORMING USES OF
STRUCTURES AND PREMISES, NON-CONFORMING
CHARACTERISTICS OF USE, AND NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
21-108.1 Intent - Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may
later be adopted there exist: lots, structures, uses of land and structures,
characteristics of use, and signs which were lawful before this ordinance was
passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under
the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance
to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that
non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
Non-conforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. A non-conforming use of structure and
land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this
ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to
be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, or a nature which
would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has
been carried on diligently.
Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where
excavating or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially
begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on
diligently.
21-108.2 Non-Conforming Lots of Record - In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption of amendment of this ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not
of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall
apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions
and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board
of Appeals.
In any district, if two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no
portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance,
nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area
below requirements stated in this ordinance.
21-108.3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land (Or land with Minor Structures Only)- Where
at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists which would not
be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use
involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000 the use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful for a period of five years
from the date of adoption of this ordinance, provided:
21-108.3.1 No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance.
21-108.3.2 No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of
the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
21-108.3.3 If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more
than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations
specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
21-108.3.4 No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall
be erected in connection with such non-conforming use of land.
21-108.4 Non-Conforming Structures - Where a lawful structure exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the
terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
21-108.4.1 No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its non-conformity.
21-108.4.2 Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its physical
structure, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this ordinance.
21-108.4.3 Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is
moved.
21-108.5 Non-Conforming Uses of Structures or of Structures and Premises In
Combination- If lawful use involving individual structures, or of structure and
premises in combination, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms
of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful; subject to the following provisions:
21-108.5.1 No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the
district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
21-108.5.2 Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building
which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside such building.
21-108.5.3 If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a structure or
structures and premises, may as a conditional use be changed to another
non-conforming use provided the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the
existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Planning
Commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this ordinance.
21-108.5.4 Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be
resumed.
21-108.5.5 When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three year period (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination,
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
21-108.5.6 Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
non-conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection
is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the physical
structure.
21-108.6 Repairs and Maintenance - On any non-conforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a non-conforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs,
or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing,
provided that the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming shall not
be increased.
If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or
unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored,
repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe
by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such
official.
21-108.7 Non-Conforming Signs Shall be Amortized - Any sign which does not conform
to the sign provisions of the district in which it is located shall be eliminated or
brought in conformity with such provisions within ten years from the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
21-108.8 Conditional Uses Shall Not Be Non-Conforming Uses- Any use which is
permitted as a conditional use in a district under the terms of this ordinance other
than a change through Planning Commission and City Council action from a
non-conforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district shall not
be deemed a non-conforming use in such district, but shall without further action
be considered a conforming use at the date of adoption of this ordinance.
21-109 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
21-109.1 Visibility at Intersections in Residential Districts - On a corner lot in any
residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in
such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and a half
and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area
bounded by the lot lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said lot
lines 15 feet from the point of the intersection of the lot lines.
21-109.2 Fences, Walls, and Hedges - Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance,
fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge
of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of
any front yard shall conflict with the provisions of Subsection 21-109.1 of this
Section 21-109.
21-109.3 Accessory Buildings - No accessory building shall be erected in any required
front or side yard, and no separate accessory building shall be erected within five
feet of any other building.
21-109.4 Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on A Lot - In all districts with
the exception of R-1, R-2, and R-M2 residential districts, more than one structure
housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot of
record, provided that yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met
for each structure as though it were on an individual lot, and further provided that
the owner of a single lot of record shall not sell or convey off a part of said lot of
record without compliance with Article 17 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of
the City of Mt. Vernon, relating to subdivision of land.
21-109.5 Exceptions to Height Regulations - The height limitations contained in the
Schedule of District Regulations do not apply to spires, elevator penthouses,
belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, farm silos in
agricultural districts or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above
the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
21-109.6 Structures to Have Access - Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be
on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street, and
all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access
for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
21-109.7 Parking, Storage, or Use of Major Recreational Equipment - For purposes of
these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and
boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted
on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, utility trailers, and the
like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether
occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be
parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport or enclosed
building or behind the nearest portion of a building so as not to be visible from the
street if feasible, provided, however, that such equipment may be parked
anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during
loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any
location not approved for such use.
21-109.8 Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles - Automotive vehicles, trucks or trailers
of any kind or type without current license plates, or trucks over 3/4 ton capacity,
with current license plates, shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned
property other than in a carport or closed building.
21-110 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT - BUILDING PERMITS AND
CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
21-110.1 Administration and Enforcement - The City Manager shall administer and assign
duties to other persons in the City's service at his discretion.
If the City Manager, or his designated official find that any of the provisions of this
ordinance are being violated, he shall provide for notice in writing to the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures, removal of illegal buildings or structure or of illegal
additions, alterations, structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
21-110.2 Building Permits Required - No building or other structure shall be erected,
moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore. No building
permit shall be issued by the Building Department except in conformity with
provisions of this ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the City
Manager after approval of the City Council or Board of Appeals in the form of an
administrative review, conditional use or variance as provided by this ordinance.
No premises within the City of Mt. Vernon shall be improved for parking or parking
lot purposes, whether for surface parking or by a parking structure, unless and until a
building permit shall have been issued therefor as required and provided by Article 5
of this Ordinance and the requisite fee paid therefor.
21-110.3 Application for Building Permit - All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions
and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of
buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed
building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as
lawfully may be required by the Building Department, including existing or proposed
building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building or land; the number
of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be
necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this
ordinance.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Department,
marked either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature. The
original and one copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the
administrative official.
21.110.4 Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered, or Non-Conforming
Uses - It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof created, erected, converted, changed or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued therefore by the administrative official, stating
that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
ordinance. No non-conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed,
changed, or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
by the administrative official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state
specifically wherein the non-conformity differs from the provisions of this ordinance.
No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building shall be issued
until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance, and the
certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provision of this ordinance upon
completion of the work.
A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the administrative
official for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy
of a building, pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may
include such conditions as safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and
the public. The administrative official shall maintain a record of all certificates of
zoning compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this
ordinance and punishable under Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
No such certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use
shall be issued for the use and occupancy of any building or premises which shall be
used for other than single family dwelling purposes unless and until the applicant
shall have provided to the Building Inspector a plan of storm water detention
describing the method for handling storm water in a manner so that storm water
runoff shall not be increased as a result of such structure without detention and other
storm water handling facilities and until such storm water detention plans shall have
been approved by the City Engineer.
In the event that the applicant shall desire to use and occupy any such building or
premises prior to completion of all parking lot required by this Article 21, such
certificate may issue only under the following circumstances:
(a) Storm water detention shall have been completed according to the storm
water detention plan approved by the City Engineer; and
(b) The applicant shall deposit with the City a performance bond in an
amount not less than one and one-half times the estimated cost of such parking lot
improvements which remain to be completed, together with the applicant's
agreement to complete all of such improvements not less than one year after the date
of such bond, and that such bond shall be conditioned to guarantee such
performance.
21-110.5 Expiration of Building Permit - If the work described in any building permit has
not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said
permit shall expire and be cancelled by the administrative official, and written notice
thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work
as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building
permit has been obtained. A building permit may be extended beyond one year if it is
so requested in writing at the time of issuance of building permit.
21-110.6 Construction and Use To Be Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance -
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and
no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance and
punishable as provided by Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
21-110.7 Storm Water Detention Plans - No building permit shall issue for any structure
other than a single family structure or for any parking lot unless there shall have been
attached to the application therefor a storm water detention plan describing the
method for handling storm water in a manner so that storm water runoff shall not be
increased as a result of such structure without detention and other storm water
handling facilities, and until such storm water detention plan shall have been
approved by the City Engineer.
21-111 ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION BOARD: ESTABLISHMENT
AND PROCEDURE
A Zoning and Planning Commission is hereby established, which Commission shall
perform the duties and have the authority as hereinafter set forth for the Zoning
Board of Appeals and shall perform the duties and have the authority of the Plan
Commission (also called APlanning Commission@) established by Article 14 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances. Wherever the term AZoning Board of Appeals@, APlan
Commission@, or APlanning Commission@ is used within the Revised Code of
Ordinances, said term shall mean the Zoning and Planning Commission Board.
21-111.1 Membership and Terms - The Zoning and Planning Commission shall consist of
nine members, all residents of the City, each shall be appointed for a 5-year term.
Members shall serve until replaced or reappointed. In the event a vacancy or late
appointment occurs, replacement shall be for the unexpired term only. The Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the City Council shall appoint the membership and
shall designate the Chairman who shall serve in this capacity until a vacancy in his
term of appointment exists. The City Engineer shall serve as an advisor and as an
ex-officio member without a vote. Members of the Zoning and Planning
Commission may be removed for cause after a public hearing. Cause shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the failure to attend two consecutive meetings or four
meetings during any 12-month period. The Zoning and Planning Commission shall
perform the duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals as hereinafter set forth.
21-111.2 Proceedings of the Board of Appeals - The Board of Appeals shall adopt written
rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this
ordinance. The Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board of Appeals shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examination and other official actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board
shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
In the performance of its duties, the Board of Appeals may incur such expenditures
as are authorized by the City Council. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
chairman and at such times and places within the City as the Board of Appeals may
determine. All meetings shall be open to the public.
21-111.3 Hearings, Appeals, Decisions, Notice - Appeals to the Board of Appeals concerning
interpretation or administration of this ordinance may be taken by any person
aggrieved. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60
days or such lesser period as the Board of Appeals may provide by the rules of the
Board of Appeals, by filing with the City Clerk and with the Board of Appeals a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Clerk shall forthwith
transmit all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and
give the notice thereof to the parties interested and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent, or by
attorney. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be
made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the City Manager,
or his designated official, from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of five members of the Board of Appeals is necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the City Manager, or his
designated official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in this ordinance, or
to recommend any amendment or modification to this ordinance to the City Council.
21-111.4 Stay of Proceedings - An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reasons of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
21-112 BOARD OF APPEALS: POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
21-112.1 Administrative Review - To hear and decide appeals where it is allege there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the officials of the City
in the enforcement of this ordinance.
21-112.2 Variances: Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures - To authorize upon
appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary
hardship. The non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in
the same district, or permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings
in other districts shall not be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. A
variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of
Appeals unless and until:
21-112.2.1 A written application for a variance is submitted, on forms obtained from the City
Clerk, demonstrating:
21-112.2.1.1 That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land,
structure or building involved and which are not applicable to the other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district.
21-112.2.1.2 That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the
applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under
the terms of this ordinance.
21-112.2.1.3 That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant.
21-112.2.1.4 That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district.
21-112.2.2 Notice shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in advance of the public
hearing. The petitioner, his agent, or attorney shall cause such notice to be given in
each of the following ways:
a. The owner of the property for which the proposed variance is sought, or his
agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and place of public
hearing, unless said owner is applicant.
b. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, legal description
of the property for which the proposed variance is sought and the common
street address and nature of the proposed variance shall be printed in a
newspaper of general circulation within Mt. Vernon.
c. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, legal description of
the property for which the proposed variance is sought, including common
street address and nature of the proposed variance, shall be posted at the City
Hall and in a prominent place on the property for which the proposed
variance is sought.
d. The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected shall be in
the following form:
(1) The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall be a
metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not
less than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous
color. Such a sign shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner
shall pay to the City in cash or by check a deposit of $50 which shall
be refunded after the hearing and after the petitioner shall return the
metal sign to the City. In the event the petitioner shall not return the
metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit the deposit; and in
addition, the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or the City Council may
delay its final decision upon the application until return of the sign.
(2) The notice shall bear the legend, PROPOSED ZONING CHANGE
AND/OR CONDITIONAL USE - THIS PROPERTY and also shall
have printed thereon the words, AFOR INFORMATION PHONE
618/242-5000.@ The notice which is published shall be typed and shall
further have a plastic cover to protect such a notice from the weather.
(3) The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible from
the road or street nearest the principal structure on the property and if
there is no structure, then from the principal road or street adjacent
thereto. If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, then such a notice shall
be posted on each side of the lot facing the street or road. In no event
shall the notice be posted more than 10 feet or less than 5 feet from
each such street or road.
e. Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given, shall be
provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of publication
of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and providing a
certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices required herein.
f. Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by number, but also
by common designation for describing the current zoning and also the
description of the variance requested.
21-112.2.3 The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
21-112.2.4 The Board of Appeals shall make findings that the requirements of Section
21-112.2.1 of this ordinance have been met by the applicant for a variance.
21-112.2.5 The Board of Appeals shall further make a finding that the reason set forth in the
application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
21-112.2.6 The Board of Appeals shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance
will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not
be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
21-112.3 Special Conditions for Variance - In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals
may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance
and punishable under Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any use
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district.
21-112.4 Board Has Power of Administrative Official on Appeals - In exercising the above
mentioned powers the Board of Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity
with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be appealed and to that
end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken.
The concurring vote of five members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance.
21-113 ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION: POWERS AND DUTIES FOR
CONDITIONAL USE
The Zoning and Planning Commission established by Section 21-111 of Article 21
and by Article 14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall perform the duties of the
Planning Commission as hereinafter set forth. The duties of the Planning
Commission shall include hearing and recommending such conditional uses
indicated in the Schedule of District Regulations to the City Council and deciding
such questions as are involved in determining whether conditional uses should be
granted and recommending conditional uses for such conditions and safeguards as
are appropriate under this Ordinance or recommending denial of conditional uses
when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Wherever the
term APlanning Commission@ is used herein it shall mean the Zoning and Planning
Commission.
21-113.1 Application and Procedure - A conditional use shall not be recommended by the
Planning Commission unless and until:
21-113.1.1 A written application for a conditional use is submitted, indicating the section of this
ordinance under which the conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on
which it is requested. Application shall be made on forms obtained from the City
Clerk.
21-113.1.2 Notice shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in advance of the public
hearing. Where the petitioner is the City of Mt. Vernon, the City Manager for the
City of Mt. Vernon or the Chairman of the Industrial Commission of the City of Mt.
Vernon and the property affected by the requested conditional use exceeds 60 acres,
notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, and place, legal description of the
property for which conditional use is sought and nature of the proposed conditional
use shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation within Mt. Vernon. In all
other cases, the petitioner, his agent, or attorney shall cause such notice to be given
in each of the following ways:
a. The owner of the property for which the conditional use is sought, or his agent,
shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and place of public hearing;
b. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, legal description of the
property for which conditional use is sought, and the common street address and
nature of the proposed conditional use, shall be printed in a newspaper of general
circulation within Mt. Vernon;
c. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, legal description of the
property for which conditional use is sought, and the common address and nature of
the proposed conditional use, shall be posted at the City Hall and in a prominent
place on the property for which the conditional use is sought;
d. The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected shall be in the
following form:
1. The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall be a
metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not
less than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous
color. Such sign shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner
shall pay to the City in cash or by check a deposit of $50 which shall
be refunded after the hearing and after the petitioner shall return the
metal sign to the City. In the event the petitioner shall not return the
metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit the deposit; and in
addition, the City Council may delay its final decision upon the
application until return of the sign.
2. The notice shall bear the legend, APROPOSED ZONING CHANGE
AND/OR CONDITIONAL USE - THIS PROPERTY@, and also shall
have printed thereon the words, AFOR INFORMATION PHONE
618/242-5000". The notice shall further have affixed thereto a copy of
the notice which is published which shall be typed and shall further
have a plastic cover to protect such notice from the weather.
3. The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible from the
road or street nearest the principle structure on the property and if there
is no structure, then from the principle road or street adjacent thereto.
If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, then such notice shall be posted
on each side of the lot facing the street or road. In no event shall the
notice be posted more than 10 feet nor less than 5 feet from each such
street or road.
e. Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given shall be provided
by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of publication of the
notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and providing a verified
certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices required herein.
f. Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by number, but also
the relief requested. An example is, ATo amend the Zoning Classification from
R-1, Low Density Residential District to B-2, Secondary Business District@.
21-113.1.3 The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or
Attorney.
21-113.2 Findings - The Planning Commission shall make a finding that is empowered under
the section of this ordinance described in the application, to recommend to the City
Council the conditional use and that the granting of the conditional use will not
adversely affect the public interest.
Before any conditional use permit shall be recommended to the City Council, the
Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying compliance with the
specific requirements governing individual conditional uses, if any, and that
satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following,
where applicable:
21-113.2.1 Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular
reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and
control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe.
21-113.2.2 Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the
items in 21-113.2.1 above and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the
conditional use or adjoining properties and properties generally in the district.
21-113.2.3 Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in 21-113.2.1 and
21-113.2.2 above.
21-113.2.4 Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility.
21-113.2.5 Screening and buffering; with reference to type, dimensions, and character.
21-113.2.6 Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety,
economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district.
21-113.2.7 Required yards and other open space.
21-113.2.8 General, compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district.
21-113.3 Final Decision - After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall grant or deny the application for conditional use.
21-114 AMENDMENTS
The regulations imposed and the districts created by this ordinance may be amended
from time to time by ordinance after this ordinance has gone into effect.
21-114.1 Application and Procedure - No amendment of this Ordinance shall be made by the
City Council unless and until:
21-114.1.1 A written application for amendment is submitted indicating the type of amendment
sought. The application for amendment shall be made on form obtained from the City
Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee to defray the cost of processing the
application. The fee less costs incurred by the administrative official, shall be
refunded if the legal notice has not been published.
21-114.1.2 Notice shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in advance of the public
hearing. Where the petitioner is the City of Mt. Vernon, the City Manager for the City
of Mt. Vernon, or the Chairman of the Industrial Commission of the City of Mt.
Vernon and the property affected by the requested zoning amendment exceeds 60
acres, notice of such hearing, indicating the date, time, place, legal description of the
property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought, and nature of the
proposed change in zoning shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation
within Mt. Vernon. In all other cases, the petitioner, his agent, or attorney shall cause
such notice to be given in each of the following ways:
a. The owner of the property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought,
or his agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and place of public
hearing.
b. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, legal description of
the property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought and the
common street address and nature of the proposed change in zoning shall be
printed in a newspaper of general circulation within Mt. Vernon.
c. Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, legal description of the
property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought, including
common street address and nature of the proposed change in zoning, shall be
posted at the City Hall and in a prominent place on the property for which the
proposed change in zoning is sought.
d. The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected shall be in
the following form:
(1) The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall be a metal or
other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not less than 18 inches
by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous color. Such sign shall remain
the property of the City. The petitioner shall pay to the City in cash or by
check a deposit of $50 which shall be refunded after the hearing and after the
petitioner shall return the metal sign to the City. In the event the petitioner
shall not return the metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit the deposit; and
in addition, the City Council may delay its final decision upon the application
until return of the sign.
(2) The notice shall bear the legend, PROPOSED ZONING CHANGE
AND/OR CONDITIONAL USE - THIS PROPERTY and also shall have
printed thereon the words, AFOR INFORMATION PHONE 618/242-5000.@
The notice shall further have affixed thereto a copy of the notice which is
published which shall be typed and shall further have a plastic cover to protect
such notice from the weather.
(3) The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible from the
road or street nearest the principle structure on the property and if there is no
structure, then from the principle road or street adjacent thereto. If the lot is a
corner lot or through lot as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt.
Vernon, then such notice shall be posted on each side of the lot facing the
street or road. In no event shall the notice be posted more than 10 feet or less
than 5 feet from each such street or road.
e. Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given, shall be
provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of publication
of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and providing a
certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices required herein.
f. Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by number, but also by
common designation for describing the current zoning and also the relief
requested. An example is, ATo amend the zoning classification from R-1, Low
Density Residential District to B-2, Secondary Business District@.
21-114.1.3 The public hearing shall be held before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any part may
appear in person or by agent or attorney.
21-114.1.4 In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or
districts signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining, or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the City Clerk, the
amendment shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote or 2/3 of the City Council
then holding office.
21-115 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF APPEALS, PLANNING COMMISSION
AND CITY COUNCIL
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, or official of the City, aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Appeals, the Planning Commission or the City Council,
may seek review by a court of record of such decision in the manner provided by law,
but only after exhaustion of administrative remedies provided by this Ordinance or by
State law.
21-116 DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER, BOARD OF APPEALS, PLANNING
COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL
It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement
shall be first presented to the Administrator of the Zoning Ordinance and that such
questions shall be presented to the Board of Appeals only on appeal from the decision
of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of
Appeals shall be to the Courts as may be provided by law.
It is also the intent of this Ordinance that conditional uses shall be decided by the City
Council and that recourse from decisions of the City Council shall be to the Courts as
provided by law.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the City Council in
connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of
interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such
questions shall be as stated in this section and this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance
the City Council have only the duties, (1) or considering and adopting or rejecting
proposed amendments or the repeal of this Ordinance, as provided by law, (2)
granting or denying conditional uses based on recommendations of the Plan
Commission and, (3) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in
Section 21-117 below.
21-117 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a
collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance appeals,
conditional uses, variances, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance.
The schedule of fees shall be posted and may be altered or amended only by the City
Council.
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall
be taken on any application or appeal.
21-118 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to
be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
21-119 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis
thereof shall be filed with the City Manager or his designated official. He shall record
properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided
by this ordinance.
21-120 (RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)
21-121 AIRPORT HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Any person seeking a building permit, rezoning, conditional use, or variance within
the jurisdiction of airport height regulations as administered by the Mt. Vernon
Airport Authority shall provide evidence acceptable to the administrative official; that
such height regulations have been complied with before such building permit,
rezoning, conditional use, or variance can be acted upon.
21-122 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any
part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
21-123 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES: EFFECTIVE DATE
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance, or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent
necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect. This Ordinance shall become
effective immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
21-124 DEFINITIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
21-124-1 Definitions - For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word Ashall@ is mandatory and
the word Amay@ is permissive; and the word Aperson@ includes firm, association, trust,
organization, partnership, company or corporation as well as an individual. The word
lot includes the words plot or parcel.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or portion of the main building,
the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or to the principal use of the
premises, including garages, fallout shelters.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental to the principal or main use of the
premises.
ACHROMATIC COLOR means colorless, zero in saturation, or lacking in hue; for
purposes of this Article, the definition of achromatic shall include, without limitation
white, black, grays, tans, and light earth tones, but any bold, vivid, neon, florescent, or
extreme coloration that attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition of
achromatic.
ACRE(S) GROSS: The Total Acreage of a subdivision, a contiguous zoning district,
or a planned development. Computations shall include all public right-of-way except
boundary streets of which only one-half of the right-of-way shall be used in any
computation.
ACRE(S) NET: The Gross Acreage less all public right-of-way and publicly owned
land utilized for community facilities.
AGRICULTURE: Land, including necessary buildings and structures, the principal
uses of which are growing of soil crops or the raising or keeping of livestock.
ALLEY: Any public right-of-way twenty feet or under in width providing a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION: Applied to a building or structure to mean a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities.
AUTOMOBILE, ABANDONED: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive
days or more and is apparently deserted. Notwithstanding the foregoing definition, a
vehicle or portion thereof stored within a permitted building or structure shall not be
considered to be an abandoned automobile.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the sale,
or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. Uses permissible at an
AAutomobile Service Station@ do not include major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating
condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics
normally found in a repair garage or a body shop.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or farm machinery, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT: Any floor below the first story of a building unless construed to be a
STORY as defined herein.
BILLBOARD: See ASign, Off-Site@.
ADULT DAYCARE - Adult Daycare Center shall mean any individual, person or
entity which for compensation provides care for 3 or more adult persons not related to
the caregiver. The care provided shall be temporary care each day and shall not
include any extended care nor any residential living arrangements. An Adult Daycare
Center shall not be situated at the family home or residence of any care giver or other
person.
BOARDING HOUSE: Any dwelling, not open to transients, which provides sleeping
and/or cooking and/or eating facilities for more than three (3) but less than ten (10)
unrelated individuals. Sleeping rooms shall not be used for more than two (2) persons
per room. A rooming house shall be deemed to be a boarding house.
BUILDING: See AStructure@.
BUILDING AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
CARPORT: See ABasement@.
CHILD CARE PROVIDER: Shall mean any individual who provides care within a
family home of less than four children and shall mean any individual who provides
care within a family home only for children related to the individual and/or only for
children from a single household (excluding the households of any related child and
of the Child Care Provider). ARelated@ means any of the following relationships by
blood, marriage or adoption: parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, great uncle,
great aunt, brother, sister, step-parent, step-brother, step-sister, uncle, aunt, nephew,
niece or first cousin. No Conditional Use under Article 21 of the Revised Code is
required for a Child Care Provider.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: Community Residence means a group home or
specialized residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities which is
licensed, certified or accredited by appropriate local, state or national bodies.
Community Residence does not include a residence which serves persons as an
alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason
for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable
disease.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE (SMALL): Small Community Residence means a
Community Residence serving eight (8) or fewer persons with disabilities in a
family-like atmosphere.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE (LARGE): Large Community Residence means a
Community Residence serving 9 to 20 persons with disabilities in a family-like
atmosphere.
CONDITIONAL USE: A special use of land which would not generally be
appropriate within a particular land use district but might be allowable in certain
locations within the district if specific requirements of conditions are met (as to
number, area, location, or relation to neighboring lands or uses and public facilities).
After compliance with appropriate safeguards and procedures specified herein, the
City Council may permit as conditional uses precise types of uses listed in the land
use districts of the Schedule of District Regulations. A conditional use, as defined
herein, is the same type of use described as a Aspecial use@ in Section 11-13-1.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use,
issued by the administrative official pursuant to authorization by the City Council and
in compliance with procedures specified herein.
DAY CARE CENTER: Shall mean any individual, person or entity which provides
care for children except a Child Care Provider or a Day Care Home. AChildren@ means
any person under 18 years of age.
DAY CARE HOME: Shall mean a family home (residence) satisfying the hereinafter
described conditions which receives more than three up to a maximum of 12 children
for less than 24 hours per day. The number of children includes the family's natural,
foster or adopted children and all persons under the age of 12. The term does not
include facilities which receive only children from a single household. A Day Care
Home must meet each of the following conditions:
1. The Day Care Home must be licensed by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services and operated in accordance with the Illinois Child Care
Act and Regulations of the Department of Children and Family Services.
2. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall
provide child care, except a Day Care Home may employ one full time
equivalent employee who is not a resident of the family home.
3. The use of the family home for child care shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants.
4. There shall be no sign or other change in the outside appearance of the
residence or premises nor any visible evidence of nonresidential use of the
premises.
5. No Day Care Home shall be situated nor shall any child care be provided
within any accessory building.
6. Only child care services shall be provided and there shall be no sales of any
goods or merchandise by the Day Care Home or upon the premises; no other
home occupation shall be conducted upon the premises.
7. No traffic shall be generated by the Day Care Home in greater volumes then
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
8. Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the Day Care Home shall be
met off the street and other than in a required front yard (except within a
garage, carport or upon a graveled, asphalted or other hard surfaced driveway).
The Day Care Home shall not create a need for off-street parking spaces in
addition to that required for the members of the family residing on the
premises.
9. No noise or condition shall be created by the day Care Home in greater
volume or degree than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
10. Unless waived in writing by the City Council, all areas where any child or
children may reasonably be expected to be present shall be completely
enclosed by properly constructed and well maintained four foot chain-link
fence or a six foot privacy fence aesthetically compatible with the
neighborhood and approved by the Building Inspector.
11. The Day Care Home shall comply with such other conditions or restrictions as
determined by the City Council to be necessary because of the particular
character or condition of the neighborhood, the premises or the proposed Day
Care Home.
12. A Conditional Use under Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall
be required which Conditional Use shall be subject to all other terms and
provisions of Article 21 relating to a Conditional Use except that said
Conditional Use shall be issued in the name of the operator or operators of the
Day Care Home and shall be non-transferable and shall immediately terminate
upon any conveyance or other transfer of the residence in whole or in part; and
in addition, upon a Day Care Home failing to satisfy any condition imposed
herein, the Conditional Use may be revoked by the City Council upon notice
and an opportunity to be heard, and shall also be subject to all other remedies
provided by law.
DENSITY: Pertaining to the number of dwelling units per net acre or gross acre as
indicated for the appropriate zoning district in the Schedule of District Regulations.
Residential District density shall not be exceeded for new subdivisions nor exceeded
for re-subdivision of existing platted land.
DISABILITIES, PERSON WITH MEANS: Any individual whose disability:
1. is attributable to mental, intellectual, or physical impairment or a combination
of mental, intellectual, or physical impairment; and
2. is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or indefinitely; and
3. results in functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of
major life activities:
a. Self-care;
b. Receptive or expressive language;
c. Learning;
d. Mobility;
e. Self-direction;
f. Capacity for independent living;
g. Economic self-sufficiency; and
4. reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment, or other services which are of a
lifelong or extended duration.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON means
the dominant or principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance,
when the phrase refers to films Awhich are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical area,@ the films so described are those whose dominant or
principal character and theme are the exhibition or description Aspecified anatomical
areas@ or Aspecified sexual activities.@
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the City of Mt. Vernon and the territorial limits
of this ordinance for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, and
intensity of use by buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are herein
established.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: A food service establishment, with or without interior
facilities for eating, which caters to and permits the consumption of food either in
customer's automobile parked on the premises or in any other designated area on the
premises outside the establishment where the food is so prepared.
DWELLING: A residential building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: a dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one
or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: a dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A Dwelling Unit other than a mobile home
designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. A Dwelling Unit includes a
Modular Unit as herein defined.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached residential building other than a mobile
home containing two dwelling units designed for or occupied exclusively by two
families living independently of each other. A Two-Family Dwelling includes a
Modular Unit as herein after defined.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A residential building other than a mobile
home or a portion thereof containing separate dwelling units for three or more
families living independently of each other. A Multiple-Family Dwelling may be a
Modular Unit as herein defined.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: shall mean any structure placed in accordance
with Article 19 of the Revised Code of Ordinances that meets the definition of
AManufactured Home@ as set forth within the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Act, 42 USC 5401 et seq and the 24 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 3280, which Act essentially provides that A Manufactured Home is a
structure that is transportable in one or more sections. In traveling mode, the home is
8-feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320
or more square feet. A Manufactured Home is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. A Manufactured Home is
designed and constructed to the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety Act
Standards and must be so labeled. Calculations used to determine the number of
square feet in a structure shall be based on the structure's exterior dimensions
measured at the largest horizontal projections when erected on site. These dimensions
will include all extendable rooms, cabinets, and other projections containing interior
space but do not include bay windows. Width of the Manufactured Home means its
largest overall width in the traveling mode, including cabinets and other projections
which contain interior space; width does not include bay windows, roof projections,
overhangs or eaves under which there is no interior space. All Manufactured Homes
must have an affixed Housing and Urban Development seal(s) located on the outside
of the home: if the home is a multi-wide unit, each must have a seal.
MODULAR UNIT: A Modular Unit is a structure manufactured in an off-site
location and transported to the placement site by a specialized transporting device.
When the Modular Unit arrives at the placement site, it must be removed from the
transporting device onto a basement or permanent foundation. The towing hitch or
running gear, which includes axles, brakes, wheels, and other parts of the chassis that
operate only during transportation must be removed prior to placement or installation
on a site built permanent foundation consisting of a system of supports, including
piers, either partially or entirely below grade which is : (a) capable of transferring all
design loads imposed by or upon the structure into soil or bedrock without failure, (b)
placed in an adequate depth below grade to prevent frost damage, and (c) constructed
of concrete, metal, treated lumber or wood or grouted masonry. A Modular Unit is not
designed to be moved once placed or installed on a site-built permanent foundation. A
Modular Unit must be designed and manufactured to comply with all building,
dwelling, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and other construction codes applicable to
construction of residential structures within the City of Mt. Vernon. A Modular Unit
must have affixed thereto a certification under 24 Code of federal Regulations
3282.12c certifying that the Unit is not subject to the provisions of the National
Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Act (42 USC 5401 et seq)
which certification shall substantially state as follows:
The manufacturer of this structure, Name
Address (location where structure was manufactured).
Certifies that this structure (Ser. No ) is not a
manufactured home subject to the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act and is -
(1) designed only for erection or installation on a site-built permanent foundation,
(2) not designed to be moved once so erected or installed,
(3) designed and manufactured to comply with
(Here state which code included in paragraph (b) (3) of this section has been
followed), and
(4) to the manufacturer's knowledge is not intended to be used other than on a
site-built permanent foundation.
This certification shall be affixed in a permanent manner near the electrical panel, on
the inside of a kitchen cabinet door, or in any other readily accessible and visible
location. As part of the certification, the manufacturer shall identify each certified
structure by a permanent serial number placed on the structure. No certification
except the certification described above shall be accepted by the City, unless
otherwise required by federal law.
ATRAVEL TRAILER@ shall mean a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: a room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment, and physically separated from any other
rooms or Adwelling units@ which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, bathroom, and sleeping facilities.
EMPLOYEE(S): in regard to off-street parking requirements, employees mean all
who work in the enterprise, including owners other than purely stock holders),
partners, management and office personnel.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distributing systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and underground
water storage tanks, including poles,
ESSENTIAL SERVICES (Cont'd.): wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, traffic signals and signs, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings, or Public Utility
Substations as hereinafter defined. Underground use is encouraged, overhead
discouraged.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that
unless all members are related by birth, adoption, or marriage, no unrelated group
shall consist of more than three (3) persons.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of all gross horizontal enclosed area of the several floors
of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot excluding basement floor
areas and non-enclosed portions of the structure. All dimensions shall be measured
between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.): The quotient of the floor area as defined above of
the building divided by its lot area.
F. A. R. = Floor Area
Lot Area
(See illustration 21-124.2 of this Section)
GRADE: Grade is the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of
a building. In case building walls are parallel to and within five feet (5) of
sidewalk(s), the grade shall be the average finished elevation of such sidewalk(s)
between side lot lines. (See also HEIGHT and STORY, and illustration at 21-124.2 of
this Section).
HEIGHT: Building height, as permitted in each district, shall be determined from
GRADE as herein defined. (See also STORY and illustration at 21-124.2 of this
Section).
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
1. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants,
and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be
used in the conduct of the home occupation.
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-illuminated
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building
4. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
5. There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation.
6. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the
street and other than in a required front yard.
7. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family
residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a
single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or
process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio
or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises.
8. A medical practitioner, architect, engineer, insurance or real estate offices
shall not be construed to be home occupations.
JUNK YARDS: The use of more than 750 cubic feet of open storage on any lot,
portion of a lot or tract of land for the sale, storage, keeping or abandonment of junk,
scrap metals or salvageable materials, or for the abandonment, dismantling, or
wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles, machines, or parts thereof.
KENNEL: Any lot, structure, or premises licensed and lawfully operating under the
Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605) where dogs and/or cats are kept or
maintained for boarding, training or similar purposes for a fee or compensation or where
more than one litter of dogs and/or cats during any calendar year is born or kept and
offered for sale, exchange, or adoption for a fee, compensation, barter, or charge.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: Adequate space, logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be
used such as trucks and tractors, and accessible to such vehicles at all times. Required
off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in
computation of required off-street parking space.
LOT: For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size
to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide
such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage
on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of
1. A single lot of record.
2. A portion of a lot of record.
3. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of records and
portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
4. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of
division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does
not meet the requirements of this ordinance for the zoning district for which
the lot or parcel is located.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the
street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through
lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall
be provided as indicated under YARDS as defined herein. (See definition of YARD,
FRONT.)
LOT MEASUREMENTS:
1. DEPTH of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints
of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front
and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
2. WIDTH of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines
connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the
rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that width between side lot
lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street lot line),
shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width, except in the case of
lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac, where the 80 percent requirement shall
not apply.
LOT 0F RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES: Any lot within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be one of the
three following types:
CENTER LOT: defined as a lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner
lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
INTERIOR LOT - defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
THROUGH LOT - define as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as
double frontage lots. (See illustration at 21-124 of this section).
MOBILE HOME: - See A Dwelling, Mobile Home@.
MODULAR UNIT: A prefabricated sectionalized, panelized or modular unit is a
structure manufactured in an off-site location and transported to the job site by a
specialized transporting device. When the modular unit arrives at the job site, it must
be removed from the transporting device onto a basement or permanent foundation.
Modular units have no steel chassis attached to the floor joist.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: For the purposes of this ordinance, an
off-street parking space shall consist of a space within the buildable area of a lot,
adequate for parking an automobile. Any off-street parking space required herein shall
be one of the following types:
l. RESIDENTIAL, ONE AND TWO FAMILY: This space may be in
a garage, carport, or unenclosed area, but not on any public
right-of-way (including sidewalk). Ingress and egress to such parking
space from public right-of way may be by forward or backward
motion.
2. RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (THREE OR MORE
FAMILIES); COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL: This space shall be
one of a group of off-street parking spaces (a parking lot and/or
structure containing three or more spaces) consisting of a space
adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on
both sides. Each parking space shall have maneuvering room and
properly related access to a public right of way (included to mean only
forward motion as opposed to backing out). Required spaces shall be
individually marked and shall be so designed, maintained, and
regulated so that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall
be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may
be parked and unparked without moving another.
Parking spaces shall not be less than 9 feet by 18 feet for any parking
arrangement except parallel type, in which case the minimum size shall be 8.5
feet by 22 feet. Aisles between parking spaces shall be not less than twelve
feet in width when serving automobiles parked at a forty-five degree angle in
one direction nor less than twenty-five feet in width when serving automobiles
parked perpendicularly.
For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary
access and maneuvering room may be estimated at 400 square feet.
Requirements will be considered met only when actual spaces as required in
the Schedule of District Regulations and maneuvering room meeting the
aforementioned requirements are provided. All parking spaces, maneuvering
room, and points of access from public right of way shall be a hard surface,
and meet the following standards:
2.1. 6" of rock and 2" of asphalt, or equivalent in concrete.
2.2. Provide for disposal of storm water and ensure such water shall not
flow onto adjoining property or sidewalks.
2.3. Traffic flow direction shall be appropriately marked.
If appropriate in the judgment of the Administrative Official: Curbs (or stops)
shall be installed at each off-street parking space to regulate traffic flow;
adequate lighting facilities shall be provided. Layout of parking spaces in
parking lot or parking structure are the responsibility of the developer, but
shall be approved by the Administrative Official in respect to meeting the
intent of this definition.
APLANNING COMMISSION@ or APLAN COMMISSION@ shall mean the Zoning
and Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A means of developing or redeveloping
existing larger parcels or combinations of smaller parcels of land within the
jurisdiction of this ordinance, by allowing more flexibility in design to produce a
more aesthetic and/or efficient environment, and which through safeguards
incorporated elsewhere in this ordinance will assure that any such planned unit
development will be in harmony and compatible with the intent of this ordinance and
the appropriate zoning district of this ordinance.
More specifically, a planned unit development is land which is under:
1. Single ownership, or
2. Unified control, and wherein such land is to be utilized for ultimate use by:
2.1. Single ownership, or
2.2. Unified control, or
2.3. Separate ownership and unified control, or
2.4. Separate ownership without unified control, and whereon such land is
designed for use as one building or a group of buildings, and whereon
such land there may be provisions for multiple purpose uses. Standards
and requirements within the various zoning districts permitting a
planned unit development are indicated in the Schedule of District
Regulations, and in Performance Standards, Section 21-200 of this
ordinance.
Planned Unit Development does not prevent conveyance or other transfer of less than
the whole parcel comprising the Planned Unit Development, provided the transfer or
conveyance does not create or result in a violation of Article 21 or other Article of the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
Any such planned unit development shall be compatible to the Comprehensive Plan
for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Provided further, if the proposed development is
only for a portion of the contiguous landholdings of the applicant(s), then a simple,
schematic plan showing anticipated uses, densities, and circulation (traffic or
thoroughfare) patterns shall be submitted with application for any planned unit
development.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA means public land which has been
designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths or similar public land open to the public within the
City of Mt. Vernon which is under the control, operation, or management of the City
or other governmental, charitable, or not-for-profit authority.
PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION: An area where facilities are provided for the
distribution of telephone, radio communications, water, gas, and electricity. These
facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use in the various zoning districts subject
to conditions which will assure their harmony, especially aesthetically, with the nature
of the respective district.
REGULARLY FEATURES means a consistent or substantial course of conduct,
such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the
films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the establishment.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple,
regular place of worship or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE means the R-1, Low Density Residential;
R-2, Medium Density Residential; R-M2, Medium Density and Mobile Home; R-3,
High Density Residential; and R-MH, Planned Mobile Home Districts described
within Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Residential Use means any
dwelling or structure used or occupied for living quarters of any person or property
upon which there is situated a residential structure, dwelling unit or other living
quarters.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS: shall mean a
specialized residential multiple dwelling unit having individual rooming units for
homeless persons. Residential Facility for Homeless Persons does not include any
specialized residential care home known as a Community Residence, nor does it include
a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense,
or persons whose reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or treatment of a
communicable disease. Each Residential Facility for Homeless Persons shall satisfy the
following conditions:
1) No person shall be permitted to reside at the Residential Facility without first
satisfactorily completing a screening process to insure that persons receiving
services at the Residential Facility are entitled to receive services offered by the
Facility and otherwise meet the requirements of this Ordinance. The screening
process may occur on or off of the premises of the Residential Facility. No person
shall be admitted nor remain as a resident of the Residential Facility who shall be
a registered sex offender or who shall have a recent criminal history of domestic or
other violence or who shall have a recent history of multiple criminal convictions
for other serious offenses against persons or property. No person shall be admitted
who is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol.
2) The Residential Facility shall only provide housing and services, including
ancillary services, to persons who have been approved and admitted as residents
and who are actual residents of the Residential Facility at the time a service is
provided, except that meals may be provided to residents of the facility, staff of
the facility, and to persons providing on-site services to residents of the facility
during times that such on-site services are being provided. Ancillary services
may include medical care, meal provision, grooming care, counseling services,
and other such services.
3) Only services for residents of the Residential Facility shall be provided and there
shall be no sales of any goods or merchandise by the Residential Facility nor any
sales or commercial use upon the premises.
4) The Residential Facility shall provide 24 hour security, which security shall
include not less than one on-site security personnel.
5) Any need for parking generated by the operation of the Residential Facility shall
be met off the street and upon the premises of the Residential Facility.
6) The Residential Facility shall comply with such other reasonable conditions or
restrictions as determined by the City Council at the time of granting the
conditional use to be reasonably necessary because of the particular character or
condition of the neighborhood, the premises, or the proposed residential facility.
7) A Conditional Use under Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be
required, which Conditional Use shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions
of Article 21 relating to a Conditional Use, except that said Conditional Use shall
be issued for the specific property and issued in the name of the operator or
operators of the residential facility and shall be non-transferrable and shall
immediately terminate upon any conveyance or other transfer of the property or of
the Facility, in whole or in part. In addition, upon a residential facility failing to
satisfy any condition imposed herein, the Conditional Use may be revoked by the
City Council upon Notice and opportunity to be heard, and shall also be subject to
all other remedies as provided by law.
ROOMING HOUSE: See ABoarding House@
SCHOOL means any public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergarten, elementary
schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, high schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges,
and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDITY means a state of dress in which non-transparent
and opaque clothing covers from view no more than the human buttocks, anus, anal
cleft and cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, vulva and the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point and the
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female
breasts, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human breasts
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part.
SERVICE STATION: See AAutomobile Service Station@
ASEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS@ shall mean an adult store, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult theater, sexual encounter center, escort agency, or semi-nude model
studio, each of which are defined as follows:
(1) ADULT CABARET means any commercial establishment, except an
adult theater, semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter center, including
but not limited to a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or gentlemen=s club, which
regularly features any one or more of the following:
(i) persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity;
(ii) live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon
exposure of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical
areas.@
(2) ADULT MOTEL means a motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment which offers private accommodations to the public, for any
form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified
anatomical areas@ and which advertises the availability of such sexually
oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television,
and (i) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10)
hours or (ii) allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a
time period of less than ten (10) hours.
(3) ADULT STORE means a commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
(i) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations that are characterized by the depicting or
describing of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical
areas;@ or
(ii) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with Aspecified sexual activities.@
(iii) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon matters exhibiting or describing Aspecified sexual
activity@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ and which are shown within a
viewing room as hereinafter defined on still or motion picture
projectors, slide projectors or similar machines or computers or other
image producing machines.
A principal business purpose exists if the establishment has a significant or
substantial portion of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial section of its
sales or display or floor space to the sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the items described above. A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing Aspecified
sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ and still be categorized as an
adult store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult store so long as
one of its principal business purposes are characterized by the depiction or
description of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas.@
(4) ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which has a room(s) for viewing or
viewing areas, each of which are 150 square feet or greater in size and which
for any form of consideration regularly features any one of the following:
(i) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified
anatomical areas@ are regularly shown for any form of consideration;
(ii) persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity or live
performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exposure of Aspecific sexual activities@ or Aspecific anatomical areas@.
(5) ESCORT AGENCY means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
(6) SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person,
who regularly appears in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any
form of consideration to be viewed or observed or sketched or drawn or
painted or sculptured or photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
Semi-nude Model Studio shall not include a modeling class operated: (a) By a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
or (b) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or (c) In a
structure: (i) which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person available for viewing and
(ii) where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class; and (iii) where no more than one model is on the
premises at any one time.
(7) SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
(i) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
(ii) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of semi-nudity.
A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are intended to
generate business income.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the
premises on which the sign is located. (For definitions and restrictions see Sections
21-125 and 21-126 of this ordinance)
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means and includes any of the following:
(1) the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely
covered;
(2) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means and includes any of the following:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
(2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;
(3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in (1) through (3) above.
STORY: That portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that
portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the
ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or
unused underfloor space is more than six feet above GRADE as defined herein, such
basement, cellar, or unused underfloor area shall be considered as a story.(See also,
GRADE and HEIGHT, and illustration at 21-124.2 of this Section).
STREET LINE: The lot line abutting street right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground,
or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things,
structures include buildings, mobile homes, signs, billboards, and poster panels, but
do not include walls and fences.
TOWN HOUSE DEVELOPMENT: A group of single family dwelling units, each
dwelling unit structure having the following characteristics:
1. May or may not be part of a planned unit development, but each zoning lot
used for single family town houses shall have a distinct area which shall be
described and recordable as a separate lot.
2. Containing one or more stories.
3. Having at least two exterior entrances.
4. Attached to one or more adjoining town houses by a vertical party wall
extending from the footing(s) to the roof line without passageway or access
between town houses, - Or - Unattached, but abutting one or more adjoining
town houses and with a separate but complete vertical wall from footing to
roof line without passageway or access between town houses.
5. A minimum of one off-street parking space.
6. Rear yards separated from adjoining rear yards with masonry fences a
minimum of seven feet in height. Such fences may or may not be party walls.
7. Area, yard, height, and F.A.R. requirements as indicated in schedule of
District Regulations.
TRAILER: See ADwelling, Mobile Home@.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes.
TRUCK OR EQUIPMENT TERMINAL: Any lot, structure, or premises use for
the parking or storage of capital equipment such as trucks, trailers, or other like
equipment, over 3/4 ton capacity.
UNIFIED CONTROL: More than one parcel of land wherein separate owners join
for development purposes, and at a later date may transfer all or part of the land to
another person or persons, but any such transfer shall include the legal responsibility
of being an integral part of the whole development. For example; a condominium; a
cooperative, a land trust; or, private owner ship of a single parcel, but any such parcel
has a legal responsibility to the entire development through a legally recorded
covenant or some other recorded instrument. It is intended that all owners of such
land under unified control know their limitations and responsibility as previously
agreed upon are re-defined from time-to-time. It is further intended that any such
jointly owned land shall not come under ownership of the City of Mt. Vernon as in
the case of open space, except in special and unique conditions which shall be
determined at the time of authorization.
Unified control may be utilized within planned unit developments or in conventional
developments.
UTILITY SUBSTATION: See APublic Utility Substations@.
VARIANCE: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As
used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of
structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use
otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted
because of the presence of non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an
adjoining district.
VIEWING ROOM shall mean a room, booth, or area having less than 150 square
feet of floor space where a patron of a sexually oriented business is positioned or
would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video
reproduction.
YARD: A required open space other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the grade of the lot
upward, provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height
limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot
adjoining a public street.
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots
indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the
front yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the
prevailing yard pattern, the administrative official may waive the requirement for the
normal front yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not
exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided on the
frontage facing the street with the greatest traffic volume as determined by the
administrative official, and where possible in accordance with the prevailing yard
pattern; and a second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in
the district shall be provided on the other frontage.
In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages, the administrative official
shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations: (1)
At least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth required generally in
the district; (2) No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth
required generally.
Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line
joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot
line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed
to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such
rounding. (See illustrations at 21-124.2 of this Section.)
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the
rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot
farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case
of THROUGH LOTS, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards
required. In the case of CORNER LOTS, yards remaining after full and half-depth
front yards have been established shall be considered side yards.
Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard
established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its
inner edge parallel with the side lot line. (See illustrations at 21-124.2 of this Section.)
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard
lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only
front and side yards.
Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard
established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its
inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. (See illustrations at 21-124.2 of this Section.)
YARD, SPECIAL: A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street,
required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but adjacent to a lot line
so placed or oriented that neither the term Aside yard@ nor the term Arear yard@ clearly
applies. In such cases, the administrative official shall require a yard with minimum
dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district,
determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the
yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and
location of structures and buildable areas thereon. (See illustration at 21-124.2 of this
Section.)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS shall mean the Zoning and Planning Commission
of the City of Mt. Vernon.
21-124.2 Illustrations -
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F. A. R.): The following drawings illustrate how Floor Area
Ratio is determined in its most simple form. Setbacks (which will determine the
building area) must be indicated initially prior to application of F. A. R. for the
appropriate district in this ordinance.
RATIO OF FLOOR AREA TO LOT AREA
LOT TYPES: The following diagram illustrates portions of a contemporary, conventional
subdivision and the various lot types as defined in this ordinance.
CORNER LOT: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. See lots marked A in lot
type diagram. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight
lines drawn from the foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot (or an
extension of the lot where it has been rounded by a street radius) at an interior angle of less than 135
degrees. See lots marked A(1) in lot types diagram.
INTERIOR LOT: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an
alley. See lots marked B in lot types diagram.
THROUGH LOT: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an
alley. Through lots with frontage on two streets may be referred to as double frontage lot. See lots
marked C in lot type diagram.
YARD MEASUREMENTS: The drawings on this and the following page illustrate typical yard
requirements of a residential zoning district.
YARDS shall be measured in the following sequence:
1. Front,
2. Side,
3. Rear,
4. Special (if applicable)

EXAMPLE OF CURVILINEAR TYPE LOT LAYOUT FOR R-1 DISTRICT
GRADE, HEIGHT, AND STORY: Also see definitions at 21-124.1 of this Section.
GRADE: Average of elevation of finished ground level at center of all walls of building
If walls are parallel to and within five feet of sidewalks, grade shall be the average of finished
elevation of sidewalks.
HEIGHT: Shall be established from GRADE as illustrated below.
STORY:













































21-200 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The Performance Standards set forth in this ordinance are to provide guidelines for
the administration of this ordinance, and for developers considering specified types of
development permitted by this ordinance. The Performance Standards herein
described are in addition to the requirements set forth in the Schedule of District
Regulations.
21-201 LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (Rl)
AND (R2)
Planned unit developments for districts R1 and R2 shall be defined as building or
group of buildings situated on land which is under single ownership or unified control
and which is wholly residential in nature. Planned unit developments for this district
shall further meet the following criteria:
21-201.1 Wholly residential development may be permitted a waiver of lot area, yard
requirements and height restrictions, providing: The general intent of the district is
not circumvented; consideration is given to adjoining property; adequate vehicle
circulation and off-street parking meeting the requirements of the regulations for this
district are provided; the density of development does not exceed the density as
indicated in the statement of intent for the district; covenants to provide maintenance
of commonly owned land and any improvements or facilities thereon are found to be
acceptable to the City Council.
21-201.2 Accessory uses including, but not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, golf
courses, community centers and other recreational uses will be permitted, but shall be
limited to the residents of the planned unit development and subject to their control.
Any such accessory uses shall not be of a commercial nature which are open to the
general public.
21-201.3 Planned unit developments shall also meet the requirements or the intent of the
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations. Development may be staged, permits
issued for each stage.
21-201.4 The granting of a conditional use permit for a planned unit development shall be valid
for a period of 12 months from date of approval. If substantial progress has not been
made toward exercising the permit it shall become null and void.
21-202 HIGH DENSITY PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (R3)
Planned unit developments for R-3 district shall be defined as a building or groups of
buildings situated on land which is under single ownership or unified control and
which is either entirely residential in nature, or predominantly residential in nature,
but wherein various compatible uses hereinafter indicated may be conducted. Planned
unit developments for this district shall further meet the following criteria:
21-202.1 A waiver of lot area, yards, height and stories requirements may be granted providing
the total land area for wholly or predominantly residential uses shall be equal to or
more than the sum of the total of minimum lot areas required per d.u. and minimum
lot area per non-residential uses permitted in this district. To insure that adequate
open space is provided, the total land for residential purposes required may not be
infringed upon for parking for non-residential purposes although common parking
areas will be permitted.
21-202.2 Adequate vehicular circulation and off-street parking meeting the requirements of the
regulations for this district are provided.
21-202.3 The dwelling unit density for this district is not exceeded, and that such density shall
be based upon computations in Section 21-202.1 as distinct from non-residential uses.
21-202.4 Covenants to provide maintenance of commonly owned land and any improvements
thereon are found to be acceptable to the City Council.
21-202.5 At least 250 square foot of recreational area per dwelling unit shall be provided for
recreational and playground purposes including but not limited to swimming pools,
tennis courts, golf putting green, tot lot, badminton, community centers, and other
recreational uses will be permitted, but shall be limited to the residents of the planned
unit development and subject to their control. Any such accessory uses shall not be of
a commercial nature which are open to the general public. This required recreational
area may be part of the open space computed in 21-202.1 above.
21-202.6 Planned unit developments shall also meet the requirements of the Subdivision
Regulations. Development may be staged, permits issued for each stage.
21-202.7 Permitted non-residential uses shall be limited to the following, and shall be situated
so as not to conflict with the residential portion(s) of the development: parking areas
for uses in less restricted districts; kindergarten or day nursery; offices of Physicians,
Dentists, Architects, Attorneys, Accountants, Engineers, Real Estate, Insurance,
Urban Planning, Welfare and Charitable Services, and other offices deemed to be
compatible by the Planning Commission; Music, Art, or Dancing Schools; Barber and
Beauty Shops; Museum and Art Galleries; Laundromat; Coffee Shop or Restaurant;
Drug Stores.
21-202.8 The granting of a conditional use permit for a planned unit development shall be valid
for a period of 12 months from the date of approval. If substantial progress has not
been made toward exercising the permit it shall become null and void.
21-203 PLANNED MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT (R-MH)
21-203.1 Planned Manufactured Home Developments are permitted as a matter of right in
districts zoned as Planned Manufactured Home Districts (R-MH). However, to
implement the Statement of Intent for this district in the Schedule of District
Regulations the following standards shall be met by any applicant for rezoning.
21-203.1.1 The proposed development shall be located so that it shall not be necessary for
excessive traffic movement from the development to pass through an existing
single-family residential area or an area designated in the Comprehensive Plan solely
for single-family residential development. The proposed development shall have
direct access onto a public road that will accommodate the projected traffic arising
from the development.
21-203.1.2 The property shall be convenient to schools, developments, and shopping facilities.
21-203.1.3 The property is not within an area used nor planned for industrial development, nor
will the occupants of the proposed development be in any way adversely affected by
nearby existing or planned industrial uses.
21-203.2 Site Requirements:
21-203.2.1 Recreation or open sites shall be provided for each manufactured home development.
Open site may be provided in more than one location, but no location shall contain
less than two-thousand (2,000) square feet. Each recreational site shall be accessible
to all of the manufactured home sites in the development, and shall not be used for
any other purpose. Each development should provide a minimum of 8 percent of the
gross acreage for such open site for recreational purposes.
21-203.2.2 Each site for manufactured homes shall have a minimum of 5,000 square feet, except
as provided with Article 19A.9.
21-203.2.3 The minimum distance required for the separation of a manufactured home from any
other manufactured home shall be 15 feet. Front set back requirement within a
manufactured home development shall be a minimum of 10 feet from private road.
For entire manufactured home development, set back requirements shall be a
minimum of 15 feet from a public street, or within 5 feet of any side or rear yard line
of the manufactured home development. No accessory building shall be placed within
the setback areas described above. The setback requirement required herein shall not
be subject to variance.
21-203.3 Access and Street Requirements:
21-203.3.1 All manufactured home sites must be served from internal private streets within the
manufactured home development and there shall be no direct access from a
manufactured home site to a public street or alley.
21-203.3.2 A minimum of two (2) off-street parking sites shall be provided for each
manufactured home site. Guest parking in the ratio of one parking space per five (5)
manufactured home sites shall be interspersed throughout the manufactured home
development; guest off street parking requirements may be met by off street parking
sites within the driveway of an individual manufactured home site (after minimum off
street parking for that site has been met). Each parking space shall comply with the
requirements of Article 21, Section 21-124, Definition of “Parking Space, Off Street”.
21-203.3.3 All internal private streets shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width, exclusive of the
required parking areas, and shall contain concrete curbs and gutters or acceptable
gutters on both sides of the street. All areas used by automobiles shall be paved and
meet the requirements of the City of Mt. Vernon.
21-203.3.4 No internal private street access to public streets shall be located closer than 100 feet
to any public street intersection.
21-203.3.5 All interior cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum outside turning radius of 38 feet.
21-203.3.6 All corners shall have a minimum 15 feet radii.
21-203.3.7 All streets shall be lighted in accordance to the standards of the City of Mt. Vernon
and the State of Illinois Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations for
mobile home parks.
21-203.3.8 Stop signs shall be placed at all public street intersections. Yield signs placed
appropriately on internal private streets.
21-203.3.9 Dedication of all necessary rights-of-way to conform to the requirements of the
Thoroughfare Plan shall be offered free of charge to the proper jurisdiction.
21-203.4 Landscaping Required:
21-203.4.1 A landscaping plan of the proposed development including at least one tree per
manufactured home site of at least 1 2 A caliper measured 3' above the ground, shall
be submitted for approval by the Plan Commission. All open sites shall be landscaped
and include a permanent means of maintenance. No more than 30 percent of the
landscaped area may be maintained in ornamental rock or gravel.
21-203.5 Sign Requirements
21-203.5.1 Signs proposed for any manufactured home development shall be subject to
architectural review of the Plan Commission, and may be indirectly or internally
lighted, but shall not be flashing, moving, or have the illusion of flashing or moving.
Incidental signs shall not exceed 1 square foot in area per sign, with a height limit of 4
feet; and one (1) 16 square foot development directory for each manufactured home
development.
21-203.6 Other Requirements:
21-203.6.1 Applicant shall comply with applicable requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of
the City of Mt. Vernon (Article 17 of the Revised Code of Ordinances).
21 203.6.2 All utilities (including without limitation sewer, water, gas, oil, telephone, T.V. and
internet service lines) within the manufactured home development shall be placed
underground and shall comply with all applicable laws, codes, and regulations.
21-203.6.3 All manufactured home developments shall comply with Article 19A of the Revised
Code of Ordinances.
21-203.6.4 Additional development requirements may be prescribe as conditions when such
requirements are determined by the Planning Department to be necessary to ensure
the protection of the character of the neighboring properties, the compatibility of land
uses, and the health and safety of manufactured home development occupants.
21-204.1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1) USES
21-204.2 SMOKE - A light industrial use shall meet such requirements as are imposed by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable state or federal law.
21-204.2 ODOR - No light industrial use may release an odor that is detectable at the lot line.
21-204.3 TOXIC MATERIALS - For a light industrial use, the emission of toxic and noxious
materials may not produce any concentration at a residence or business district
boundary line exceeding 3% of the threshold limit values for toxic material in
industry as set forth in AThreshold Limit Values@ for the current year, as adopted at the
annual meeting of the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
21-204.4 GLARE AND HEAT - No light industrial use may cause heat at the lot line so
intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard. No such use may cause illumination at or
beyond any residence district boundary in excess of 0.1 foot candle².
21-204.5 PARTICULATE MATTER³- A light industrial use shall meet such requirements as
are imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable state
or federal law.
Footnote (2) The term Afoot-candle@ means a unit of illumination equal to the
illumination at all points that are 1 foot from a uniform point source of one candle
power.
Footnote (3) The term Aparticulate matter@ means a divided liquid or solid material
that is discharged and carried along in the air.
21-204.6 VIBRATION - No light industrial use may cause, at the lot in continuous earthborne
vibrations higher than the limits set forth in column I of the following table. Nor may
it cause, at any residence district boundary, continuous earthborne vibrations higher
than the limits set forth in column II.
I II
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement4
(inches)
Displacement4
(inches)
More
than
But not
more than
0
10
0.0008
0.0004
10
20
0.0005
0.0002
20
30
0.0002
0.0001
30
40
0.0002
0.0001
40
50
0.0001
0.0001
50
0.0001
0.0001
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce higher
than twice the displacement specified in the table.
Footnote (4) "Displacement@ means the maximum amount of motion in any direction
as determined by any three-component (simultaneous) measuring system approved by
the Commission; and Athree component measuring system@ means instrumentation
that can measure earthborne vibrations in a horizontal as well as a vertical plane.
21-204.7 Noise5- At no boundary of a residence or business district may the sound pressure
level of any light industrial use (except for background noises produced by sources
not under control of this ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other
transportation facilities) exceed the following decibel limits:
I II
Octave Band Frequency Maximum Permitted Maximum Permitted
(cycles per second) Sound Level (decibels) Sound Level (decibels)
More But Not Along Residence Along Business
Than More Than District Boundaries District Boundaries
20 75 72 79
75 150 67 74
150 300 59 66
300 600 52 59
600 1200 46 53
1200 2400 40 47
2400 4800 34 41
4800 B 32 39
The prescribed limits of column I apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At other
times, the allowable levels in each octave band are each reduced by 6 decibels.
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave band
filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by the American
Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the Flat C network of the
sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave band analyzer.
Impulsive noises are subject to the performance standards prescribed by this section if
they cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of
no more than plus or minus 2 decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such
as irregular and intermittent noises, shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
Footnote (5) “Octave band” means all the frequencies from one frequency to a
second. In sound octave bands, the second frequency is usually twice the first one;
and “octave band filter” means an electrical device that separates the sounds in each
octave band and presents them to the sound level meter.
21-204.8 Fire Hazards6- Solid substances ranging from free or active burning may be stored,
used, or manufactured only within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible
exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system.
The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials which
produce flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations of the State Fire Marshall. A certificate of compliance, issued by the
State Fire Marshall's Office, stating that the plan and specifications for a light or
general industrial use comply with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire
Marshall shall accompany the application for a certificate of zoning compliance.
21-204.9 Detonation Materials- No activity involving the storage, use, or manufacturing of
materials that decompose by detonation may be carried on except in accordance with
the rules issued by the State Fire Marshall. These materials include primary
explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; high
explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and their
components, such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its
derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds, such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and
ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates,
chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as
uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
Footnote (6) “Free burning” means a rate of combustion described by a substance that
burns actively and easily supports combustion; and “Intense burning” means a rate of
combustion described by a substance that burns with a high degree of activity and is
consumed rapidly
21-204.10 Exceptions- These performance standards do not apply to: Site preparation or
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or improvement of buildings, structures,
equipment, or other improvements on or within the lot line;
The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the transportation of personnel,
materials, or products;
Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accident, failure, or
breakdown;
Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of life,
limb, or property; or
Processes for which there are no known means of control.
Research shall be promptly conducted to discover methods of control leading to the
installation of protective equipment.
21-204.11 Open Storage- Open storage of materials shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner.
Open storage shall be limited to no more than 50% of the open storage area, and shall
not exceed 5'-0" in height. All open areas shall be screened from public view by a
fence of at least 6'-0" in height. All open storage areas shall be paved with a dust free
surface.
21-205 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (1-2) USES
21-205.1 Smoke- a general industrial use shall meet such requirements as are imposed by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable state or federal law.
21-205.2 Odor - No general industrial use may release an odor that is detectable at the lot line.
21-205.3 TOXIC MATERIALS - For general industrial use, the emission of toxic and
noxious materials may not produce any concentration at a residence or business
district boundary line exceeding 10 percent of the threshold limit values for toxic
materials in industry as set forth in AThreshold Limit Values@ for the current year, as
adopted at the annual meeting of the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists.
21-205.4 GLARE AND HEAT - No general industrial use may cause heat at the lot line so
intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard. No such use may cause illumination at or
beyond any residence district boundary in excess of 0.1 footcandle8.
21-205.5 PARTICULATE MATTER9
A general industrial use shall meet such requirements as are imposed by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable state or federal law.
21-205.6 VIBRATION - No general industrial: use may cause at any business district
boundary continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the limits set forth in Column l
of the following table. Nor may it cause at any residence or Mobile Home district
boundary continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the limits set forth in column
II.
I
II
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement10
(inches)
Displacement10
(inches)
More
than
But not
more than
0
10
0.002
0.0004
10
20
0.001
0.0002
20
30
0.0006
0.0001
30
40
0.0004
0.0001
40
50
0.0003
0.0001
50
0.0002
0.0001
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce higher
than twice the displacement specified in the table
8See Footnote Number 2
9See Footnote Number 3
10See Footnote Number 4
21-205.7 NOISE11 At no boundary of a residence or business district may the sound pressure
level of any general industrial use (except for background noises produced by sources
not under control of this ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other
transportation facilities) exceed the following decibel limits:
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
MoreBut not
than more than
I
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level (decibels)
Along Residence
District Boundaries
II
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level (decibels)
Along Business
District Boundaries
20
75
72
79
75
150
6 7
74
150
300
59
66
300
600
52
59
600
1200
46
53
1200
2400
40
47
2400
4800
34
41
4800
-
32
39
The prescribed limits of column I apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At other
times, the allowable levels in each octave band are each reduced by 6 decibels.
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band
filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by the American
Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the Flat C network of the
sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave band analyzer.
Impulsive noises are subject to the performance standards prescribed by this section if
they cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of
no more than plus or minus 2 decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such
as irregular and intermittent noises, shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
11 See Footnote Number 5
21-205.8 FIRE HAZARDS12 - Solid substances ranging from free or active burning to intense burning
may be stored, used, or manufactured only within completely enclosed buildings having
incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing
system.
The storage utilization, or manufacturing of flammable liquids or materials which produce
flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of
the State Fire Marshall. A certificate of compliance, issued by the State Fire Marshall's Office,
stating that the plans and specifications for a light or general industrial use comply with the
Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshall shall accompany the application for certificate
of zoning compliance.
21-205.9 DETONATION MATERIALS - No activity involving the storage, use, or manufacturing of
materials that decompose by detonation may be carried on except in accordance with the rules
issued by the State Fire Marshall. These materials include primary explosives such as lead
azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX,
PETN, and picric acid; propellants and their components, such as nitrocellulose, black powder,
boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fire works such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine, unstable organic compounds such as acetylines, tetrazoles, and ozonides; strong
oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorics, chlorates, and hydrogen
peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and
products, and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
21-205.10 EXCEPTIONS - These performance standards do not apply to: Site preparation or
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, or improvement of buildings, structures,
equipment or other improvements on or within the lot line;
The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the transportation of personnel, materials,
or products; Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accident, failure,
or breakdown;
Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of life, limb or
property;
or processes for which there is no known means of control.
Research shall be promptly conducted to discover methods of control leading to the installation
of protective equipment.
12See Footnote Number 6
21-300 Schedule of District Regulations
The column headings in the following Schedule of District Regulations are self-explanatory. However, prior to any
reference to the Schedule, refer to the following General Statement of Intent which is to be used as a guide in any
interpretation of the various Statements of Intent and Regulations for Land Use Districts established by this Ordinance.
G E N E R A L S T A T E M E N T O F I N T E N T
The zoning districts hereby established are to effect a plan of land use which will:
1. Create order out of chaos.
2. Be based upon existing land use.
3. Provide a pleasant and economical living environment for inhabitants of the Community through the
establishment of a variety of districts to meet individual preferences and overall community needs.
4. Utilize governmental and public utilities facilities in the most economical manner possible which in
turn should provide the most service for the least cost.
5. Preserve and enhance property values throughout the community by keeping like and compatible uses
together, and to separate incompatible uses from each other by designation on the ZONING DISTRICT
MAP which is an integral part of this Ordinance.
Land values are highest in the Central Business District Area (CBD), and diminish as the distance from the CBO
increases. Therefore, it is the purpose and intent of this Ordinance to conserve, protect, enhance, and utilize to the fullest
extent possible these land values which the community has created. Consequently, in establishing these districts, the
general objectives are to (1) utilize the existing CBD as the starting point and allowing within the CBD only appropriate
uses, (2) land adjacent to the CBD should permit high density (more people per acre) residential uses, and (3) land further
out to be utilized for lower density residential purposes.
Existing ownership of land is generally in relatively small lot sizes and which often will be non-conforming to this
ordinance. To implement the general intent of this ordinance, it is hoped that consolidation of these smaller parcels will
be achieved either through private acquisition or some type of privately owned but unified control, and that planned
developments will be the rule rather than the exception, especially in non-residential areas.
Portions of the existing thoroughfare network are the logical place for certain types of commercial uses, but should only
be permitted in certain compact spots not only for their own welfare, but for the welfare of the entire community and its
inhabitants. Land for industrial purposes should be provided, but location should be determined by (1) existing industrial
uses, (2) relationships to the other land uses districts, and (3) supporting transportation facilities in the thoroughfare
system of the community. The intent for the remaining variety of land uses are stated in the individual statement of intent
for each district. Perpetuation of non-conformities to the various Land Use Districts will be discouraged in the
administration and interpretation of this ordinance.
It is further intended that in the territorial limits outside the City limits the General Agriculture district be utilized as far
as is practical until residential, commercial or industrial development is proposed as the case may be. It is also intended
that any development proposed in the territorial limits outside the City limits be considered in conjunction with
annexation agreements.
T H E C O M P R E H E N S I V E P L A N
The City of Mt. Vernon officially adopted a Comprehensive Plan on February 17, 1964. It is the intent of this Zoning
Ordinance that the Comprehensive Plan and its subsequent officially adopted amendments be the guide for any
development in the jurisdiction of this ordinance. In the event of any proposed amendment to this Zoning Ordinance
which is in contradiction to the Comprehensive Plan, such amendment shall be preceded by an amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan.
LAND USE DISTRICTS
A-G General Agriculture
F-P Flood Plain
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-M2 Medium Density Residential & Mobile Home
R-3 High Density Residential
R-MH Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home
B-1 Primary Business
B-2 Secondary Business
B-3 Interchange Business
B-PL Planned Business
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 General Industrial
I-A Industrial-Agricultural
IPCA-PUD Industrial Park Conservation Area
A-G
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
A-G General Agricultural District
It is the intent of this district to provide
land for purposes devoted primarily to
the production of agricultural products
such as field crops, livestock, fowl and
other conventional agricultural pursuits.
This district is also created to assist in
the conservation of the natural resources
within the jurisdiction of this ordinance
by encouraging practices which will
conserve soil, soil resources, water,
water resources, and prevent soil erosion
and floodwater damages. Utilities other
than electricity and telephone should be
provided by the land user thereby
discouraging the uneconomical
extension of public water supply and
sewage disposal facilities. Uses not
related to Agriculture are discouraged.
When the public interest will be served
and only when a contribution will be
made to orderly growth, portions of this
district may be rezoned for alternative
uses.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126
of this Ordinance
(1) Building and enclosed pens for
livestock, fowl and animals shall
not be closer than 200' from any
adjoining district.
(2) Principal and accessory buildings
shall not be closer than 100' from
any adjoining parcel.
(3) Principal and accessory buildings
shall not be closer than 50' from
any adjoining parcel.
(4) Principal, accessory buildings and
operations shall not be closer than
500' from any adjoining parcel.
Agriculture and Agriculture buildings
in connection with a bona fide farm
operation. (1)
Cemeteries
Churches (3)
Essential Services
Forest Preserves
Single Family Farm Dwellings
Wireless communication facility
placed on existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500
Municipally Owned Parks and
Recreational Areas
Public Secondary Schools
______________________________
______________________________
(5) See State Law
(6) See definition of Home
Occupation
(7) Principal, accessory buildings
and operations shall not be closer than
100' from any adjoining parcel
Accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to permitted
principal uses and on the same
parcel including:
Residential garages
Living quarters of persons
employed on the premises.
Home occupations (6)
Truck or Equipment Terminal
Roadside produce stands in
conjunction with a bonafide farm
Kennel
A-G
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards,
the City Council may permit as
Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Sale of Greenhouse products grown on
premises.
Riding Stables (1)
Raising, breeding and boarding of
non-farm fowl and animals (1)
Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun
club or related operation
Railroad
Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race
track. (1), (4)
Penal or Correctional Institution (2)
Airport or Heliport (5)
Commercial agricultural storage
operations.
Public utility substation; Energy Park;
Photovoltaic Power Station; Solar Farm,
Park or Plant; Wind Farm, Park or Plant
Public sewage disposal plant or public
water plant. (4)
Freestanding Wireless Communication
Facility as described within Section
21-500
Sanitary landfill or other qualified
disposal system. (7)
Commercial Radio or Television
Station
Mineral extractive operations outside
corporate limits, including but not
limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand
and the related processing operations,
storing and sale of such materials. (4)
Travel Trailer Park
Any use more
appropriate to another
zone or zones
including, but not
limited to:
Mobile Homes
Non-farm dwellings
Junk Yard
Abandoned
Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Mineral extractive
operations within
corporate limits.
MIN. LOT AREA: 5 acres, except for: churches
and cemeteries in which case 2 acres; and
conditional uses as determined by the Planning
Commission.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300'
MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 80' along
Federal Highway, 60' along other public roads.
MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 100'
100' MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1000 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 40' except barns and silos
MAX. STORIES: 3
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Dwelling unit 2 0
Home Occupation +1 0
Churches per 4 seats in
main auditorium 1 0
Sanitary landfill or other
qualified disposal plant per
3 employees 1 0
All remaining permitted uses and conditional
uses if permitted are subject to the Planning
Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
F-P
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
F-P Flood Plain District
It is the intent of this district to
delineate reasonable high water
marks within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance. For reasons of health,
safety and the general welfare, it is in
the public interest to permit only
limited types of uses within these
areas which are subject to flooding
and require emergency services. A
factor recognized in determining
reasonable high water marks is that
as urban land use increases, storm
water runoff will also tend to
increase, consequently taxing the
water carrying capacity of certain
low lying areas within the
jurisdiction of this ordinance. The
development of roads, streets,
highways, water and sewer lines are
discouraged in this district, as such
improvements would tend to
encourage further developments.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section
21-126 of this Ordinance
(1) Building and enclosed pens for
livestock, fowl and animals shall not
be closer than 200' from any
adjoining district.
(2) Principal, accessory buildings
and operations shall not be closer
than 500' from any adjoining parcel.
(3) See State Law.
Agriculture and Customary
Agricultural buildings and structures
(1)
Parks & Playgrounds
Airport or Heliport (3)
Stadium or Coliseum (2)
Horse or Auto race track (1)
Essential Services
One artificial lake of 3 acres or less.
Wireless communication facility
placed on existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500
Accessory uses and structures
incidental to permitted uses and
structures and on the same parcel.
One artificial lake of 3 acres or less.
F-P
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards,
the City Council may permit as
Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Accessory uses of permitted principal
uses in adjoining districts (such as
parking lots, golf courses, etc.) and
which are compatible with the statement
of intent for this district.
Freestanding wireless communication
facility as described within Section
21-500.
May be used to meet area requirements
of adjoining districts if on the same
parcel.
Drive-In Theater
More than one artificial lake of 3 acres
or less.
Artificial lake of 3 or more acres
depending on recommendation of
qualified agricultural engineer.
If it can demonstrated to the City
Council that such land is or may be
adequately drained and that the water
table elevation will permit successful
utilization of the land, and if a hydraulic
study is submitted from a qualified
hydraulic engineer providing the
proposed use will not impede the flow of
water nor increase the flow velocity onto
downstream properties, a permit may be
granted for a use which is compatible,
contiguous and subject to the regulations
governing the adjoining district(s).
Adequate drainage and necessary
supporting structures shall be installed
prior to the use & occupancy of the land.
Mineral extractive operations outside
corporate limits, including but not
limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand
and the related processing operations,
storing and sale of such materials. (2)
Any use more appropriate to
another zone or zones
including, but not limit to:
Residential Dwellings-farm or
non-farm
Commercial structures.
Industrial Structures except
mineral extractions
Railroads
Mobile Homes
Travel Trailers
Landfills
Filling to raise the area above
high water elevation
Mineral extractive operations
within corporate limits.
MIN. LOT AREA: 4 acres, except for:
parks and playgrounds, in which case 1
acre; Heliports, 2 acres.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 200'
MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 60'
MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 60' MIN.
SIDE YARD WIDTH: 30'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1000 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 40'
MAX. STORIES: 3
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Permitted uses and conditional uses if
permitted are subject to the Planning
Commission. Consideration shall be given
to recommendation of administrative
official.
R-1
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
It is the intent of this district to provide
land within and in some cases adjacent to
the corporate limits of the community for
single family residential purposes.
Persons residing in this district prefer
and are entitled to maximum protection
from the encroachment of other types of
uses which are not appropriate to
residential areas. Other reasons for the
establishment of this district are: to
maintain a quiet atmosphere within the
district; to discourage incompatible uses
within the district. Care has been taken
and shall be taken in the delineation and
expansion of this district to assure that
adequate public water is available and
that individual sewage disposal systems
will not be required.
Maximum density: 4.0 D.U. per gross
acre.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126
of this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center
or Day Care Home where any child may
reasonably be expected to be present
shall be enclosed by a four foot chain
link or 6-foot privacy fence approved by
the Building Inspector unless waived by
City Council.
Single family residential units
Parks, public schools and recreation
buildings; libraries and public
buildings.
Small Community Residence,
provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300'
from another Small Community
Residence and that prior to
occupancy a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and
received.
Wireless Communication Facility
placed on existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500.
Accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses and on
the same parcel.
R-1
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Planned unit developments with minimum tracts
of 10 acres provided that any such planned unit
development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the
Thoroughfare Plan for the City. Provided further,
if the proposed development is only for a portion
of contiguous landholdings of the applicant, then
a plan showing anticipated uses, densities and
circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns for
the entire property shall be submitted with the
application. Planned unit developments shall
meet performance standards of Section 21-201
of this ordinance.
Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the
commercial or manufacturing zones, when
incidental to such permitted uses.
Public Utility Facilities.
Churches or private schools and subordinate uses
related thereto.
Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
Fire Stations
Kennel
Historical Museum Park
Small Community Residence whose lot line is
located less than 300 feet from the lot line of
another Small Community Residence, provided
that the Planning Commission for the City finds
that the cumulative effect of such use would not
alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional
setting, and its operation would not create an
adverse effect upon surrounding properties, and
that prior to occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and received.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Any use more
appropriate to another
zone or zones including,
but not limit to:
Mobile Homes (except
nonresidential church
uses where permitted by
conditional use
approval).
Commercial uses
Industrial uses
Mineral Extractive
Operation
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Truck or Equipment
Terminal
Sign Off-Site
MIN. LOT AREA: 10,000 Sq. Ft.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 70'
MIN. FRONT YARD: 25'
MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on
each side but shall not be less than 8' and
need not be more than 15'.
MIN. REAR YARD: 25'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,200 Sq. Ft.
exclusive of garage.
MAX. HEIGHT: 30' MAX. STORIES: 2
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Residential dwellings on
neighborhood streets 2
If lots face on a collector or
arterial street 4
Fire station per two
employees on maximum
shift 1
Schools, per four seats in
main auditorium. 1 0
All employees and visitors for a Historical
Museum Park shall have off-street parking.
All remaining permitted uses and conditional
uses if permitted are subject to the Planning
Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
R-2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
It is the intent of this district to provide land
within and in some cases adjacent to the
corporate limits of the community for single
and two family residential purposes. Persons
and families residing in this district are
entitled to protection from the encroachment
of other types of uses which are not
appropriate to medium density residential
area: In relation to R-1 Districts (low density
residential), R-2 Districts provide for higher
traffic flow; maintain a relatively quiet
atmosphere; discourage incompatible uses;
provide less but adequate open space. Care
has been taken and shall be taken in the
delineation and expansion of this district to
assure that adequate public water is available
and that individual sewage disposal systems
will not be required.
Maximum density: 6.5 D.U. per gross acre.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of
this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or
Day Care Home where any child may
reasonably be expected to be present shall be
enclosed by a four foot chain link or 6-foot
privacy fence approved by the Building
Inspector unless waived by City Council.
Dwellings, single family
Parks, public schools and recreation
buildings; libraries and public
buildings.
Small Community Residence,
provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300'
from another Small Community
Residence and that prior to
occupancy a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and
received.
Wireless Communication Facility
placed on an existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500.
Accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to permitted
principal uses and on the same
parcel.
R-2
Conditional Uses
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Dwellings: Two-family
Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of
10 acres provided that any such planned unit
development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the Thoroughfare
Plan for the City. Provided further, if the proposed
development is only for a portion of contiguous
landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing
anticipated uses, densities and circulation (traffic
or thoroughfare) patterns for the entire property
shall be submitted with the application. Planned
unit developments shall meet performance
standards of Section 21-201 of this ordinance.
Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the
commercial or manufacturing zones, when
incidental to such permitted uses.
Public Utility Facilities.
Churches or private schools and subordinate uses
related thereto.
Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
Fire Stations
Hospital or Nursing Home
Funeral Homes
Public Libraries
Kennel
Historical Museum Park
Small Community Residence whose lot line is
located less than 300 feet from the lot line of
another Small Community Residence, provided
that the Planning Commission for the City finds
that the cumulative effect of such use would not
alter the residential character of the neighborhood,
would not create an institutional setting, and its
operation would not create an adverse effect upon
surrounding properties, and that prior to
occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is
applied for and received.
(continued on next page)
Any use more appropriate to
another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
Mobile Homes
Commercial uses
Industrial uses
Mineral Extractive
Operation
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Truck or Equipment
Terminal
MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. ft. per single
family dwelling unit and boarding houses;
3,300 sq. ft. per DU in 2-family structures;
7,000 sq. ft. for uses other than residential.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50'
MIN. FRONT YARD: 15' or the average
front yard of parcels where structures exist
in the same block, on the same side of the
street at the time a building permit is issued.
MIN. REAR YARD: 15'
MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on
each side but shall not be less than 8' and
need not be more than 15'.
MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per
dwelling unit exclusive of garages: 1 & 2
Family - 800 each. Nonresidential: 1,000 sq.
ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 35' MAX. STORIES: 3
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Each dwelling unit
of 900 sq. 2
ft. or more
Each dwelling unit
under 900 1.5
sq. ft.
Fire station per 2
employees 1.5
on working shift
Libraries per 2
employees plus 1
1 per 6 reading or studying chairs
Schools, per 4 seats in
main auditorium. 1 0
All employees and visitors for an Historical
Museum Park shall have off-street parking.
All remaining permitted uses and
conditional uses if permitted are subject to
the Planning Commission. Consideration
shall be given to recommendation of
administrative official.
R-2
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the
City Council may permit as Conditional
Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Large Community Residence, provided that
the lot line of such residence shall be located
not less that 300 feet from the lot line of a
Small or Large Community Residence. The
spacing requirement may be varied
(lessened) but such variance shall require a
finding by the Planning Commission that the
cumulative effect of such uses would not
alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an
institutional setting, and, by its operation,
would not create an adverse effect upon
surrounding properties; and further provided
that prior to admitting residents the operator
of such residence shall demonstrate that the
dwelling will comply with all applicable
licensing standards, and that prior to
occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and received.
Adult Day Care
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
R-M2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
R-M2 MEDIUM DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL & MOBILE HOME
DISTRICT
It is the intent of this district to provide land
within and in some cases adjacent to the
corporate limits of the community for single
and two family residential purposes. Persons
and families residing in this district are
entitled to protection from the encroachment
of other types of uses which are not
appropriate to medium density residential
area: In relation to R-1 Districts (low density
residential), R-M2 Districts provide for higher
traffic flow; maintain a relatively quiet
atmosphere; discourage incompatible uses;
provide less but adequate open space. Care
has been taken and shall be taken in the
delineation and expansion of this district to
assure that adequate public water is available
and that individual sewage disposal systems
will not be required
Maximum density: 6.5 D.U. per gross acre.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of
this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or
Day Care Home where any child may
reasonably be expected to be present shall be
enclosed by a four foot chain link or 6-foot
privacy fence approved by the Building
Inspector unless waived by City Council.
Dwellings: Single Family; Two
Family
Parks, public schools and recreation
buildings; libraries and public
buildings.
Small Community Residence,
provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300'
from another Small Community
Residence and that prior to
occupancy a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and
received.
Wireless Communication Facility
placed on an existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500.
Mobile Homes
Accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to permitted
principal uses and on the same
parcel.
R-M2
Conditional Uses
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of
10 acres provided that any such planned unit
development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the Thoroughfare
Plan for the City. Provided further, if the proposed
development is only for a portion of contiguous
landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing
anticipated uses, densities and circulation (traffic
or thoroughfare) patterns for the entire property
shall be submitted with the application. Planned
unit developments shall meet performance
standards of Section 21-201 of this ordinance.
Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the
commercial or manufacturing zones, when
incidental to such permitted uses.
Public Utility Facilities.
Churches or private schools and subordinate uses
related thereto.
Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
Fire Stations
Hospital or Nursing Home
Funeral Homes
Public Libraries
Kennel
Historical Museum Park
Small Community Residence whose lot line is
located less than 300 feet from the lot line of
another Small Community Residence, provided
that the Planning Commission for the City finds
that the cumulative effect of such use would not
alter the residential character of the neighborhood,
would not create an institutional setting, and its
operation would not create an adverse effect upon
surrounding properties, and that prior to
occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is
applied for and received.
(continued on next page)
Any use more appropriate to
another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
Commercial uses
Industrial uses
Mineral Extractive
Operation
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Truck or Equipment
Terminal
MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. ft. per single
family dwelling unit and boarding houses;
3,300 sq. ft. per DU in 2-family structures;
7,000 sq. ft. for uses other than residential.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50'
MIN. FRONT YARD: 15' or the average
front yard of parcels where structures exist
in the same block, on the same side of the
street at the time a building permit is issued.
MIN. REAR YARD: 15'
MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on
each side but shall not be less than 8' and
need not be more than 15'.
MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per
dwelling unit exclusive of garages: 1 & 2
Family - 800 each. Nonresidential: 1,000 sq.
ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 35' MAX. STORIES: 3
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Each dwelling unit
of 900 sq. 2
ft. or more
Each dwelling unit
under 900 1.5
sq. ft.
Fire station per 2
employees 1.5
on working shift
Libraries per 2
employees plus 1
1 per 6 reading or studying chairs
Schools, per 4 seats in
main auditorium. 1 0
All employees and visitors for an Historical
Museum Park shall have off-street parking.
All remaining permitted uses and
conditional uses if permitted are subject to
the Planning Commission. Consideration
shall be given to recommendation of
administrative official.
Conditional Uses B continued
Large Community Residence, provided that the
lot line of such residence shall be located not less
that 300 feet from the lot line of a Small or Large
Community Residence. The spacing requirement
may be varied (lessened) but such variance shall
require a finding by the Planning Commission
that the cumulative effect of such uses would not
alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional
setting, and, by its operation, would not create an
adverse effect upon surrounding properties; and
further provided that prior to admitting residents
the operator of such residence shall demonstrate
that the dwelling will comply with all applicable
licensing standards, and that prior to occupancy,
a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
Adult Day Care
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
R-3
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
This district is created to allow the most
intensive residential development in the
community, but also to provide for
adequate off-street parking and open
space. To permit a larger variety of uses
which are not inconsistent with the aims
of this district which shall be dominantly
residential in character. Adequate public
water and sewer are available to meet the
needs of this high density residential
area, and shall be available in any
additional area proposed for this district.
Maximum density: 40 D.U. per gross
acre.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126
of this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center
or Day Care Home where any child may
reasonably be expected to be present
shall be enclosed by a four foot chain
link or 6-foot privacy fence approved by
the Building Inspector unless waived by
City Council.
Multifamily dwelling units.
Public Libraries
Parks and playgrounds
Essential services
Boarding Houses
Business & Professional Offices
Small Community Residence, provided
that the lot line of such property is
located not less than 300' from another
Small Community Residence and that
prior to occupancy a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance is applied for and
received.
Large Community Residence, provided
that the lot line of such residence shall be
located not less than 300 feet from the
lot line of a Small or Large Community
Residence; and further provided that
prior to admitting residents, the operator
of such residence shall demonstrate that
the dwelling will comply with all
applicable licensing standards, and that
prior to occupancy a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance is applied for and
received.
Wireless Communication Facility placed
on an existing nonresidential structure as
described within Section 21-500.
Accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to permitted
principal uses and on the same parcel.
Residential garages
Living quarters of persons employed on
the premises.
R-3
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot areaMinimum yards (all buildings)Minimum
floor area (principal buildings)Maximum height (all
buildings)Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Churches or private schools and subordinate uses
related thereto.
Day care center or day care home. Fire Stations
Hospital or Nursing Home
Parking areas for uses in adjoining less restricted
district(s).
Planned unit developments with minimum tracts
of 2 acres in accordance with the provisions for
planned unit developments in Section 21-202.
Private Clubs & Lodges
Dining or drinking facilities in clubs or lodges
restricted to members and/or bonafide guests of
members, and not operated as a public facility.
Funeral Homes
Town house development of 5 or more units.
Condominium
Kennel
Small Community Residence whose lot line is
located less than 300 feet from the lot line of
another Small Community Residence, provided
that the Planning Commission for the City finds
that the cumulative effect of such use would not
alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional
setting, and its operation would not create an
adverse effect upon surrounding properties, and
that prior to occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance is applied for and received.
Large Community Residence, provided that the
lot line of such residence shall be located not less
than 300 feet from the lot line of another Large
Community Residence provided that the Planning
Commission finds that the cumulative effect of
such uses would not alter the residential character
of the neighborhood, would not create an
institutional setting, and, by its operation, would
not create an adverse effect upon surrounding
properties, and that prior to occupancy a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
Adult Day Care
Residential Facility for Homeless Persons
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Any use more appropriate to
another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
Single Family Dwelling Units
except town houses.
Open Storage of Construction
Equipment
Mobile Homes
Industrial Uses
Commercial Uses
Mineral Extractive Operation
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Truck or Equipment Terminal
MIN. LOT AREA: If parking is not within structure
Effic. - 800 sq. ft. lot area per DU
1 Bedrm - 1100 sq. ft. lot area per DU
2 Bedrm - 1300 sq. ft. lot area per DU
3 Bedrm - 1600 sq. ft. lot area per DU
If parking is within structure:
Effic. - 750 sq. ft. lot area per DU
1 Bedrm - 1000 sq. ft. lot area per DU
2 Bedrm - 1150 sq. ft. lot area per DU
3 Bedrm - 1400 sq. ft. lot area per DU Nonresidential:
4000 sq. ft.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50'- 25' for townhouse
MIN. FRONT YARD: 15'
MIN. REAR YARD: 15'
MIN. SIDE YARD: 10'+ 2' for each story over 3.
MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per dwelling unit
exclusive of garages: 2 Family - 800 each; 3 or more
family - 600 each; nonresidential - 800
MAX. HEIGHT: 200'
MAX. STORIES: 20, providing any structure over 3
stories shall have an integral passenger elevator.
MAX F.A.R. per story: .75 for 1; 1.20 for 2; 1.60 for 3;
2.00 for 4; 2.40 for 5; 2.80 for 6; 3.20 for 7; 3.60 for 8;
4.00 for 9; 4.40 for10; 4.80 for 11; 5.20 for 12 & up.
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Land use Parking spaces Loading spaces
Each dwelling unit 2
of 900 sq. f.t. or more
Each dwelling unit 1.5
under 900 sq. ft.
Boarding House. Plus 1 per 2
each lodging room or fraction thereof
Fire station per 2 employees on
working shift 1
Kindergarten or Day Nursery 1 0
per 5 students
Hospital or Nursing Home /beds 1 1-up to 200 beds
2-200-500 beds
3-over 500 beds
Churches, Schools, Funeral Homes
per 4 seats in main auditorium 1 0
Libraries per 2 employees plus
1 per six reading or studying chairs 1 0
Private Clubs or Lodges Subject to Planning Commission
Approval
R-M H
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
R-MH PLANNED MANUFACTUREDMOBILE
HOME
This district is created to preserve and
enhance property values in the
community by providing designated,
distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes and mobile homes (which terms
are synonymous) may be situated for
residential dwelling purposes. It is the
intent that this district be a desirable
permanent area providing adequate open
space, and essentially the same
considerations given to residents of R-1
& R-2 Districts. Any land so designated
must necessarily be through the rezoning
process, and thus will require amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance Zoning District
Map (1).
Maximum density: 12.0 D.U. per gross
acre.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126
of this Ordinance
(1) All R-MH Districts shall comply
with the performance standards indicated
in Section 21-203 of this ordinance.
Manufactured/Mobile Home dwellings
Laundromats - including facilities for
coin operated dry cleaning machines.
Parks and Playgrounds
Essential Services
Wireless Communication Facility placed
on an existing nonresidential structure as
described within Section 21-500.
Only those accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to principal uses
and structures.
R-M H
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate
safeguards, the City Council may
permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area Minimum yards (all
buildings)Minimum floor area (principal
buildings)Maximum height (all buildings)Maximum
floor area ratio (all buildings)
None
Any use more appropriate to another
zone or zones including, but not limited
to:
Agriculture, conventional dwelling
units, industrial uses, mobile homes not
having access to public water and
sanitary sewers.
Commercial uses unless part of a
planned development.
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Kennel
Truck or Equipment Terminal
Mineral Extractive Operations
MIN. LOT AREA: 1 acre
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100'
MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: )
MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: ) Refer To
MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: ) Performance
Standards
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 800 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 20'
MAX. STORIES: 1
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Land Use Parking Spaces Loading Spaces
Per mobile home 2 0
Per total all washing
machines & dry cleaning
machines divided by 3 1 0
B-1
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures Accessory Uses and Structures
B-1 PRIMARY BUSINESS
DISTRICT
This district is the location of the most
valuable land in the community, and
in its establishment the aims are to
protect this community created value
by: restricting uses to primarily
pedestrian oriented traffic;
discouraging uses requiring large
areas of land in proportion to
pedestrian traffic generated;
encouraging intense land
development. Uses in this district
should be: predominantly retail;
public or private offices; appropriate
types of personal and business
services. Residential uses are
discouraged in this district except for
hotels.
Off-street parking in this district
except in conditional uses is
encouraged through the development
of private and/or public parking
facilities which are consolidated
and/or of adequate size and lend
themselves to better traffic control and
more efficient use of land.
The provisions for off-street loading
facilities are intended to avoid
congestion in the streets which would
otherwise hamper the normal flow of
traffic resulting from trucks and
delivery vehicles double parking.
Consequently, off-street loading
requirements are encouraged but not
required in this district when access to
public alley exists.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section
21-126 of this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care
Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to
be present shall be enclosed by a four
foot chain link or 6-foot privacy fence
approved by the Building Inspector
unless waived by City Council.
The following service establishments or offices wherein or
whereat incidental but subordinate sale of merchandise may or
may not be available.
Accountants
Advertising Agencies
Appliance Repair
Amusement Centers except Bowling Alleys
Attorneys
Architects
Art Galleries
Auto Parking Lots or Structures
Banks, except Drive-In Facilities
Barber
Beauty Shops
Blueprinting & Photocopying
Business & Professional Offices
Catering
Chambers of Commerce
Clothes Cleaning Agency
Clubs or Lodges, Private
Credit Bureaus & Collections
Currency Exchanges
Custom Tailor & Dressmaking
Dentist, Orthodontists, etc.
Detectives
Employment Agencies
Engineering Offices, but not outside storage of
equipment
Essential Services
Funeral Homes
Fire Station
General Loan
Governmental Offices
Insurance Agencies
Insurance Company Offices
Interior Decorator
Janitorial Services
Jewelry Repair
Labor Unions & Halls
Laundry Agencies
Libraries
Locksmiths
Motion Picture Theaters
Museums
Newspaper Offices but not newspaper plants
Offices, Business & Professional
Pawn Brokers
Physicians, Chiropractor, Osteopaths
etc. but not Veterinarians
Photographer
Planners, but not outside storage of equipment
Police Station
Pool hall
Post Office
Radio Studios
Savings & Loan Association
Secretarial
Security & Commodity Brokers & Dealers Small Loan
Title Abstract Offices
Only sale of gas & oil at
retail in conjunction with and
subsidiary to a parking
garage or parking lot.
Offices in conjunction with
and subsidiary to principal
use.
Warehousing or storage in
conjunction with and
subsidiary to principal use.
Off-street parking and
loading
B-1
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-1 PRIMARY BUSINESS
DISTRICT
continued
Travel Agencies
Upholstery Shop
Utility Company Offices, but not outside storage of
equipment
Wireless Communication Facility placed
on existing nonresidential structure
as described within Section 21-500
Stores or shops offering the following merchandise
primarily at retail & wherein or whereat incidental but
subordinate related services may or may not be available:
Candy, but not manufacturing operations
Catering
Confectionery
Delicatessen or Food, but not grocery or supermarket
Department
Drapery
Drug
Dry Goods
Florist
Furniture
Gifts
Hardware
Ice Cream, Ice Milk-walk-in or walk-up but not
drive-in
Jewelry
Liquor
Locksmith
Mail Order
Milliner
Music
Notions
Office Supply
Optical Merchandise
Pawn Brokers
Periodicals
Pharmacy
Ready to wear, Men's Women's, Children, Infants
Restaurants, but not drive-in
Shoes
Sporting Goods
Stationery
Tavern
Trading Stamp Redemption
Tobacco, News
Toys
Variety or Dime
The administrative official shall have authority to
determine other uses, in addition to those specifically
listed herein, when in his judgment such other uses are
similar to and no more objectionable to the public
welfare than those listed.
B-1
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the
City Council may permit as Conditional
Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area Minimum yards (all
buildings)Minimum floor area (principal
buildings)Maximum height (all
buildings)Maximum floor area ratio (all
buildings)
The following manufacturing operations
providing they are of a limited nature. In
conjunction with a permitted use, and in
harmony with other activities in this
district.
Bakery Manufacturing
Candy Manufacturing
Drapery Manufacturing
Jewelry Manufacturing
Clothes Cleaning Plant or Laundry
The following uses providing the location,
nature and extent of proposed operations
are compatible with other uses in the
district, and that any proposed
development plan provides consideration
for integration with the thoroughfare
system of the neighborhood and
community:
Day Care Center
Drive-In Banking
Drive-In Restaurants
Drive-In Operations not otherwise
specified or prohibited
Paint, Wallpaper-Glass
Pet Shop
Coin Operated Laundromat or Dry
Cleaning
Church or Temple
Crematorium operated in conjunction with
Funeral Home
Meat, Poultry or Fish Market
Post Office
Clubs or Lodges (Private)
Exterminating Services
Hospitals
Medical Clinics
Auto Glass Stores
Schools of any kind
Hotels or Motels
Newspaper Printing Plants
Printers
Rental Equipment
Transportation Terminals (passenger)
Bowling Alleys
TV Studios
Chemical Supplies
Lumber Yards
Automobile Sales & Service
Kennel
Adult Daycare
One or more dwelling units above the
main floor (i.e. street level) with each unit
having a minimum total floor area per
dwelling unit (which includes a studio or
efficiency dwelling) of 600 square feet,
plus an additional total floor space of 150
square feet per each bedroom and with
each dwelling unit being in full
compliance with all applicable local, state,
and federal laws and codes.
Any use more appropriate to another zone
or zones including, but not limited to:
Truck Sales & Service
Trailer, Mobile Homes
Sales & Service
Drive-Ins:
Ice Cream or Ice Milk
Auto Washing
Agricultural Products except produce
Manufacturing or industrial operations
except those permitted
Single Family Residential Structures
Truck Terminals
Warehouses
Moving & Storage Operations
Agricultural Equipment Stores
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Automobile Service Station
Mineral Extractive Operations
MIN. LOT AREA: Not applicable
MIN. FRONT, SIDE & REAR YARD:
None except as required by the Planning
Commission
MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A
MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F. A.
R. MAX. STORIES: As determined by F.
A. R. MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Per Story: 1.0 for 1; 2.0 for 2; 3.0 for 3;
3.5 for 4; 4.0 for 5; 4.5 for 6; 5.0 for 7;
5.5 for 8; 6.0 for 9; 6.50 for 10; 7.0 for 11;
7.5 for 12 & up
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Parking:
Off-street parking shall not be required for
any use except conditional uses permitted
by City Council and shall be provided or
not provided as determined by the City
Council.
Loading Spaces:
Any permitted principal use having access
to a public alley shall not be required to
provide off-street loading facilities.
Off-street loading facilities for conditional
uses if permitted by City Council and uses
not having access to a public alley, shall be
provided as determined by the City
Council.
B-2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-2 SECONDARY BUSINESS
DISTRICT
This zone is created primarily as a
result of the ever increasing space
demands of the auto oriented shopper,
and to provide space for continued
growth of such commercial facilities
adjacent to or near major
thoroughfares.
The most important factor in this
district to promote a more efficient
land use and thoroughfare plan for the
community is the provision of
off-street parking and loading space. It
is intended that all land uses (including
accessory or supplemental uses) in this
district provide an appropriate amount
of off-street parking and loading
facilities.
This zone discourages further strip
type development which tends to
hamper the flow of thoroughfare
traffic.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section
21-126 of this Ordinance
All outdoor areas of a Day Care
Center, or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be
present shall be enclosed by a four-foot
chain-link or six-foot privacy fence
approved by Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.
The following service establishments or offices wherein
or whereat incidental but subordinate sale of merchandise
may or may not be available.
Appliance Repair
Amusement Centers, indoor or outdoor
Art Galleries
Auto Parking Lots or Structures
Auto & Truck servicing within buildings
Auto Washing
Banks Barber
Beauty Shops
Blueprinting & Photocopying
Business & Professional Offices
Bowling Alleys
Catering
Chambers of Commerce
Church or Temple
Clothes Cleaning Agency
Clubs or Lodges, Private
Coin-operated Laundromat
Coin-operated Dry Cleaning
Construction Company - but not outside storage of
equipment
Credit Bureaus & Collections
Currency Exchanges
Custom Tailor & Dressmaking
Employment Agencies
Essential Services
Exterminators
Filling Station
Fire Station
Funeral Homes
General Loan
Governmental Offices
Hotels & Motels
Insurance Agencies
Interior Decorator
Janitorial Services
Jewelry Repair
Labor Unions & Halls
Laundry Agencies
Libraries
Locksmiths
Motion Picture Theaters
Museums
Newspaper Offices but not newspaper plants
Pawn Brokers
Photographer
Police Station
Poolhall
Post Office
Printers
Radio Studios
Rental Equipment
Savings & Loan Association
Secretarial
Security & Commodity Brokers & Dealers
Small Loan
TV Studios
Title Abstract Offices
Transportation Terminals
Only those accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental
to principal uses and structures.
B-2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-2 SECONDARY BUSINESS
DISTRICT
continued
Travel Agencies
Upholstery Shop
Utility Company Offices, but not outside
storage of equipment
Veterinarians
Wireless Communication Facility placed
on existing nonresidential structure
as described within Section 21-500
Stores or shops offering the following merchandise
primarily at retail & wherein or whereat incidental but
subordinate related services may or may not be
available.:
Appliances
Autoglass
Auto Parks - Wholesale or retail
Auto & Truck Sales
Bakery Good's
Books
Camera Shop
Candy Shop
Catering
Chemical Supplies
Confectionery
Dairy Products
Delicatessen or Food Department Store Drapery
Drug
Dry Goods
Farm & Garden Supplies, but not milling
or grain storage operations nor sale of
major agricultural implements
Filling Station
Florist
Food
Furniture
Gifts
Grocery & Supermarkets
Hardware
Ice Cream-Ice Milk
Liquor
Locksmith
Mail Order
Meat, Poultry or Fish
Milliner
Music
Notions
Office Supply
Optical Merchandise
Paint, Wallpaper, Glass
Pawn Brokers
Periodicals
Pet Shop
Pharmacy
Ready to wear-Men's, Women's, Children's, Infants'
Restaurants
Shoes
Sporting Goods
Stationery
Tavern
NOTES
B-2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-2 SECONDARY BUSINESS
DISTRICT
continued
Tire Dealers within buildings
Trading Stamp Redemption
Trailer or Mobile Homes
Tobacco, News
Toys
Variety or Dime
Other uses determined by administrative official. The
administrative official shall have authority to determine other
uses, in addition to those specifically listed herein, when in
his judgment such other uses are similar to and no more
objectionable to the public welfare than those listed.
Ambulance services, except helicopter and air ambulance
services.
Non-residential sleeping quarters for ambulance services
providing emergency medical first responder services,
excluding helicopter and air ambulance service, when used
solely in conjunction with and forming part of a premises of
a provider of emergency medical first responder services. If
the use is situated solely upon real estate owned by a
governmental entity then the sleeping quarters may be
situated within a mobile home (notwithstanding Section 19.4
of the Revised Code of Ordinances) if the following
conditions are met:
(1) Written variance must be obtained from the Zoning
Board of Appeals permitting use of the mobile home, which
variance shall be granted only if each and every condition set
forth herein is met.
(2) The mobile home shall be an accessory structure only;
(3) The sleeping quarters must be the primary use within the
mobile home, with any office use being secondary and with
storage use being prohibited;
(4) The variance permitting use of a mobile home shall
immediately terminate upon any transfer of title to the real
estate or to the mobile home or transfer of the assets of the
emergency medical first responder service provider or
cessation of business of same or cessation of use of the
mobile home for sleeping quarters or expiration of any lease
or agreement with the governmental entity, or upon any
condition imposed herein not being satisfied;
(5) The mobile home must be removed within 30-days of
termination of the variance permitting placement of the
mobile home.
NOTES
B-2
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards,
the City Council may permit as
Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
The following manufacturing operations
providing they are of a limited nature, in
conjunction with a permitted use, and in
harmony with other activities in this
district.
Bakery Manufacturing
Candy Manufacturing
Drapery Manufacturing
Jewelry Manufacturing
Clothes Cleaning Plant or Laundry
The following uses providing the
location, nature and extent of proposed
operations are compatible with other
uses in the district, and that any
proposed development plan provides
consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood
and community.
Day Care Center
Kennel
Crematorium operated in conjunction
with Funeral Home
Newspaper Printing Plants
Lumber Yards
Agricultural Implement Store
Truck Terminals
Warehouses
Moving & Storage operations conducted
within a building
Drive-In Theaters
Winery
Freestanding Wireless Communication
as described in Section 21-500
Adult Daycare
One dwelling unit used solely in
conjunction with and forming part of a
funeral home
One on-premises dwelling unit used
solely in conjunction with Moving &
Storage operations conducted within a
building for use only by the security
employee of said business; provided the
dwelling unit shall have a floor area of
not less than 500 square feet and not
more than 800 square feet, shall have not
more than two bedrooms (sleeping
rooms), and shall comply with all
Housing, Building, and Safety Codes
applicable to a residential dwelling.
Any use more appropriate to another
zone or zones including, but not
limited to:
Residential Dwelling Units
Mobile Homes
Travel Trailers
Agriculture
Industrial or Manufacture Operations
except as permitted by the
Planning Commission
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Mineral Extractive Operations
MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 Sq. Ft.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50'
MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 35'
MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: None
MIN. SIDE YARD: If lot abuts public alley on rear, none required,
otherwise one side yard shall be required a minimum of 20' to permit
off-street parking.
MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A MAX. HEIGHT: 35'
MAX. STORIES: 2
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .60
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Land use Parking spaces Loading spaces
Off-street parking shall
be required as follows:
Banks & other financial
institutions & business
or professional offices
per 400 sq. ft. of gross
Floor area 1
Beauty Shops per hair dryer 2
Barber Shops per chair 2
Hotels per 3 guest sleeping rooms 1
Motels per guest sleeping room 1
Retail Stores, Supermarkets,
Dept. Stores & Personal Service
Shops per 300 sq. ft. of gross
Floor area 1
Laundromats: per 3 coin operated
machines 1
Filling Stations: per 2 employees 1
Bowling Alleys per lane 3
Restaurants, night clubs, taverns, lounges - 1 space for each table or
booth, or 3 seats at counter or bar
Furniture & Appliance Stores - 1 per 800 Sq. Ft. of gross area plus 1 per
2 employees
Theaters, auditoriums & places of assembly - 1 space for each 6 seats of
designed capacity
All remaining uses unclassifiable herein shall be as reasonably
determined by the Administrative Official & based upon number of
employees anticipated and/or gross floor space, of which guides are
indicated elsewhere in this ordinance.
Any permitted principal use having access to public alley shall not be
required to provide off street loading facilities, except that off-street
loading facilities for conditional uses permitted by City Council & uses
not having access to a public alley shall be provided or not provided as
determined by the City Council.
B-3
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-3 INTERCHANGE BUSINESS
DISTRICT
This district is created to serve
predominantly the needs of interregional
vehicular traffic at interchanges on limited
access arterial thoroughfares. The uses
allowed in this district should be limited to
the needs of the interregional traveler which
are: food, service, fuel and lodging. The
basic purpose of limiting the land uses in this
district is to preserve and enhance the other
business district(s) of the community (or
nearby communities) by preventing the
establishment of a shopping center which
would compete with existing or proposed
(and justified) shopping centers which cater
or will cater to the needs of the community.
The land for this district should be compact
(not strip type). In any development plan,
access points should be limited to minimize
hazardous driving conditions.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of
this Ordinance
(1) All development plans for B-3
Districts shall be approved by the
Administrative Official; such plans
shall show:
a. Access points to public ROW.
b. Building locations
c. Parking layout
d. Elevations of buildings
e. Detail drawings of all signs
Automobile Service Station
Auto or Truck Repair Shops
Restaurants
Hotels or Motels
Gift Shops
Offices
Funeral Homes
Combinations of above in planned
development, provided that any such
planned development shall be compatible to
the Comprehensive Plan, especially the
Transportation: Plan. If the proposed
development is only for a portion of
contiguous landholdings of the applicant,
then a plan showing anticipated uses and
circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns
shall be submitted with application for
approval of any planned B-3 development.
(1)
Other uses determined by administrative
official. The administrative official shall
have authority to determine other uses in
addition to those specifically listed herein
when in his judgement such other uses are
similar to and no more objectionable to the
public welfare than those listed.
Wireless Communication Facility placed on
existing nonresidential structure as described
within Section 21-500
Only those accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to principal uses and
structures.
B-3
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the
City Council may permit as Conditional
Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Truck or Equipment Terminal
Winery
Freestanding wireless communication
facility as described within Section 21-500.
One dwelling unit used solely in conjunction
with and forming part of a funeral home.
Crematorium operated in conjunction with
Funeral Home
Storage of wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
All uses other than permitted uses.
Mineral extractive operations
MIN. LOT AREA: 15,000 Sq. Ft.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100'
MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 60'
MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 15'
MIN. SIDE YARD WIDTH: 10'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A
MAX. HEIGHT: 50'
MAX. STORIES: 4
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Parking Spaces:
Filling Station: 1 per 2 employees on
maximum shift.
Auto or truck repair shop: 4 per repair bay,
grease rack, wash rack, etc.
Restaurants: 1 space per table or booth or 3
counter spaces.
Hotels or Motels: 1 per guest sleeping room.
Gift Shops: 1 per 200 Sq. Ft. of floor area.
Loading Requirements:
1 loading space at service entrance for hotels
motels, restaurants & gift shops.
B-PL
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
B-PL PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT
This district is created to provide for the
construction of a planned shopping center
offering a wide variety of goods and
services, and which caters to the auto
oriented shopper. This district is similar to
the Secondary Business District, but the
differentiation between these districts is
primarily in the minimum size tract of land
involved. Any land so designated must
necessarily be through the rezoning process
and this will require amendment to the
zoning ordinance and zoning district map.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of
this Ordinance
(1) The development plan for a B-PL
District shall be approved by the City
Council; such plan shall show:
1. Access points to public ROW.
2. Building locations
3. Parking layout
4. Elevations of buildings
5. Landscaping plan
6. Lighting plan
7. Drainage plan
8. Site utilities plan
9. Such plan shall be compatible with
the comprehensive and thoroughfare
plans.
10. If development is to be staged,
phasing shall be indicated.
Planned Developments only, but which may
include any use as permitted in B-2 or B-3
Districts. (1)
Wireless Communication Facility placed on
existing nonresidential structure as described
within Section 21-500.
Only those accessory uses and structures
customarily incidental to principal uses and
structures.
B-P L
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
The following manufacturing operations
providing they are of a limited nature, in
conjunction with a permitted use, and in
harmony with other activities in this district.
Bakery manufacturing
Candy manufacturing Drapery manufacturing
Jewelry manufacturing
Clothes cleaning plant or laundry
The following uses providing the location,
nature and extent of proposed operations are
compatible with other uses in the district, and
that any proposed development plan provides
consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood and
community.
Newspaper printing plants
Lumber yards
Agricultural implement stores
Truck terminals
Warehouses
Moving and storage operations
conducted within a building
Drive-In theaters
Any use more appropriate to another zone or
zones including, but not limited to:
Residential dwelling units
Mobile homes
Travel trailers
Agriculture
Industrial or manufacturing operations except as
permitted by Planning Commission
Abandoned automobile
Automobile wrecking
Kennel
Mineral extractive operations
MIN. LOT AREA: Min. tract of 5 acres for
entire development.
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300' for entire
development.
For individual uses as determined by the
development plan.
MIN. FRONT, REAR & SIDE YARDS: as
determined by development plan.
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 50,000 sq. ft. for entire
development.
MAX. HEIGHT: 30'
MAX. STORIES: 3
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A
See note (1)
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Parking:
A common parking lot (or lots) is (are) permitted
but provisions for parking spaces per required
use shall be governed by the requirements of the
B-2 District.
Loading:
Off street loading facilities and space shall be
provided as distinctly separate from parking lots
and designed so as there will be a minimum or
no conflict with parking lots.
I-1
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
This district is established to provide space
for certain types of industrial and/or
manufacturing and/or warehousing or
storage operations which are compatible to
adjoining districts. Such uses generally
require open storage of materials or goods
either before, during or after the
manufacturing process, but are of a low
noise or nuisance level. Such uses shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed
building of substantial construction. Land
designated for this district should be located
in relation to the thoroughfare network of the
community as well as rail and air if required,
and designated so as to not disrupt normal
traffic flow. Because of increased
technological developments, extensive lists
of permitted and prohibited uses is
impractical, therefore, to safeguard the
public interests, performance standards are
established herein as criteria for all permitted
uses and as guidance for the Planning
Commission in permitting any conditional
uses. Planned Industrial Parks are
encouraged in this district.
This district also provides space for sexually
oriented business so as to minimize
secondary effects of sexually oriented
business on residential, business and other
districts
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of
this Ordinance
(1) See Performance Standards for I-1
District, excluding sexually oriented
businesses
Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted if the performance standards for this
district (1) are met and certified as being met by a registered professional engineer of the State of
Illinois. Standards of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing nonresidential structure as described
within Section 21-500.
Sexually Oriented Business shall be located as follows:
(1) A. If situated within the corporate limits the sexually oriented business shall not
be operated within 400 feet of
(a) a religious institution;
(b) a school;
(c) a public park
(d) the boundary of any residential district;
(e) any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized for residential use,
whether zoned residential or not.
B. If situated outside the corporate limits the sexually oriented business shall not
be operated within 500 feet of
(a) a religious institution;
(b) a school;
(c) a public park
(d) the boundary of any residential district;
(g) any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized for residential use,
whether zoned residential or not
(2) A sexually oriented business shall not be operated in the same building, structure or portion
thereof containing another sexually oriented business or containing any premises licensed under
Article 6 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or containing any business or premises licensed
under Article 11, Section 11.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. In addition, a sexually
oriented business shall not be operated within 800 feet of another sexually oriented business or
within 800 feet of any business or premises licensed under Article 6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances or within 800 feet of any business or premises licensed under Article 11, Section 11.4
of the Revised Code of Ordinances. A sexually oriented business shall be operated only within
a single structure situated upon the premises; two or more buildings connected by an enclosed
walkway or hall shall constitute a single structure.
(3) Measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or
objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a business
or use described within (1) above.
(4) The distance between any two businesses described within subparagraph (2) shall be
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(5) The distance requirements and provisions of (1) and (2) above shall not be subject to
variance.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of Article 21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, a
sexually oriented business lawfully established, lawfully located and lawfully operating on
September 2, 2003 that is in violation of the foregoing shall be a non-conforming use and said
non-conforming use will be permitted to continue at its existing location for a period of 1-year,
unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30-days or
more.
Continued
I-1
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
(Continued)
Helicopter or air ambulance services as a principal use, although land ambulances are
permitted as an accessory use to the principal use.
Non-residential sleeping quarters for helicopter or air ambulance services providing emergency
medical first responder services, when used solely in conjunction with and forming part of a
premises of a provider of emergency medical first responder services. If the use is situated solely
upon real estate owned by a governmental entity then the sleeping quarters may be situated within
a mobile home (notwithstanding Section 19.4 of the Revised Code of Ordinances) if the
following conditions are met:
(1) Written variance must be obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting use of
the mobile home, which variance shall be granted only if each and every condition set forth
herein is met.
(2) The mobile home shall be an accessory structure only;
(3) The sleeping quarters must be the primary use within the mobile home, with any office
use being secondary and with storage use being prohibited;
(4) The variance permitting use of a mobile home shall immediately terminate upon any
transfer of title to the real estate or to the mobile home or transfer of the assets of the
emergency medical first responder service provider or cessation of business of same or
cessation of use of the mobile home for sleeping quarters or expiration of any lease or
agreement with the governmental entity, or upon any condition imposed herein not being
satisfied;
(5) The mobile home must be removed within 30-days of termination of the variance
permitting placement of the mobile home.
I-1
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Wireless Communication - Freestanding Wireless
Communication Facility as described within
Section 21-500
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained
off-street parking and loading areas shall be
provided as follows:
1. For industrial or manufacturing
operations - 1 auto parking space per (a) two
employees of combined employment of two largest
successive shifts, or (b) two employees if only one
shift operation; plus 1 auto parking space equal to
15% of the above for visitors and company
vehicles.
Minimum of 1 off-street loading space.
Additional off-street loading spaces may be
required by the nature and size of anticipated
operations.
2. For non-industrial or manufacturing
operations as required in more restricted
district(s), except sexually oriented business.
3. Common parking and loading areas
provided parking requirements for all uses are
met.
4. Sexually oriented businesses:
Off-street Parking:
( a) Adult store: one space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area, excluding viewing rooms and
one space per viewing room.
(b) Adult cabaret: one space for each table or
booth or three seats at counter or bar.
(c) Adult motel: one space per guest sleeping
room.
(d) Adult theater: one space for each six seats of
designated capacity.
(e) Semi-nude studio, Sexual encounter center,
Escort agency: one space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
(Continued next column)
Any use more appropriate to another zone or
zones including, but not limited to:
Residential uses of any kind including
dwelling units, hotels, motels, mobile homes,
etc.
Schools, churches, clubs, lodges, hospitals
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Kennel
Mineral Extractive Operations
Minimum off-street parking & loading
(Continued)
Lighting:
All off-street parking areas and entrances to
the premises of a sexually oriented business
shall be illuminated from dusk to closing
hours of operation with a lighting system
which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of 5 foot candles of
light on surface of the parking areas and
walkways. Illumination of the remaining
external surface areas of the sexually oriented
business shall be an average maintained
horizontal illumination of not less than 2 foot
candles of light or greater than 5 foot candles
of light. This required lighting level is
established in order to provide sufficient
illumination to the parking areas and walkway
areas serving the sexually oriented business
for the personal safety of the patrons and
employees of the sexually oriented business
and to reduce the incidents of vandalism and
criminal conduct.
All lighting shall be shielded and arranged so
that illumination is directed toward the surface
areas of the licensed premises and not onto
adjoining properties or into the skyward area
above the licensed premises or the skyward
area of a property adjoining the licensed
premises, so that light trespass onto adjoining
properties and light pollution (sky glow and/or
glare) will be minimized. No light fixture
shall be mounted or placed higher than 25 feet
from the ground surface. Illumination from
the sexually oriented business shall not exceed
1 foot candle 10 feet from the property
boundary line on any property adjoining the
premises of the sexually oriented business.
All uses except sexually oriented business:
MIN. LOT AREA: 2 acre
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 125'
MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 20'
MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 20'
MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: 20'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F. A. R.
MAX. STORIES: As determined by F. A.
R. MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50
Sexually oriented business:
MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. feet
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50'
MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 35'
MIN REAR YD. DEPTH: None
MIN. SIDE YD.: If lot abuts public alley on rear,
none required; otherwise one side yard shall be
required a minimum of 20' to permit off-street
parking
MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A
MAX. HEIGHT: 35'
MAX. STORIES: 2
MAX FLOOR AREA RATIO: .60
I-2
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
1-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
This district is established to provide space for
industrial and/or manufacturing and/or warehousing or
storage operations which may require buildings and/or
open area for fabricating, processing, extraction,
repairing, dismantling or disposal or equipment, raw
materials, manufactured products or wastes. Land
designated for this district should be located in relation
to the thoroughfare network of the community
(including primarily streets as well as rail and air if
required) and designed so as to not wholly disrupt
normal traffic flow. Because of increasing technological
developments, extensive lists of permitted and
prohibited uses is impractical, therefore, to safeguard
the public interest, performance standards are
established herein as criteria for all permitted uses and
as guidance for the City Council in permitting any
conditional uses. Planned Industrial Parks are
encouraged in this district.
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section 21-126 of this
Ordinance
(1) See Performance Standards for 1-2 District
(2) The City Council may permit as Conditional
Use: Automobile Wrecking & Storage Yards if
the following conditions are met in addition to
the Performance Standards of 1-2 District:
1. Use permitted not closer that 300' to a
residential use or residential zone.
2. Solid wall or solid painted fence eight (8) feet
high.
3. Parking not permitted closer that 300' to a
residential use or residential zone.
4. Two (2) off street loading spaces required.
May not face on bordering street or highway.
5. One (1) principal entrance only. 6. Outdoor
lighting shall be approved by the City Council.
Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted if the performance standards
for this district (1) are met and certified as being met by a registered professional
engineer of the State of Illinois. Standards of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency must also be met.
Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing nonresidential structure as
described within Section 21-500.
I-2
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Automobile Wrecking & Storage Yards (2)
Mineral extractive operations outside corporate
limits, including but not limited to: coal, oil,
rock, gravel, sand, and the related processing
operations, storing, and sale of such materials.
Wireless Communication - Freestanding
Wireless Communication Facility as described
within Section 21-500
Any use more appropriate to
another zone or zones including,
but not limited to:
Residential uses of any kind
including dwelling units, hotels,
motels, mobile homes, etc.
Schools, churches, clubs, lodges,
hospitals
Abandoned Automobile
Kennel
Mineral Extractive Operations
within corporate limits.
MIN. LOT AREA: 1 acre
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100'
MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 50'
MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 50'
MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: 50'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F. A. R.
MAX. STORIES: As determined by F. A. R.
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained
off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided
as follows:
1. For industrial or manufacturing operations - 1
auto parking space per (a) two employees of
combined employment of two largest
successive shifts, or (b) two employees if only
one shift operation; plus 1 auto parking space
equal to 15% of the above for visitors and
company vehicles.
Minimum of 1 off-street loading space.
Additional off-street loading space may be
required by the nature and size of anticipated
operations.
2. For non-industrial or manufacturing
operations as required in more restricted
district(s).
3. Common parking and loading areas provided
parking requirements for all uses are met.
I-A
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
I-A INDUSTRIAL-AGRICULTURAL
It is the intent of this District to provide a transitional
zoning district for land which is undeveloped and
agricultural land but which is projected to become
industrial during future years; the desire being that
large tracts of land should be readily available to
promote and encourage industrial development.
It is the intent of this District to continue to provide
land for purposes devoted to the production of
agricultural products such as field crops, livestock,
fowl, and other conventional agricultural pursuits and
to also assist in the conservation of the natural
resources within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance by
encouraging practices which will conserve soil, soil
resources, water, water resources, and prevent soil
erosion and flood water damages.
At the same time, it is the intent of this District to
provide space for industrial and/or manufacturing
and/or warehousing or storage operations which may
require building and/or open areas for fabricating,
processing, extracting, repairing, dismantling, or
disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufactured
products or wastes; land designated for this District
should be located in relation to the thoroughfare
network of the community (including primary streets as
well as rail and air if required) and designed so as to
not wholly disrupt normal traffic flow. Because of
increasing technological developments, extensive lists
of permitted and prohibited uses are impractical;
therefore, to safeguard the public interests,
performance standards are established herein as criteria
for all permitted uses and as guidance for the City
Council in permitting any conditional uses. Planned
Industrial Parks are encouraged in this District.
NOTES
For sign regulations, see Section 21-126 of this
Ordinance.
(1) Building & enclosed pens for livestock, fowl &
animals shall not be closer than 200' from any
adjoining district.
(2) Principal and accessory buildings shall not be
closer than 100' from any adjoining parcel.
(3) Principal and accessory buildings shall not be
closer than 50' from any adjoining parcel.
(4) Principal, accessory buildings and operations
shall not be closer than 500' from any adjoining
parcel.
(5) See State Law
(6) See definition of Home Occupation
(7) Principal, accessory buildings and operations
shall not be closer than 100' from any adjoining
parcel.
(8) See performance standards for 1-2 District.
Agriculture and agricultural buildings
in connection with a bonafide farm
operation (1).
Cemeteries
Essential Services Forest Preserves
Single Family Farm Dwellings
Principal Uses and structures are
permitted if the performance standards
for the District I-2, General Industrial
District, are met and certified as being
met by a registered professional
engineer of the State of Illinois.
Standards for the Environmental
Protection Agency must also be met.
Wireless Communication Facility
placed on an existing nonresidential
structure as described within Section
21-500.
Municipally Owned Parks and
Recreational Areas
Accessory uses and structures customarily
incidental to permitted principal uses on the
same parcel including:
Residential garages
Home Occupations (6)
Truck or Equipment Terminal
Roadside produce stands in conjunction
with a bonafide farm operation on the
premises.
Kennel
Accessory uses and structures are permitted
if the performance standards for the District
I-2, General Industrial District, are met and
certified as being met by a registered
professional engineer of the State of
Illinois. Standards for the Environmental
Protection Agency must also be met.
I-A
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
Sale of greenhouse products grown on
premises.
Riding Stables (1)
Raising, breeding & boarding of non-farm fowl
and animals (1)
Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun club or
related operation.
Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race track
(1), (4)
Penal or correctional institution (2)
Airport or heliport (5)
Sanitation Transfer Station
Freestanding Wireless Communication Facility
as described within Section 21-500
Commercial radio or television station
Commercial radio or television towers are
exempted from height regulations.
Schools
Churches
Hospitals
Mineral extractive operations outside corporate
limits, including but not limited to: coal, oil,
rock, gravel, sand and the related processing
operations, storing and sale of such materials
(4).
Energy Park; Photovoltaic Power Station; Solar
Farm, Park, or Plant; Wind Farm, Park, or
Plant
Any use more appropriate to another zone or
zones including, but not limited to:
Mobile Homes
Travel Trailer Parks
Junk Yard
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Sanitation Landfill or other qualified system
(7) except sanitation transfer station
Residential use of any kind, including
dwelling units. hotels, motels, mobile homes,
etc. except bonafide single family farm
dwellings.
Mineral Extractive Operations within
corporate limits.
MIN. LOT AREA: 5 acres, except for cemeteries in
which case 2 acres; and conditional uses as determined
by the Planning Commission
MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300'
MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 80' along Federal Highway;
60' along other public roads
MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 100'
MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
MAX. HEIGHT: 40' except barns & silos; and all except
manufacturing/industrial, etc. buildings which are to be
determined by F. A. R.
MAX. STORIES: 3, except for manufacturing/
industrial, etc. buildings which are to be determined
by F. A. R.
MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50 for manufacturing/
industrial, etc. buildings; otherwise N/A.
Minimum off-street parking & loading
land parking loading
use spaces spaces
Dwelling Unit 2 0
Home Occupation +1 0
Churches per 4 seats in
main auditorium 1 0
Industrial, manufacturing, etc.
Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained off-street
parking and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
1 For industrial or manufacturing operation: 1 auto
parking space per (a) two employees of combined
employment of two largest successive shifts, or
(b) two employees if only one shift operation;
plus 1 auto parking space equal to 15% of the
above for visitors and company vehicles.
Minimum of 1 off-street loading space.
Additional off-street loading space may be
required by the nature and size of anticipated
operations.
2. For non-industrial or manufacturing operations as
required in more restricted district(s).
3. Common parking and loading areas provided
parking requirements for all uses are met.
All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses
if permitted are subject to the Planning
Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
IPCA-PUD
Land Use District
Statement of Intent
Schedule of District Regulations
Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures Accessory Uses and
Structures
IPCA-PUD Industrial Park
Conservation Area
Industrial and warehouse uses in facilities where
the primary building exceeds 100,000 sq. ft.
Accessory uses and
structures customarily
incidental to permitted
principal uses on the same
parcel including:
NOTES
For Sign Regulations see Section
21-126 of this Ordinance – B-3
(1) The development plan for
a IPCA-PUD District shall be
approved by the City Council;
such plan shall show:
1. Access points to public
ROW
2. Building locations
3. Parking layout
4. Elevations of buildings
5. Landscaping plan
6. Lighting plan
7. Drainage plan
8. Site utilities plan
9. Such plan shall be
compatible with the
comprehensive and
thoroughfare plans.
10. If development is to be
staged, phasing shall be
indicated.
Commercial and Industrial uses are
encouraged to follow guidelines as
described in the Commercial Design
Standards Section
IPCA-PUD
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards,
the City Council may permit as
Conditional Uses:
Prohibited Uses
Minimum lot area
Minimum yards (all buildings)
Minimum floor area (principal buildings)
Maximum height (all buildings)
Maximum floor area ratio (all buildings)
The following uses providing the
location, nature and extent of proposed
operations are compatible with other uses
in the district, and that any proposed
development plan provides consideration
for integration with the thoroughfare
system of the neighborhood and
community.
Adult Daycare
Appliance Repair
Amusement Centers, indoor or outdoor
Art Galleries
Auto Glass Stores
Auto Parking Lots or Structures
Automobile Sales & Service
Banks
Barbers
Business & Professional Offices
Bowling Alleys
Chambers of Commerce
Chemical Supplies
Clothes Cleaning Agency
Clubs or Lodges (Private)
Construction Company – but not outside
storage of equipment
Convenience Stores with fuel, without
facilities for semi trucks
Credit Bureaus & Collections
Currency Exchanges
Custom Tailor & Dressmaking
Day Care Center
Drive-In Banking
Drive-In Restaurants
Drive-In Operations not otherwise
specified or prohibited
Drive-In Theaters
Employment Agencies
Essential Services
Exterminators
Fire Station
General Loan
Governmental Offices
Hotels & Motels
Insurance Agencies
Interior Decorator
Any use more appropriate to another zone or
zones including, but not limited to:
Abandoned Automobile
Automobile Wrecking
Automobile Service Station
Agriculture
Agricultural Equipment Stores
Agricultural Products except produce
Churches
Commercial Radio or Television Station
Commercial Radio or Television Towers are
exempted from height regulations
Drive-Ins:
Ice Cream or Ice Milk
Auto Washing
Hospitals
Junk Yards
Kennel
Manufacturing or industrial operations except
those permitted
Mineral Extractive Operations
Mineral Extractive Operations within corporate
limits
Mineral Extractive Operations outside corporate
limits, including but not limited to: coal, oil,
rock, gravel, sand and the related processing
operations, storing and sale of such materials
Mobile Homes
Moving & Storage Operations
Penal or correction institution
Raising, breeding & boarding of non-farm fowl
and animals
Residential Dwelling Units
Residential use of any kind, including dwelling
units, hotels, motels, mobile homes, etc.
except bonafide single family farm dwellings
Riding Stables
Sales & Service
Sale of greenhouse products grown on premises.
Sanitation Landfill or other qualified system
except sanitation transfer station
Sanitation Transfer Station
Schools
Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun club or
related operation.
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Single Family Residential Structures
Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race track
Storage Facilities
Minimum lot areas and setback requirements shall comply
with those required in the I-2 District for Industrial Uses and
B-3 District for all other uses.
Minimum off-street parking & loading
Industrial uses shall comply with parking regulations in the I-2
District.
All other uses shall comply with parking regulations in the B-3
District
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards,
the City Council may permit as
Conditional Uses:
IPCA-PUD
Prohibited Uses
Janitorial Services
Jewelry Repair
Libraries
Locksmiths
Lumber Yards
Meat, Poultry or Fish Market
Medical Clinics
Motion Picture Theaters
Museums
Newspaper Offices but not newspaper
plants
One or more dwelling units above the
main floor
One dwelling unit used solely in
conjunction with and forming part
of a funeral home
Paint, Wallpaper-Glass
Pet Shop
Photographer
Police Station
Post Office
Printers
Rental Equipment
Savings & Loan Association
TV Studios
Title Abstract Offices
Transportation Terminals (passenger)
Travel Agencies
Upholstery Shop
Utility Company Offices, but not
outside storage of equipment
Veterinarians
Warehouses
Winery
Wireless Communication Facility placed
on existing nonresidential structure
as described within Section 21-500
Stores or shops offering the following
merchandise primarily at retail &
wherein or whereat incidental but
subordinate related services may or
may not be available.
Appliance
Auto glass
Auto Parts – Wholesale or retail
Auto & Truck Sales
Bakery Goods
Books
Camera Shop
Candy, but not manufacturing
operations
Catering
Confectionery
Trailers
Travel Trailers
Travel Trailer Parks
Truck Sales & Service
Truck Stops
Truck Stops with fuel
Truck Terminals
Warehouses except where permitted
Wireless Communication Facility–
freestanding as described with Section
21-500
Conditional Uses
After notice & appropriate safeguards, the
City Council may permit as Conditional
Uses:
IPCA-PUD
Prohibited Uses
Dairy Products
Delicatessen or Food, but not grocery or
supermarket
Department
Drapery
Drug
Dry Goods
Farm & Garden Supplies, but not milling
or grain storage operations nor sale of
major agricultural implements
Florist
Food
Furniture
Gifts
Grocery & Supermarkets
Hardware
Ice Cream, Ice Milk-walk-in or walk-up
but not drive-in
Jewelry
Liquor
Locksmith
Mail Order
Meat, Poultry or Fish
Milliner
Music
Notions
Office Supply
Optical Merchandise
Paint, Wallpaper, Glass
Pawn Brokers
Periodicals
Pet Shop
Pharmacy
Ready to wear, Men’s, Women’s,
Children, Infants
Restaurants, but not drive-in
Shoes
Sporting goods
Stationery
Tobacco, News
Toys
Variety or Dime
The administrative official shall have
authority to determine other uses, in
addition to those specifically listed
herein, when in his judgment such
other uses are similar to and no more
objectionable to the public welfare
than those listed.









































21-400 DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD PLAIN (SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD)
AREAS
Section 1. Purpose.
All new development proposals in the Flood Plain (Special Flood Hazard) Areas shall be
reviewed and approved by the Building Officials so as to accomplish the following
purposes:
A. To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to
others;
B. protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
C. to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens from the hazards of flooding;
D. to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for
creating blight areas;
F. make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
G. to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and
floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development.
Section 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
Base Flood- The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The
base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 3 of this ordinance.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)- The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of
the base flood.
Basement- That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Building- A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas
or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers
installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
Critical Facility- Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to
these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage
to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include:
emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals
retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
Development- Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
1. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
2. substantial improvement of an existing building;
3. installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days per year;
4. installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
5. construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
6. drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
7. storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
“Development” does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities,
resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filing,
grading, or construction of levees.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA- Federal Emergency Management Agency
Flood- A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of
surface waters from any source.
Flood Fringe- That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map- A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
Flood Insurance Study- An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)- These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon, or that may be annexed into the
City of Mt. Vernon, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of
the City of Mt. Vernon are generally identified as such on panel numbers (0179C, 0180C,
0183C, 0184C, 0185C, 0190C, 0191C, 0192C, 0195C, and 0225C) of the countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010. Floodplain also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Jefferson County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon or that may be annexed into the City
of Mt. Vernon are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared
for Jefferson County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
September 17, 2010.
Floodproofing- Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property
and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate- A form published by the Federal Emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be
structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection elevation.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE)- The elevation of the base flood plus one foot of
freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
Floodway- That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood.
The floodway for the floodplains of Church Tributary, West Tributary, East Fork Botch’s
Ditch, Botch’s Ditch, Casey Fork, Bell Street Ditch, Brickyard Creek, and Bishop Creek
shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson prepared
by FEMA and dated September 17, 2010. The floodways for each of the remaining
floodplains of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be according to the best data available from
the Federal, State, or other sources.
Freeboard- An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a
factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
Historic Structure- Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
3. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR- Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
Lowest Floor- the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s
lowest floor. Provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 7 of this
ordinance.
Manufactured Home- A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to required utilities.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
New Construction- Structures for which the start of construction commenced or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
NFIP- National Flood Insurance Program.
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer- A vehicle which is:
1. built on a single chassis;
2. four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss- Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such
flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA- See definition of floodplain.
Start of Construction- Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part oaf a building whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure (see “Building”)
Substantial Damage- Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes “Repetitive Loss Buildings” (see
definition).
Substantial Improvement- Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement
of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements:
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
“Substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures
which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair
work done.
The term does not include:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
Violation- The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
Section 3. Base Flood Elevation.
This ordinance’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data
are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall
finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data
and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the
site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Church Tributary, West
Tributary, East Fork Botch’s Ditch, Botch’s Ditch, Casey Fork, Bell Street
Ditch, Brickyard Creek, and Bishop Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Jefferson
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
September 17, 2010.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH Zone” or
AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county wide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson County.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as a
“A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson County
shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
Section 4. Duties of the Building Official.
The Building Official of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be responsible for the general
administration of this ordinance and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon meet the requirements of this
ordinance. Specifically, the Building Official shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with Section 5;
B. ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated
floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of Section 6;
C. ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to
Section 7 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
D. assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of Section
8;
E. ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health
standards of Section 9;
F. if a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Section 11 are met
and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
G. inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined
in Section 13 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
H. assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local,
state, and federal permits;
I. notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
J. provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit
procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
K. cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this
ordinance;
L. maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of
state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this ordinance;
M. perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain, and
N. maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map.
Section 5. Development Permit.
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development
permit from the Building Official. The Building Official shall not issue a development
permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1. drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
2. existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
3. the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
4. the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance,
and
5. cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this
requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Building Official
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be
higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after
the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain
and therefore not subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Conversely,
any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation
and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance
Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
The Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
The Building Official shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-notrequired
letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Building
Official shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
Section 6. Preventing Increased Flood Heights and Resulting Damages.
Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and within
all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards
shall apply:
A. Except as provided in Section 6(B) of this ordinance, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
a. the crossing will not result in an increase in water
surface profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet, and
b. the crossing will not result in an increase in water
surface profile elevation in excess of one half (0.5) feet
at a point one thousand (1,000) feet upstream of the
proposed structure.
c. There are no buildings in the area impacted by the
increases in water surface profile.
d. The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not
involve straightening, enlarging, or relocating the
existing channel.
e. The design must be certified by a licensed professional
engineer in the State of Illinois and the designs must
meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR permit.
f. The design must be certified by a second licensed
professional engineer.
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 3:
a. The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells,
or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 4;
a. The utility line must be constructed above the existing
100-year flood elevation or attached to an existing
bridge.
b. A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
c. No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a
river, lake or stream.
d. Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall
be designed and located so as to not cause an
obstruction of flood flows by trapping debris.
e. All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction
grades and re-vegetated.
f. All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical
Safety Code, and federal requirements must be met.
4. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
a. The boat dock must not extend more than fifty (50) feet
into a waterway and no more than one quarter (1/4) of
the width of the waterway and shall not extend beyond
the navigational limited established by the IDNR and
Corps of Engineers.
b. The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten
(10) feet.
c. For L-Shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that
portion parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the landowner’s shoreline frontage
nor fifty (50) feet.
d. Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection
of property lines into the waterway or come within ten
(10) feet of the projected property line.
e. Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
f. The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent
detachment during times of high wind or water.
g. Metal drums or containers may not be used as
buoyancy units unless they are filled with floatation
foam. Containers which previously stored pesticides,
herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not
permissible.
h. This permit does not authorize any other related
construction activity such as shore protection or fill.
i. Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a
manner which will minimize obstruction to flow.
j. At any future date, the permittee must agree to make
necessary modifications to the dock as determined by
the IDNR or Corp of Engineers
5. Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6:
a. the following activities (not involving fill or positive
change in grade) are covered by this permit:
i. The construction of underground utility lines,
wells, or septic tanks not crossing a lake or
stream.
ii. The construction of light poles, sign posts, and
similar structures.
iii. The construction of sidewalks, driveways,
athletic fields (excluding fences), patios, and
similar structures.
iv. The construction of properly anchored,
unwalled, open structures such as playground
equipment, pavilions, and carports.
v. The placement of properly anchored buildings
not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size,
nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension. Only
one such building on a property is authorized by
this statewide permit.
vi. The raising of existing buildings, provided no
changes are made to the outside dimensions of
the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
6. Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
a. Any outfall structure, including any headwall or endsection,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the
existing adjacent natural bank slope or adjacent bank
protection.
b. The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion
would be prevented by the use of riprap or other design
measures.
c. Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a
stream until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise
stabilized to minimize stream sedimentation.
d. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including
the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction.
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
a. In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed
of the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is
encased in concrete or entrenched in bedrock, a
minimum of three (3) feet of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its
original condition.
b. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including
stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours
and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of
construction.
c. Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause
water pollution, as defined by the Environmental
Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall be provided with
shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
d. If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at
least ten (10) days prior to the blasting date to allow
monitoring of any related fish kills.
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
a. Only the following materials may be utilized in urban
areas: stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling,
cellular blocks, fabric-formed concrete, gabion baskets,
rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and
treated timber. Urban areas are defined as: areas of the
State where residential, commercial, or industrial
development currently exists or, based on land use
plans or controls, is expected to occur within ten (10)
years. (The Department should be consulted if there is
a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
b. In addition to the materials listed in Section 6 (A)(8)(a),
other materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in
rural areas provided all other conditions of this permit
are met.
c. The following materials shall not be used in any case:
auto bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal
refuse, roofing materials, asphalt or other bituminous
materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections
Act (415 ILCS 5).
d. The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or
channel to be protected shall not exceed, either
singularly or cumulatively, one thousand (1000) feet.
e. All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored
to resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
f. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not
cause erosion or the accumulation of debris on
properties adjacent to or opposite the project.
g. Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing
top of the bank.
h. Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank fullwidth
and cross-sectional area of the channel will
conform to or be no more restrictive than that of the
natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap
along the bank, toe of the bank or other similar
applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional area of
the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent
(10%) nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2)
cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or
shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter
slope and to lessen the quantity of material required.
i. If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such
as reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of
the concrete and removed from the construction area.
j. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
k. In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes,
the structure shall be constructed at or landward of the
water line as determined by the normal pool elevation,
unless:
i. It is constructed in alignment with an existing
seawall(s) or gabion structure(s), and
ii. The volume of material placed, including the
structure, would not exceed two (2) cubic yards
per lineal foot.
l. Excess material excavated during the construction of
the bank or shoreline protection shall be placed in
accordance with local, state, and federal laws and rules,
shall not be placed in a floodway.
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
a. The accessory structure or building addition must
comply with the requirements of the local floodplain
ordinance.
b. The principle structure to which the project is being
added must have been in existence on the effective date
of this permit (July 25, 1988).
c. The accessory structure or addition must not exceed
five hundred (500) square feet in size and must not
deflect floodwaters onto another property, and
d. Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
e. No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty
(50) feet of the bank of the stream channel.
f. The accessory structure or addition must be properly
anchored to prevent its movement during flood
conditions.
g. Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for
any subsequent addition must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for review.
h. Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of
construction.
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
a. The affected length of the stream shall not either
singularly or cumulatively exceed one thousand (1000)
feet.
b. The project shall not include the construction of any
new channel; all work must be confined to the existing
channel or to reestablishing flows in the natural stream
channel, and
c. The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall
conform to that of the natural channel upstream and
down stream of the site.
d. Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a
wetland and shall be either:
i. removed from the floodway;
ii. used to stabilize an existing bank provided no
materials would be placed higher than the
existing top of bank and provided the crosssectional
area of the natural channel would not
be reduced by more than ten percent (10%), nor
the volume of material placed exceed two (2)
cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
iii. used to fill an existing washed out or scoured
floodplain area such that the average natural
floodplain elevation is not increased;
iv. used to stabilize and existing levee provided the
height of the levee would not be increased nor its
alignment changed;
v. placed in a disposal site previously approved by
the Department in accordance with the conditions
of the approval, or
vi. used for beach nourishment, provided the material
meets all applicable water quality standards.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including
the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit
Number 12:
a. A licensed professional engineer shall determine and
document that the existing structure has not been the
cause of demonstrable flood damage. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that:
i.No buildings or structures have been impacted
by the backwater induced by the existing
structure, and
ii.There is no record of complaints of flood
damages associated with the existing structure.
b. A licensed professional engineer shall determine that
the new structure will provide the same or greater
effective waterway opening as the existing structure.
For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the
direction of the approaching flow upstream of the
bridge.
c. The project shall not include any appreciable raising of
the approach roads. (This condition does not apply if
all points on the approaches exist at an elevation equal
to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood
insurance study completed or approved by
IDNR/OWR).
d. The project shall not involve the straightening,
enlargement or relocation of the existing channel of the
river or stream except as permitted by the Department’s
Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, channel
and Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide
Permit Number 11 (Minor Maintenance Dredging
Activities).
e. The permittee shall maintain records of projects
authorized by this permit necessary to document
compliance with the above conditions.
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13:
a. No temporary construction activity shall be commenced
until the individual permittee determines that the
permanent structure (if any) for which the work is being
performed has received all required federal, state and
local authorizations.
b. The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one
construction season. All temporary construction
materials must be removed from the stream and
floodway within one year of their placement and the
area returned to the conditions existing prior to the
beginning of construction. Any desired subsequent or
repetitive material placement shall not occur without
the review and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
c. The temporary project shall be constructed such that it
will not cause erosion or damage due to increases in
water surface profiles to adjacent properties. For
locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed
such that all water surface profile increases, due to the
temporary project, are contained within the channel
banks.
d. This permit does not authorize the placement or
construction of any solid embankment or wall such as a
dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any channel or
floodway.
e. No temporary structure shall be placed within any river
or stream channel until a licensed professional engineer
determines and documents that the temporary structure
will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be
impacted by the backwater induced by the temporary
structure.
f. The permittee shall maintain records of projects
authorized by this permit necessary to document
compliance with the above condition.
g. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of
the temporary construction.
h. Materials used for the project shall not cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection
Act (415 ILCS 5).
13. Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway
permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in 6(A) may be permitted only if:
1. permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not
required), or
2. sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map
and base flood elevation.
Section 7. Protecting Buildings.
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of Section 6 of this
ordinance, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or seventy (70) square feet.
2. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty
percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent
(50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the
adoption of this ordinance. If substantially improved, the existing
structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards
of this section.
3. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this
ordinance. If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet
the flood protection standards of this section.
4. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. (The building protection
requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the
same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood
damage).
5. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
6. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 2.
B. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or
above the flood protection elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six
inches before compaction and should extend at least ten
(10) feet beyond the foundation before sloping below
the flood protection elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other
structural measure.
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporated debris or refuse material, and
e. shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when
necessary stormwater management techniques such as
swales or basins shall be incorporated.
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on
stilts, piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that
is permanently open to flood waters.
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation.
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures
by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one
(1) permanent opening on each wall no more than one
(1) foot above grade with a minimum of two (2)
openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every one (1)
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below
the base flood elevation, and
d. The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize
exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
i. All structural components below the flood
protection elevation shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage.
ii. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps, and other service
facilities may be located below the flood protection
elevation provided they are waterproofed.
iii.The area below the flood protection elevation shall
be used solely for parking or building access and
not later modified or occupied as habitable space, or
iv. In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to
comply with these requirements may be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
3. The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below
the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions
are met:
4. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
5. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening
on each wall having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch per one (1) square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be
no more than one (1) foot above grade.
6. The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade.
7. The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed
four (4) feet at any point.
8. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event.
9. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
10. Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
C. Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies that:
1. Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of
the base flood.
2. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy,
and the impact from debris and ice.
3. Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.
4. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall
be:
1. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with Section 7(B), and
2. anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the
Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm.
Code § 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of section
7(D) unless the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
2. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks
and porches
4. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
5. The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
6. The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe
for movement of the floodplain.
8. Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
9. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
10. must either:
a. entirely be supported by jacks, or
b. have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires
touching the ground and be supported by block in a
manner that will allow the block to be easily removed
by used of the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an
existing residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions
are met:
1. The garage of shed must be non-habitable.
2. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
3. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
4. The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
5. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
6. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must
be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
7. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on
each wall not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square
inch of opening for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
8. The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than
five hundred (500) square feet.
9. The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
10. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
11. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
Section 8. Subdivision Requirements
The City of Mt. Vernon shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned
unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance. Any proposal for such
development shall include the following data:
1. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood
elevation;
2. the boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
3. a signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface
waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds.
Section 9. Public Health and Other Standards
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance the
following standards apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of
Section 7 of this ordinance.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters.
4. New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above
ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be
watertight.
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall
be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed
within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood
frequency elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood
frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing
measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or
above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all
critical facilities.
B. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter
flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
Section 10. Carrying Capacity and Notification.
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including
levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
In addition, the City of Mt. Vernon shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty
(30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
Section 11. Variances.
Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning and Planning Commission
of the City of Mt. Vernon for a variance. The Zoning and Planning Commission of the
City of Mt. Vernon shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the City Council. The City Council may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or
other public facilities.
6. The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
7. all other state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Zoning and Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon shall notify
an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building
protections standards of Section 7 that would lessen the degree of protection
to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twentyfive
dollars ($25) per one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance
coverage;
2. increase the risk to life and property, and
3. require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk
and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of Section 7 of this
ordinance which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in “Historic
Structures”, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance subject to the conditions
that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
Section 12. Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that development either
inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This ordinance
does not create liability on the part of the City of Mt. Vernon or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
Section 13. Penalty.
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the
conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance.
Upon due investigation, the Building Official may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this ordinance exists. The Building Official shall notify the owner
in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
1. The City of Mt. Vernon shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this ordinance or make
such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance
with the ordinance.
2. Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven
hundred fifty ($750) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
4. The City of Mt. Vernon shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
B. The Building Official shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
The Building Official is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Zoning and Planning Commission of the City of Mt.
Vernon. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and
shall state:
1.The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
2.The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning and
Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon shall determine whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Mt. Vernon from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
Section 14. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinances, easements, covenants or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
Section 15. Severability.
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
21-500 ZONING, SITING LOCATION, AND DESIGN REGULATIONS FOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
21-500. 1 Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas within the
jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon. The goals of this Ordinance are to: (i) encourage the location of towers in
non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, (ii) encourage strongly
the joint use of new and existing tower sites, (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, (iv) encourage users of towers
and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, (v)
protect the public health and safety, and (vi) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
The Illinois General Assembly enacted Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act (50 ILCS 835) and effective on June 1, 2018, preempting some authority of the City of Mt.
Vernon to regulate small wireless facilities. Provisions of the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act
are incorporated within the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon as Article 21, Section 21-500A.
Small Wireless Facilities as defined herein are subject to Section 21-500A.
21-500.2 Definitions
A. "Abandonment" or "abandoned" means: (1) to cease operation for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive
days; (2) to reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by seventy-five percent for sixty (60) or more
consecutive days; (3) to relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty (80) percent of the height of an antenna
support structure; or (4) to reduce the number of transmissions from an antenna by seventy-five percent for sixty
(60) or more consecutive days. If there are two or more users of a single Wireless Communication Facility then
this provision shall not be applicable to the supporting structure until all users have met the definition.
B. "Administrative approval" means successful completion of application process and issuance of a Building
Permit.
C. "Antenna" means any system of electromagnetically tuned wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices
used to transmit or receive electromagnetic waves between terrestrial and/or orbital based points, including, but
not limited to:
1. Whip antenna: An Omni-directional antenna, which transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a
360-degree radial pattern. Typically four inches or less in diameter.
2. Panel antenna: A directional antenna which transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific
directional pattern of up to 120-degrees, and which is typically thin and rectangular in shape.
3. Tubular antenna: A tube typically twelve (12) inches in diameter containing either omni-directional or
directional antenna, depending on the specific site requirement. This is often used as a means to mitigate the
appearance of antennae on top of light standards and power poles.
4. Parabolic (or dish) antenna: A bowl-shaped device for the reception and/or transmission of
communications signals in a narrow and specific direction.
5. Ancillary antenna: An antenna that is less than twelve (12) inches in its largest dimension and that is not
directly used to provide personal wireless communications services. An example would be a global
positioning satellite (GPS) antenna.
D. "Co-location" means the placement and arrangement of multiple providers' antennae and equipment on a single
support structure or equipment pad area.
E. "Conditional Use Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this Section 21-500 and Article 21, Section 21-
113 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
F. "Electromagnetic field" means the field produced by the operation of equipment used in transmitting and
receiving radio frequency signals.
G. "Equipment shelter" means the structure associated with a Wireless Communication Facility that is used to
house electronic switching equipment, cooling systems, and back-up power systems.
H. "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
I. "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
J. "Freestanding Wireless Communication Facility" means a wireless communication facility utilizing a
monopole support structure.
K. "Height" means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the
highest point on the tower or other structure even if the highest point is an antenna.
L. “Microcell” means a Wireless Communication Facility consisting of a single antenna that is either: (i) a
panel antenna not more than four (4) feet in height and with an area of not more than five-hundred eighty (580)
square inches; or (ii) a whip antenna, no more than four (4) inches in diameter and no more than six (6) feet in
height; or (iii) a tubular antenna no more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and six (6) feet in height; except
Microcell shall not include a Small Wireless Facility defined within and subject to Article 21, Section 21-500A.
M. “Minor Facility” means a Wireless Communication Facility consisting of up to three (3) antennae, each of
which is either (i) not more than four (4) feet in height and with an area of not more than five-hundred eighty (580)
square inches; or (ii) a whip antenna, no more than four (4) inches in diameter and no more than six (6) feet in
height; (iii) a tubular antenna no more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and six (6) feet in height; and an
associated equipment cabinet that is six (6) feet or less in height and no more than forty-eight (48) square feet in
floor area; except Minor Facility shall not include a Small Wireless Facility defined within and subject to Article
21, Section 21-500A.
N. "Personal wireless services" means commercial mobile services, unlicenced wireless services, and common
carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332 (c)(7)(C).
0. "Support structure" means any built structure, including any guy wires and anchors, to which antenna and other
necessary associated hardware is mounted. Support structures include the following:
1. "Lattice tower" means a support structure which consists of a network of crossed metal braces, forming
a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section.
2. "Guy tower" means a support structure such as a pole or narrow metal framework which is held erect by
the use of guy wires and anchors.
3. "Monopole" means a support structure that consists of a single steel or wood pole sunk into the ground
and/or attached to a concrete pad.
4. "Existing nonresidential structure" means existing structures identified in this Ordinance to which
wireless facility components may be attached with certain mitigating conditions.
P. "Wireless Communication Facility" means a Wireless Communication Facility, including a microcell, that
is a facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio (television) frequency signals, and which may include
antennas, equipment shelter or cabinet, transmission cables, a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation,
and reception and transmission devices and antennas.
Q. “Small Wireless Facility” means a small wireless facility or micro wireless facility defined within and subject
to Article 21, Section 21-500A.
21-500.3 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be permitted in all zones:
A. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC:
B. Antennas and related equipment not more than three (3) feet in height that are being stored, shipped, or
displayed for sale;
C. Facilities used for purposes of public safety, such as, but not limited to, police and the regional 911 system;
D. Wireless radio utilized for temporary emergency communications in the event of a disaster;
E. Licensed amateur (ham) radio stations not greater than 75-feet in total height including any support or other
existing structure.
F. Wireless Data Communications antenna for Internet single end user (i.e. consumer) not greater than 75-feet
in total height including any support or other existing structure.
G. Satellite dish antennas one meter in diameter or less, including direct to home satellite services, when used as
a secondary use of the property in all zoning districts, except within business and industrial districts satellite
dish antennas two meters in diameter or less;
H. Freestanding residential television or private radio reception antenna stations not exceeding 60-feet in height
or residential television or private radio reception antennas mounted on existing residential structures not
more than 60-feet in height including the height of the roof line of the structures.
I. Wireless Communication Facilities which legally existed prior to August 7, 2000; except that this exemption
does not apply to modifications of such existing facilities;
J. Maintenance or repair of a Wireless Communication Facility and related equipment, (excluding structural
work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings) provided that compliance with the
standards of this Ordinance are maintained; and
21-500.4 General Provisions
A. Principal or Accessory Use. A Wireless Communication Facility will be considered either principal or
accessory uses. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a
Wireless Communication Facility on that lot except as specifically provided within this Ordinance.
B. Not Essential Services. Wireless telecommunications facilities are not considered essential public facilities
and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential public facilities.
C. FCC Licensing. The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by the FCC if it is required to be licensed
under FCC regulations. The applicant if not the telecommunications service provider shall submit proof of lease
agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider if they are required to be licensed by the FCC.
D. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a wireless telecommunications facility
complies with zoning and development standards, such as, but not limited to, setback and lot coverage
requirements, only the dimensions of the parcel upon which the wireless telecommunications facility is located
shall be considered. If the Wireless Communication Facility is located upon a leased parcel of a larger lot, then
only the leased area shall be considered.
E. Signs. No wireless telecommunications equipment shall be used for the purpose of mounting signs or
message displays of any kind.
F. Lighting. Wireless Communication Facilities shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or
other applicable authority.
G. Permanent Mounting Required. All commercial wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed,
erected, or mounted in a manner that is intended to be permanent. Temporary and mobile commercial facilities are
not allowed except for testing purposes, or emergency or display purposes not to exceed a 24-hour period except
with the written permission of the Chief Building Inspector of the City, which permission shall be granted only
upon good cause not within the control of the permittee.
H. Cumulative Effects. The City shall consider the cumulative visual effects of Wireless Communication
Facilities mounted on existing structures and/or located on a given permitted site in determining whether the
additional administrative approval can be granted so as to not adversely affect the visual character of the City.
I. Change of Ownership Notification. Upon transfer of ownership of any Wireless Communication Facility or
the lot or parcel upon which such facility has been erected the owner of the Wireless Communication Facility shall
notify in writing the City of Mt. Vernon, Building Inspector, within thirty (30) days of the transfer. No transfer of
ownership shall release said owner-transferor from the owner's existing obligations under this Ordinance; in
addition, all transfers of ownership in whole or part shall obligate and subject the new owner-transferee to any
obligations of the transferor existing under this Ordinance at time of transfer.
21-500.5 Wireless Communication Facility Locations
A. Freestanding. Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities may be located in the following Agriculture,
Flood Plain, Business or Industrial zoning districts subject to administrative approval at the following heights;
provided in all cases a Conditional Use Permit must be obtained in accordance with Article 21, Section 21-113 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances:
1. A-G, General Agriculture District and F-P, Flood Plain District: 200 feet. I-1, Light Industrial District,
1-2, General Industrial District, and I-A, Industrial-Agriculture District: 200 feet.
2. B-2, Secondary Business District, B-3, and Interchange Business District: 120 feet.
No freestanding Wireless Communication Facility shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing Wireless Communication Facility, freestanding or located on
existing structures, nor any available structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing Wireless Communication Facility or structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
1. No existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures are located within the geographic area
required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
2. Existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures are not sufficient height to meet applicant's
engineering requirements.
3. Existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to
support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
4. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures, or the antenna on the existing Wireless
Communication Facility or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
5. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or
structure to adapt an existing Wireless Communication Facility or to use an existing structure for sharing or
use are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new Wireless Communication Facility development are presumed to
be unreasonable.
6. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing Wireless
Communication Facility and structures unsuitable.
B. Existing Structures. Wireless Communication Facilities may be placed in any zoning district on the following
existing structures subject to administrative approval of the facility. No Conditional Use Permit is required. The
height of the wireless facility must not exceed the height requirements of Section 21-500.6 B herein:
1. Any free standing support structure currently used by a permitted Wireless Communication Facility;
2. Non-residential buildings including, but not limited to, office buildings, retail buildings, industrial
buildings, and clubhouses; but not including structures considered accessory structures to a residential use;
and
3. Minor facilities located on non-residential buildings and structures including, but not limited to, water
towers, government buildings, churches, light standards in parking lots and sports fields, bridges, power
poles and towers, and flag poles.
C. Rights-of-Way. Subject to administrative approval, Wireless Communication Facilities may be placed in the
public right-of-way or utility right-of-way provided the Wireless Communication Facility is a microcell consisting
of a whip or tubular antenna placed on a light standard or power pole and the equipment cabinet is placed in the
ground; provided the written agreement of the right-of-way owner is first obtained and the right-of-way permits
same. No such pole and microcell shall have a combined height which exceeds 40 feet; no minimum setback
requirement shall be required for the antenna.
D. Residential Districts. Except as provided in subsection B above, Wireless Communication Facilities are not
permitted in any residential district.
21-500.6 Site Development Standards
All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be constructed, erected or built in accordance with the following site
development standards:
A. Wireless Communication Facilities shall be screened or camouflaged by employing the best available
technology. This may be accomplished by use of compatible materials, location, color, stealth technologies, and/or
other tactics to achieve minimum visibility of the facility as viewed from public streets or residential properties.
All screening and camouflaging is subject to the approval of the City when possible facilities should be
camouflaged to resemble trees.
B. Wireless Communication Facilities may be mounted on certain nonresidential buildings and structures in
accordance with the limitations in Section 21-500.5 B with administrative approval, provided that the following
conditions are met:
1. The Wireless Communication Facility is co-located on an existing wireless communication facility and
conforms to Section 21-500.5 A; or
2. The Wireless Communication Facility consists of a microcell or a minor facility as follows:
a. The combined antenna(e) and supporting hardware shall not extend more than 15 feet above the
existing or proposed roof structure. Antenna(e) may be mounted to rooftop appurtenances provided they
do not extend beyond 15 feet above the roof proper; and
b. The antenna(e) and supporting hardware shall be mounted on the building upon which they are
located and designed to minimize visual and aesthetic impacts to surrounding land uses and structures
and shall, to the greatest extent practical, blend into the existing environment.
c. The minimum setback in each direction from the edge of the building or structure shall be one
and one-half feet of setback for each foot of combined antenna and supporting hardware height, which
minimum setback shall not be subject to variance.
C. Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities shall conform to all of the following site development
standards:
1. Monopoles shall be the only freestanding support structures allowed in the City; no lattice towers or guy
towers shall be permitted;
2. Installation of a freestanding facility shall be denied if placement of the antennae on an existing structure
can meet the applicant's technical and network location requirements;
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that the Wireless Communication Facility is the minimum height required
to function satisfactorily. No freestanding facility that is taller than the maximum allowed height shall be
approved. Height shall be measured to the top of the antenna(e);
4. A freestanding Wireless Communication Facility, including the support structure and associated electronic
equipment, shall have a minimum setback requirement from all adjoining property lines equal to one foot of
setback for each foot of height; except, however, when on a parcel adjacent to a residential use or adjacent to
a lot zoned residential, then the minimum setback from the property line(s) of the adjacent residential use or
lot shall be one and one-half feet of setback for each foot of height. Minimum setback requirements shall not
be subject to variance;
5. Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities shall be designed and placed on the site in a manner
that takes maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation, and structures so as to:
a. Use existing site features to screen as much of the total facility as possible from prevalent views;
and/or
b. Use existing site features as a background so that the total facility blends into the background
with increased sight distances;
6. In reviewing the proposed placement of a wireless facility on the site and any associated landscaping,
the City may make a condition of the permit that the applicant supplement existing trees and mature
vegetation to more effectively screen the facility; and
7. Support structures, antennae, and any associated hardware shall be painted a nonreflective color or color
scheme appropriate to the background against which the facility would be viewed from a majority of points
within its viewshed. A proposed color or color scheme shall be approved by the City.
8. Separation distances between freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities is required and shall
measured between the proposed Wireless Communication Facility and those Wireless Communication
Facilities that are existing, or have received approval on the effective date of this Ordinance from any
governmental entity, regardless of whether situated within or outside the corporate limits of the City. The
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing Wireless Communication Facility and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed
Wireless Communication Facility. No freestanding Wireless Communication Facility shall be erected within
1500 feet of another freestanding Wireless Communication Facility.
D. Electronics equipment enclosures shall conform to the following:
1. Screening of Wireless Communication Facility equipment enclosures shall be provided with one or a
combination of the following: underground, fencing, walls, landscaping, structures, or topography which will
block the view of the equipment shelter as much as practicable from any street and/or adjacent properties.
Screening may be located anywhere between the enclosure and the above mentioned viewpoints.
Landscaping for the purposes of screening shall be maintained in a healthy condition; and
2. No wireless equipment reviewed under this section shall be located within required building setback
areas.
E. Security fencing, if used, shall conform to the following:
1. No fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height or be less than six (6) feet in height;
2. Security fencing shall be effectively screened from view through the use of appropriate landscaping
materials; and
3. Chain-link fences shall be painted or coated with a nonreflective color, and shall have a minimum three
(3) foot deep area to be planted with approved plant species in a manner that will completely screen the
fencing.
21-500.7 Co-location
The intent of co-location is to encourage several providers to use the same structure or site to keep the number of
Wireless Communication Facilities sites to a minimum as a means of reducing the overall visual effects
throughout the community. The following procedures are required to further the intent of Wireless
Communication Facility co-location:
A. A permittee shall cooperate with other Wireless Communication Facility providers in co-locating
additional antennae on support structures and/or on existing buildings and sites provided said proposed colocatees
have received a permit for such use at said site from the City. A permittee shall allow other providers
to co-locate and share the permitted site, provided such shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical
level impairment of the permitted use (as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden).
B. A signed statement indicating that the applicant agrees to allow for the potential co-location of
additional Wireless Communication Facility equipment by other providers on the applicant's structure or
within the same site location shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the permit application. If an
applicant contends that future co-location is not possible on its site, the applicant must submit a technical
study documenting that such co-location is not possible.
21-500.8 Facility Removal
In instances where a Wireless Communication Facility is to be removed, the removal shall be in accordance
with the following procedures:
A. The operator of a Wireless Communication Facility shall notify the City upon the discontinued use of a
particular facility. The Wireless Communication Facility shall be removed by the facility owner within ninety
(90) days of the date the site's use is discontinued, it ceases to be operational, the permit is revoked, or if the
facility falls into disrepair or is abandoned. Disrepair includes structural features, paint, landscaping, or
general lack of maintenance which could result in safety or visual impacts; and
B. If the provider fails to remove the facility upon ninety (90) days of its discontinued use or abandonment
or disrepair, the responsibility for removal falls upon the landowner on which the facility has been located. If
any facility is not removed within said ninety (90) days same shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject
to removal by the City in accordance with Article 13, Section 13.11 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
21-500.9 Electromagnetic Field (EMF) Standards Compliance
All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. The applicant shall comply with Federal standards for EMF emissions. Within six (6) months after the
issuance of its operational permit, the applicant shall submit a project implementation report which provides
cumulative field measurements of radio frequency (EMF) power densities of all antennas installed at the subject
site. The report shall quantify the EMF emissions and compare the results with established Federal standards.
Said report shall be subject to review and approval by the City for established Federal standards. Said report
shall be subject to review and approval by the City for consistency with the project proposal report and the
adopted Federal standards. If on review the City finds that the Wireless Communication Facility does not meet
Federal standards, the City may revoke or modify the permit. The applicant shall be given a reasonable time
based on the nature of the problem to comply with the Federal standards. If the permit is revoked, then the
facility shall be removed pursuant to Section 21-500.8.
If said Federal standards are met, no administrative approval or conditional use may be denied on grounds
that radio frequency admissions are harmful to the environment or to the health of residents.
B. The applicant shall ensure that the Wireless Communication Facility will not cause localized interference
with the reception of area television or radio or data broadcasts. If on review of a registered complaint the City
finds that the Wireless Communication Facility interferes with such reception, the City may revoke or modify
the permit. The applicant shall be given a reasonable time based on the nature of the problem to correct the
interference. If the permit is revoked, then the facility shall be removed pursuant to Section 21-500.8.
21-500. 10 Application Requirements
Applications for administrative approval and/or Conditional Use Permit shall be in the form prescribed by the
City of Mt. Vernon and shall include such information as required for all such permits and shall also include the
information described below. The Chief Building Inspector shall issue a Building Permit when an application for
administrative approval has been deemed to be complete. The City Council shall make final determination with
regard to Conditional Use Permits. Applications shall be processed in accordance with the City's ordinances and
regulations as presently constituted or hereafter amended. Application for a Wireless Communication Facility
shall contain the following information. In addition to the information required within other Articles or provisions
of the Revised Code of Ordinances, the Applicant must provide any combination of site plans, maps, surveys,
technical reports, or written narratives that operate to convey all of the following information:
A. Photo simulations of the proposed facility as viewed from affected residential properties and public
rights-of-way at varying distances;
B. A signed statement indicating that (1) the applicant and landowner agree they will diligently negotiate in
good faith to facilitate co-location of additional Wireless Communication facilities by other providers on the
applicant's structure or within the same site location and (ii) the applicant and/or landlord agree to remove the
facility within ninety (90) days after abandonment;
C. Copies of any environmental documents required by any federal agency, if applicable. These shall
include the environmental assessment required by FCC Para. 1.1307, or in the event that a FCC
environmental assessment is not required, a statement that described the specific factors that obviate the
requirement for an environmental assessment;
D. A full site plan shall be required for all sites, showing the tower, antenna, antenna support structure, building,
fencing, buffering, access, and all other items required in this Ordinance The site plan shall clearly indicate the
location, the specific placement of the facility on the site, the type and height of the proposed Wireless
Communication Facility, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed facility, the location
of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features, the type and location of plant materials used to
screen the facility, fencing, proposed color(s), and other proposed structures. The site plan shall not be required if
the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure;
E. A current map showing the location and service area of the proposed Wireless Communication Facility,
and a map showing the locations and service areas of other Wireless Communication Facilities operated by
the applicant and those proposed by the applicant that are close enough to impact service within the City;
F. A legal description of the parcel, if applicable;
G. The approximate distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted
residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties;
H. The method of fencing, the finished color, and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination, if required;
I. A letter signed by the applicant stating the Wireless Communication Facility will comply with all FAA
regulations and EIA (Electronic Industries Association) Standards and all other applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations;
J. A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the Wireless Communication Facility will
accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users;
K. Certification that the antenna usage will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or
reception functions.
L. An inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon or
within 1 V2 miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design
of each tower. The City may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or Conditional Use Permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas
within the jurisdiction of the City; provided, however, that the City is not, by sharing such information, in any
way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
M. At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall
network within the City. This shall include a service area coverage chart for the proposed facility that depicts
the extent of coverage and corresponding signal quality at the proposed facility height and at least one height
lower than that proposed.
21-500. 11 Permit Limitations
Construction of a Wireless Communication Facility shall commence within one (1) year from the date of the
City's approval, which approval shall be the earlier of date of issuance of a Building Permit or granting of a
Conditional Use. If not used within one year, the applicable permit shall become null and void.
21-500.12 Fees
In Addition to any other applicable fees, prior to administrative approval, the applicant shall reimburse the City
for costs of professional engineers and other consultants hired by the City to review and inspect the applicant's
proposal. By way of illustration and not limitation, these professional services may include engineering and
technical review, legal review, planning review, Hearing Examiner services, environmental review, critical
areas review, financial and accounting review, soils review, and mechanical and structural engineering review.
21-500.13 Rules and Regulations of the City
Nothing in this Ordinance shall operate to restrict or limit the City's ability to adopt and enforce all
appropriate ordinances requirements for telecommunications carriers' and provider's use of the rights-of-way
and public property, procedures for application and approval of telecommunication business registrations,
telecommunications rights-of-way use authorizations, franchises and facilities leases, and describing
violations and establishing penalties. Nothing in this Ordinance shall operate to release in whole or in part any
applicant for a Wireless Communication Facility from the obligation to comply with such ordinances, rules
and regulations of the City of Mt. Vernon.
21-500.14 Severability
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance should be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance.
21-500A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT ORDINANCE PROVIDING
FOR THE REGULATION OF AND APPLICATION FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Preamble:
WHEREAS, the Illinois General Assembly enacted Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (50 ILCS 835), having an effective date of June 1, 2018; and
WHEREAS, the City of Mount Vernon, Illinois (the City) is an Illinois municipality in accordance
with the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970; and
WHEREAS, the City is authorized, under existing State and federal law, to enact appropriate
regulations and restrictions relative to small wireless facilities, distributed antenna systems and other
personal wireless telecommunication facility installations in the public right-of-way as long as it does
not conflict with State and federal law; and
WHEREAS, the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act preempts home rule authority
and sets forth the requirements for the collocation of small wireless facilities by local authorities; and
WHEREAS, this Section 21-500A implements the requirements of the Illinois Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
Section 1. Purpose and Scope.
Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the
siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or
outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, but only to the extent of such conflict.
Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, the wireless provider shall comply with
the requirements of this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State
laws or regulations.
Section 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Antenna – communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency
signals used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes – uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National
Electric Safety Code.
Applicant – any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
Application – a request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to collocate small wireless
facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well
as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
Collocate or collocation – to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities
on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
Communications service – cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
Communications service provider – a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a
provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications
carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC – the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
Fee – a one-time charge.
Historic district or historic landmark – a building, property, or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the
National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government
Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the
preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
Law – a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or
resolution.
Micro wireless facility – a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in
length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer
than 11 inches.
Municipal utility pole – a utility pole owned or operated by the City in public rights-of-way.
Permit – a written authorization required by the City to perform an action or initiate, continue, or
complete a project.
Person – an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other
entity or organization.
Public safety agency – the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit of local
government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or
has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
Rate – a recurring charge.
Right-of-way – the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk,
alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include City-owned
aerial lines.
Small wireless facility – a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each
antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached
directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box,
ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
Utility pole – a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service
provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
Wireless facility – equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless
communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure
or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with
an antenna.
Wireless infrastructure provider – any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in
the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as
an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the City.
Wireless provider – a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless services – any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
Wireless services provider – a person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure – a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or
self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of
supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
Section 3. Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities.
Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to
administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding Height Exceptions or Variances,
but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the City to collocate a small
wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject
to the following conditions and requirements:
(1) Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to
the City, together with the City’s Small Cell Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of
any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless
support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready
analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the
Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be
installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting
the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would
be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This
should include a depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each
proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be
installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless
facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation Requirements and
Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing
pole owned by an entity other than the City, the wireless provider shall provide
legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed
collocation.
(2) Application Process. The City shall process applications as follows:
a. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by
different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support
structure.
b. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days
after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of
a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission
of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
City's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
Ordinance.
c. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a
new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed
approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission
of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission
of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
City's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
Ordinance.
d. The City shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this
Ordinance.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern
public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and Conditions contained herein
require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the
requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the
utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant
without paying an additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny the
revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it
is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of
denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the City’s review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the
revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the
denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the
review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new
antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a
small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall
enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the City for the initial
collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved
permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City
and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole
Attachment Agreement.
(3) Completeness of Application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the City shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is
incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing information. An application
shall be deemed complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30
days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the City's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness
to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
(4) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or
b. A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the
delay.
(5) Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small
wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may remove small
wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless
facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits
for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
(6) Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than 5 years,
and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the City makes a finding
that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the
applicable City codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this
Ordinance.
If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as provided in Section 90
therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable City code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
(7) Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting
information and notices to the City by personal delivery at the City’s designated place of
business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used
means, including electronic mail.
Collocation Requirements and Conditions.
(1) Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on municipal utility poles for
future public safety uses, for the City’s electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of
space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City
reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(2) Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and
modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance
with the requirements and conditions of this Ordinance. The wireless provider shall ensure
that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small
wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable
industry and governmental standards and regulations.
(3) No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's
operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a
public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will
not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry
standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider,
at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the
FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47
CFR 90.675.
The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in
the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.
(4) The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles that
are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located
in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not
otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication
worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in
the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
(5) The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or
regulations that concern public safety.
(6) The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally
applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic
requirements that are set forth in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
(7) Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements and Conditions
Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on
any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple
antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant
shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or
additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant shall provide
written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons
the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
(8) Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than
10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless
facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless
facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
a. 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole
supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is
submitted to the City, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement
utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within
the jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless
support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
b. 45 feet above ground level.
(9) Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement
pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is
proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a Variance in conformance with
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in Article 21, Section 21-112.
(10) Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private property owner
that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and groundmounted
equipment located in the right-of-way.
(11) Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with
applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements
include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for
exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
(12) Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code
provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without
prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not
prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
(13) Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be
completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the City and the wireless
provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a
municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the
issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time
to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise,
the permit shall be void unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
(1) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate a single small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each
small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small
wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
(2) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless facility addressed in
an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
(3) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant
to this Section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be
non-refundable.
(4) The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other
charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. routine maintenance;
b. the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially
similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the City at least 10
days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the
replacement of equipment consistent with subsection d. under the Section titled
Application Requirements; or
c. the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless
facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in
compliance with applicable safety codes.
(5) Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within rights-of-way for
activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person to collocate small
wireless facilities on:
(1) property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the City or another unit
of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole
or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
(2) property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or
conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent
of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an
affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
(3) property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as
defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply
to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being
used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-
108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in
Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to
relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued
authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this Ordinance.
Pre-Existing Agreements. Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that relate
to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small
wireless facilities on City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City
before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements
entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this Ordinance.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the effective date of the Act may
accept the rates, fees and terms that the City makes available under this Ordinance for the collocation
of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of
the Act by notifying the City that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the
wireless provider has collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the
City before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200
per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space
on the City utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable
on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility
within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the City to the
owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed
within 90 days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to
the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are
provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or transfers small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider.
Section 4. Dispute Resolution.
The Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes
arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the rightof-
way, the City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more
than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the
dispute.
Section 5. Indemnification.
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and all liability or loss
from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use
or occupancy of the City improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges
granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold
harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
City or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may
have against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused,
based on the theory of liability.
Section 6. Insurance.
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following
insurance:
(i) property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
(ii) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law;
OR
(iii) commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the City improvements or
rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of
City improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the commercial general
liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial
general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement
required by the City. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the selfinsurance,
to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this Section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the City.
Section 7. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications
of this Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each
invalid provision or invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
21-600 REGULATIONS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
21- 600.1 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment may be allowed as a Conditional Use in
the R-1, Low Density Residential District; R-2, Medium Density Residential District; R-M2, Medium
Density Residential District and Mobile Home; R-3, High Density Residential District.
21-600.2 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall at all times comply with the
regulations set forth herein.
21-600.3 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be located within a single-family
residence and shall maintain the appearance of a single-family residence. No mobile home shall be used
as a Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
21-600.4 No expansion of the residence shall be allowed to accommodate a Bed and Breakfast
Establishment and all guest rooms shall be located in the principal residential structure on the lot.
21-600.5 Not more than fifty percent of the floor area of the residence nor more than five bedrooms
shall be devoted to rooms rented as overnight accommodations; each bedroom shall serve no more than
two guests.
21-600.6 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be an operator-occupied residence at all times
a guest is registered. "Operator" shall mean the owner of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment or the
owner's agent who is required by this Ordinance to reside in the Bed and Breakfast Establishment or upon
contiguous property.
21-600.7 The operator of a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall maintain a guest register
including names, addresses and dates of occupancy; such register shall be open to inspection by the
appropriate City officials.
21-600.8 Meals served by a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall only include breakfast and shall
only be served to overnight guests. A Bed and Breakfast Establishment which serves breakfast shall
comply with the following minimum standards:
(1) Food shall be clean, wholesome, free from spillage, free from adulteration and misbranding
and safe for human consumption. Containers of food shall be stored above the floor, on clean racks,
shelves or other clean surfaces in such a manner as to be protected from splash or other contamination.
Milk of only pasteurized Grade A may be used. Use of home canned food is prohibited except for jams
and jellies.
(2) Food shall be protected from contamination while being stored, prepared, and served, and
during transportation. Perishable foods shall be stored at temperatures that will protect them against
spoilage. Potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe temperatures of 45 degrees F. or below,
or 140 degrees F. or above, as appropriate, except during necessary periods of preparation and serving.
Frozen food shall be kept at temperatures that will keep it frozen, except when being thawed for
preparation. Potentially hazardous frozen food shall be thawed at refrigeration temperatures or below,
quick thawed as part of the cooking process, or thawed by another method approved by the local Health
Department. An indicating thermometer shall be located in each refrigerator. Raw fruits and vegetables
shall be washed thoroughly before use. Stuffings, poultry, and pork products shall be cooked to heat all
parts of the food at least 165 degrees F. before being served. Salads made of meat, poultry, potatoes, fish,
shellfish, or eggs and other potentially hazardous prepared food, shall be prepared from chilled products
with a minimum of manual contact. Portions of food once served to an individual may not be served
again. Laundry facilities shall be separated from food preparation areas. Live animals shall be excluded
from food preparation areas.
(3) No person knowingly infected with a communicable disease that may be transmitted by
food handling may work in a Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
(4) If the Bed or Breakfast operator suspects that any employee, family member or the
operator himself or herself has a communicable disease, the operator shall notify the local Health
Department immediately.
(5) All operators shall be certified. Certification shall be achieved by successfully completing
an examination offered by the local Health Department as described in the current edition of the State of
Illinois Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations.
(6) Persons preparing or serving food or washing utensils shall wear clean outer garments and
maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness. They shall wash their hands thoroughly before starting
work and as often as necessary while working to remove soil and contaminants. After visiting a toilet
room, persons shall wash their hands thoroughly in a lavatory but never in the kitchen sink.
(7) No one, while preparing or serving food, may use tobacco in any form.
(8) Utensils shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(9) Multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. Facilities
needed for the operations of washing, rinsing and sanitizing shall be provided.
(10) Pots, pans and other utensils used in the preparation or serving of food or drink and all
food storage utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. Cooking surfaces of equipment, if any,
shall be cleaned at least once each day. Non -food contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at
intervals that will keep them in a clean and sanitary condition.
(11) Residential sinks and home -style mechanical dishwashing machines are acceptable
facilities for washing multi -use eating and drinking utensils. Utensils shall be air dried.
(12) Immediately following either manual or mechanical washing of eating or drinking utensils,
and pots, pans and other cooking utensils, these utensils shall be effectively sanitized by being submerged
in a hypochlorite solution with a chlorine concentration continuously maintained in one hundred parts per
million, or another approved sanitizing solution which shall be used at the concentration tested and
approved by the local Health Department. Dishpans may be used to accomplish the final sanitizing
rinse.
(13)The reuse of single -service utensils is prohibited.
21-600.9 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall comply with all Building Codes, Fire Codes,
and other Codes of the City of Mt. Vernon; in addition, a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) Manual extinguishing equipment shall be provided on each floor in accordance
with NFPA 10 - Standards for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers.
(b) All combustibles or flammable liquids shall be stored in approved metal
containers. No combustible storage in or under stairways.
(c) All trash containers shall be metal.
(d) No cooking facilities nor storage facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms.
(e) All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted.
(f) No portable heating devices shall be permitted in guest rooms.
(g) The operator shall submit a floor plan of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment to
the Fire Department of the City of Mt. Vernon; in addition if the Bed and Breakfast Establishment is
not situated within the corporate limits of the City, the floor plan shall also be submitted to the
Jefferson Fire Protection District.
(h) Smoke detectors shall be provided in each guest room.
21-600.10 No guest shall remain in a Bed and Breakfast Establishment for more than fourteen
consecutive days and no guest shall reside within the Bed and Breakfast Establishment for more than
a total of sixty days in any calendar year.
21-600.11 There shall be one off-street parking space provided on the lot for each bedroom for
rent, in addition to the parking requirements for a single-family residence in the applicable Land Use
District. Off street parking shall not be met by parking within any required front yard.
21-600.12 There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the residence or
premises nor other visible evidence of the conduct of a Bed and Breakfast Establishment other than
one sign, not exceeding two square foot in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of
the residence, or one free standing, non-illuminated sign not exceeding two square feet in area,
mounted on a single pole or lamppost, not exceeding eight feet in height.
21-600.13 There shall be no retail sales in connection with a Bed and Breakfast Establishment nor
any commercial activity conducted other than a Bed and Breakfast Establishment. No Bed and
Breakfast Establishment shall sell or serve alcoholic liquor upon its premises.
21-600.14 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall maintain liability insurance to protect its
guests and others at all times that the residence is operated, maintained, or advertised as a Bed and
Breakfast Establishment.
21-600.15 A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be subject to all hotel taxes imposed by
the State of Illinois or the City of Mt. Vernon.
21-600.16 Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be subject to additional reasonable
requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare as determined by the
City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon.
ARTICLE 22
GENERAL PROVISIONS, TITLE, AMENDMENTS,
DEFINITIONS, REPEALER SEPARABILITY, AND PENALTY
SECTION 22.1 The within Ordinance shall be known and hereafter cited by the title
AREVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MT. VERNON@. All ordinances
enacted after the effective date hereof which shall amend or otherwise modify the terms hereof
shall specify the part or portion of this revised code of ordinances which shall be amended or
affected. A copy of the within code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk in
looseleaf form as the official Revised Code of Ordinances and the City Clerk shall insert therein
all amendments, hereto immediately upon the same becoming effective.
SECTION 22.2 DEFINITIONS. In the construction of the within Revised Code of
Ordinances, except as specifically otherwise provided in any Article or section hereof, the
following terms and words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
A. The word Aperson@ shall include and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships,
corporations, clubs, societies, and bodies politic, as well as to individuals.
B. The term Acity@ shall mean the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
C. The term ACity Council@ shall mean the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, including
the elected Councilmen and Mayor of such City.
SECTION 22.3 CONSTRUCTION. The following rules of construction shall be observed
in the enforcement and interpretation of the within ordinance:
A. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and
approved usage of language, except that technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such
special meaning.
B. Every word herein importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females
as well as males. Every word importing the singular only shall extend and be applied. to the
plural as well as to the singular; and every word importing the plural shall extend and be applied
to the singular as well as to the plural.
SECTION 22.4 SEPARABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City
Council in enacting the within Revised Code of Ordinances or any amendment or modification
hereof that if any article, section, paragraph, phrase, or part of this ordinance shall be held
invalid, the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs, phrases, and parts shall remain in full force
and effect and the provisions hereof are hereby declared to be separable.
SECTION 22.5 All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of
this Revised Code of Ordinances are hereby repealed, except the following, which are excluded
and not hereby repealed:
A. Appropriation and Tax levy ordinances.
B. Salary ordinances.
C. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
D. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons.
E. Ordinances creating or authorizing the execution of contracts or the issuance of
warrants.
F. Ordinances establishing names for or vacating streets, alleys, or other public
places.
G. Bond ordinances.
H. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate or personal property
by or from the City.
I. All special ordinances.
The within Revised Code of Ordinances or any amendment hereto shall not be construed
or held to repeal a former ordinance whether expressly repealed or not as to any offenses
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred or any right accrued or created arising under such former ordinance, and
shall not in any way whatever affect any such offense or act so committed or done or any penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or created arising before the effective
date of such Revised Code of Ordinances or amendment thereof.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of any ordinance of the City herein repealed or if discontinued, abating, modifying, or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or affecting the liability or any person waiving any right
of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Revised Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 22.6 PENALTY.
Any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with the provisions of the within
Revised Code of Ordinances or any regulation promulgated in accordance with the terms hereof,
shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00; and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day on which such violation occurs
or continues.
EX PARTE HEARING: In all cases in which a court appearance is not required under the
Statutes of the State of Illinois and in which a cash bail is posted or a bond certificate deposited,
the defendant shall be provided with a statement in substantially the following form, on the
AComplaint@ or on the bond form:
AIn the event you fail to appear in court to answer a charge that does not require you to appear in
court you thereby consent to the entry of a judgment against you in the amount of all applicable
fines, penalties, and costs and the application of a cash bail or other security you have deposited
to their payment and satisfaction@.
If the defendant does not appear on the date set for appearance or any date to which the
case may be continued, the Court may enter an ex parte judgment against the defendant assessing
fines, penalties, and costs in an amount not to exceed the cash bail or security and apply the cash
bail or security in payment thereof.
ARTICLE 23
MT. VERNON MUNICIPAL AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION 1: TITLE
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Mt. Vernon Municipal and Service
Occupation Tax. The tax imposed herein shall be imposed effective September 1, 1990, and shall
be in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, the State of Illinois, or any
other municipal corporation of political subdivision thereof.
SECTION 2: TAX IMPOSED
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this
State's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 2-1/2% of the gross receipts from such
sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at
the rate of 2-1/2% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman
as an incident to a sale of service. This “Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and this
“Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sales of food for
human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, softs drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription
and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the AIllinois Municipal Code@ (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 65
ILCS 5/8-11-5).
All proceeds from the imposition of the one half percent (2%) increase in the Mt. Vernon
Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Service Occupation Tax enacted by Ordinance 2012-10 shall be
deposited into and maintained as a separate dedicated fund to be expended solely for economic
development and quality of life activities, acquisitions, and improvements within the City of Mt.
Vernon.
All proceeds from the imposition of the one percent (1%) increase in the Mt. Vernon Home
Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Service Occupation Tax enacted by Ordinance 2017-42 shall be
deposited into and maintained as a separate dedicated fund to be expended solely for (i) expenses
incurred for Capital construction projects for the Public Utility Department, (ii) expenses incurred for
Capital equipment purchases for all City Departments, (iii) expenses incurred for Capital expenditures
for road construction or road maintenance, (iv) early retirement of existing indebtedness, with priority
to payment of debt with the highest interest rate, and (v) nuisance abatement expenditures, including
demolition of dangerous and dilapidated structures.
SECTION 3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE, STATE OF ILLINOIS TO
COLLECT TAX
The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assesses as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois.
The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 24: MOTOR FUEL TAX
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this ordinance, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
A. Bulk User means any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage
facilities located within the City of Mt. Vernon, which facilities are owned, leased or
controlled by said person, for subsequent dispensing into the supply tanks of internal
combustion engines operated by said person.
B. Gasohol means a fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which is
comprised chiefly of gasoline and ethyl alcohols in variable quantities.
C. Gasoline means a volatile, highly flammable or combustible, liquid mixture of
hydrocarbons produced by the fractional distillation of petroleum and used chiefly as a
fuel in internal combustion engines, but shall not include mixtures commonly known as
diesel fuel, kerosene and aviation fuel, or mixtures used in the heating of buildings.
D. Motor fuel means gasohol and gasoline as defined in this section.
E. Person means any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution agency contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any
officers, agents, employees, or other representative, acting either for himself or for any
other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
F. Retail Gasoline Dealer means any person who engages in the business of selling
motor fuel in the City of Mt. Vernon to a purchaser for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
G. ASale@, or AResale@, ASelling@, means any transfer of ownership or possession, or
both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for valuable consideration.
SECTION 2. TAX IMPOSED.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor
fuel, or fraction thereof sold at retail within the corporate limits of the City of Mt.
Vernon, a tax at the rate of two cents ($.02) per gallon. In the event motor fuel is
dispensed in a unit of measure other than the gallon, the tax shall be imposed at the same
ratio to two cents as the unit is to the gallon. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges.
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the
retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose a tax
upon the occupations of persons engaged in the retail sale of motor fuel.
C. It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure the tax from the
purchaser at the time the dealer collects the purchase price for the motor fuel and to pay
over the tax to the City of Mt. Vernon Finance Department as provided in this Article.
D. A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales only when the sale is made to the
federal government, the State of Illinois, any municipality or unit of local government as
those terms are defined by Section 1 of Article VII of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, or any school district.
SECTION 3. TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the Finance Department of the City
of Mt. Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum of money equal to
the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by
a report upon forms supplied by the City, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel
sold for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the Finance
Department may require for the enforcement of this Article.
B. Every bulk user shall transmit to the Finance Department of the City of Mt.
Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum of money equal to the
amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a
report upon forms supplied by the City, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel
purchased for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the Finance
Department may require for the enforcement of this Article.
SECTION 4. RECORDS INSPECTION.
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and accurate books and records,
including but not limited to records showing all purchases, receipts, sales and losses
through any cause.
B. Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases of motor
fuel, including the dates of purchases, the gross gallons purchased on each of the dates
and the names and addresses of the gasoline dealers from which each of the purchases
were made.
C. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Article, the Finance
Department shall have the right to inspect all books, records and reports of retail gasoline
dealers and bulk users during their normal business hours.
SECTION 5. LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this Article who
has the control, supervision, or responsibility of filing returns and collecting and making
payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who fails to file such returns or to
collect and to make payment to the City shall be personally liable for such amounts,
including costs of collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as
provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
SECTION 6. DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Mt. Vernon and shall be credited to
and deposited into a restricted Transportation Account within the general corporate fund
of the City and shall be expended solely for transportation infrastructure projects within
the corporate limits of the City and within areas reasonably expected to be annexed and/or
for transportation infrastructure projects improving or constructing roads and highways
which directly serve and benefit the City of Mt. Vernon and its residents as determined by
the City Council.
SECTION 7. PENALTY, INTEREST, AND COSTS OF COLLECTION.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00). Each day during which the violation continues shall be recorded as a separate
punishable offense.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of two percent (2%) per
month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
C. Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to
enforce the payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon in any court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any delinquent tax, interest, and
penalties and also the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred
by the City in enforcing any provision of this Article.
SECTION 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on July 1, 1999 and shall
remain effective until June 30, 2003 at which time said ordinance and the tax imposed
thereby shall expire.
This Ordinance and tax imposed herein shall be effective on July 1, 1999.
Notwithstanding any other language within this Article the tax imposed herein shall be
abated effective May 1, 2000 until such date that the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon shall pass an ordinance rescinding the abatement of the tax as imposed within
Article 24.
ARTICLE 24 A: MOTOR FUEL TAX - DIESEL
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Article 24 A, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
A. Bulk User means any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage
facilities located within the City of Mt. Vernon, which facilities are owned, leased or
controlled by said person, for subsequent dispensing into the supply tanks of internal
combustion engines operated by said person.
B. Diesel fuels means any petroleum diesel, bio diesel, or any liquid suitable for fuel
in a diesel - powered motor vehicle or a diesel-powered train; said term excludes
gasoline, gasohol, kerosene, aviation gasoline, or mixtures used in the heating of
buildings.
C. Motor fuel means diesel fuels as defined in this Section.
D. Person means any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution agency contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any
officers, agents, employees, or other representative, acting either for himself or for any
other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
E. Retail Motor Fuel Dealer means any person who engages in the business of selling
motor fuel in the City of Mt. Vernon to a purchaser for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
F. ASale@, or AResale@, ASelling@, means any transfer of ownership or possession, or
both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for valuable consideration.
SECTION 2. TAX IMPOSED.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor
fuel, or fraction thereof sold at retail within the corporate limits of the City of Mt.
Vernon, a tax at the rate of two cents ($.02) per gallon. In the event motor fuel is
dispensed in a unit of measure other than the gallon, the tax shall be imposed at the same
ratio to two cents as the unit is to the gallon. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges.
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the
retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose a tax
upon the occupations of persons engaged in the retail sale of motor fuel.
C. It shall be the duty of every retail motor fuel dealer to secure the tax from the
purchaser at the time the dealer collects the purchase price for the motor fuel and to pay
over the tax to the City of Mt. Vernon Finance Department as provided in this Article.
D. A retail motor fuel dealer may make tax free sales only when the sale is made to
the federal government, the State of Illinois, any municipality or unit of local government
as those terms are defined by Section 1 of Article VII of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, or any school district.
SECTION 3. TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
A. Every retail motor fuel dealer shall transmit to the Finance Department of the City
of Mt. Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum of money equal to
the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by
a report upon forms supplied by the City, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel
sold for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the Finance
Department may require for the enforcement of this Article.
B. Every bulk user shall transmit to the Finance Department of the City of Mt.
Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum of money equal to the
amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a
report upon forms supplied by the City, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel
purchased for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the Finance
Department may require for the enforcement of this Article.
SECTION 4. RECORDS INSPECTION.
A. Every retail motor fuel dealer shall keep complete and accurate books and records,
including but not limited to records showing all purchases, receipts, sales and losses
through any cause.
B. Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases of motor
fuel, including the dates of purchases, the gross gallons purchased on each of the dates
and the names and addresses of the motor fuel dealers from which each of the purchases
were made.
C. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Article, the Finance
Department shall have the right to inspect all books, records and reports of retail motor
fuel dealers and bulk users during their normal business hours.
SECTION 5. LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this Article who
has the control, supervision, or responsibility of filing returns or collecting and making
payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who fails to file such returns or to
collect and to make payment to the City shall be personally liable for such amounts,
including costs of collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as
provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
SECTION 6. DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article, including
penalties, interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into the Treasury of the City
and shall be credited to and deposited into the General Corporate Fund of the City; all
proceeds shall be expended solely for capital construction projects or for capital
equipment purchases of the City.
SECTION 7. PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00). Each day during which the violation continues shall be recorded as a separate
punishable offense.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of two percent (2%) per
month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
C. Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to
enforce the payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon in any court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any delinquent tax, interest, and
penalties and also the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred
by the City in enforcing any provision of this Article.
SECTION 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on September 1, 2008.
ARTICLE 25
REGULATION OF THE PLANNING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL
OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS
SECTION 1: DEFINITIONS
PARK TREES: APark Trees@ are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other
woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the City, or to
which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: AStreet Trees@ are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other
woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or
ways within the City.
TREE BOARD: ATree Board@ shall be the Board established by Article 2, Section 2.14 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 2: TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED
The following list constitutes the official tree species for Mt. Vernon, Illinois. No species
other than those included in this list may be planted as Street or Park Trees without written
permission of the City Tree Board. Only desirable trees of good appearance, beauty, and
adaptability that are generally free from injurious insects, diseases, or other limitations may be
planted. The overall objective of proper tree selection is to select the right tree for the right
location in order to benefit from trees without being subject to future maintenance liability or
hazards.
SMALL TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
Acer ginnala Amur Maple (tree form)
Acer griseum Paperbark Maple
Acer Palmatum Japanese Maple
Acer Pennsylvanicum Striped Maple
Amalanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry (tree form)
Amalanchier grandiflora Apple Serviceberry (tree form)
Amalanchier Laevis Allegany Serviceberry (tree form)
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura Tree
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood
Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood
Cornus kousa Japanese Dogwood
Crataegus sp. Hawthorn (Thornless)
Euonymus sp. Wahoos
Halesia carolina Carolina Silverbell
Koelrevteria paniculata Goldenrain Tree
Malus sp. Flowering Crab
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac
Small Trees are appropriate in street locations where due to space limitations larger trees
cannot be properly utilized without creating space conflicts with existing trees. Height limitations
imposed by overhead utilities also necessitate the use of appropriate Small Trees in order to
avoid line conflicts and the necessity of excessive utility trimming that results in disfigured trees.
On the whole, Small Trees tend to be more ornamental than their larger counterparts and can
create an added aesthetic dimension to the streetscape.
MEDIUM TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
Alnus glutinosa Black Alder
Betula nigra River Birch
Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Cladrastic lutea Yellowwood
Eucommia ulmoides Hardy Rubber Tree
Juniperus virginiana Juniper-Eastern Red Cedar
Magnolia kobus Kobus Magnolia
Phellodendron amurense Amur Cork Tree
Picea pungens Blue Spruce
Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear
Sassafras albidum Sassafras
Sophora japonica Pagoda tree
Zelkova serrata Zelkova Tree
Medium-sized trees are generally better suited for planting as Street Trees rather than
their larger counterparts.
LARGE TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Alnus incana Tag Alder
Cary illinoensis Wild Pecan
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Celtis laevigata Sugar Hackberry
Fagus grandifolia American Beech
Fagus sylvatica European Beech
Fraxinus americana White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male)
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffee (male)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Magnolia acuminata Cucumber Tree
Nyssa sylvatica Blackgum
Picea abies Norway Spruce
Picea engelmanii Engleman Spruce
Pinus echinata Shortleaf Pine
Pinus strobus White Pine
Prunus serotina Black Cherry
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak
Quercus alba White Oak
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinquapin Oak
Quercus pagodafolia Cherrybark Oak
Quercus phellos Willow Oak
Quercus robus English Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak
Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
Tilia americana Basswood
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden
Tilia euchlora Crimean Linden
Tilia heterophylla Beetree Linden
Tilia platyphyllos Bigleaf Linden
Tilia petiolaris Pendent Silver Linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden
Large Trees require more living space, and for this reason it is recommended they be
planted on the private side of the sidewalks whenever possible.
SECTION 3: UNSUITABLE TREES
The following is a listing of the trees more or less common to our area not suitable as
Street or Park Trees. Their lack of suitability is based on the undesirable growth habits, fruiting
habits, form, susceptibility to serious diseases, propensity to storm damage, and a host of other
limitations too numerous to mention. The limitations listed for each tree or species group are not
all inclusive, and list only the more serious problems encountered locally.
Any tree listed as unsuitable presently growing within City parks as a result of previous
unrestricted and natural plantings constitutes a maintenance expense to the City; and, therefore,
upon removal, shall be replaced with the appropriate, approved Small, Medium, or Large Tree.
UNSUITABLE TREES
Scientific Name Common Name Problem or Limitation
Albiers sp. Fir Form-visibility hazard
Acer negundo Boxelder Weak wooded
Acer platenoides Norway Maple Local problem
Acer saccharinum Silver/Soft Maple Subject to rot
Aesculus sp. Horsechestnut Foliar diseases
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven Weak wooded, aggressive
Albizzia sp. Mimosa Not hardy
Betula sp. (non-native) Birch Environmental stress, borers
Catalpa Catalpa Littering fruit
Diospiros Persimmon Littering fruit
Elaeagnus spp. Russian and Aggressive, littering fruit
Autumn Olive
Gleditsia sp. Honey Locust Serious disease
Juglans sp. Walnut Littering fruit
Mulus sp. Common Apple Littering fruit
Morus sp. Mulberry Littering fruit
Paulownia tomentosa Royal Paulownia Aggressive, thin skinned
Pines nigra Austrian Pine Storm damage
Pinues resinosa Red Pine Storm damage
inus sylvestris Scotch Pine Storm damage
Pinus taeda Loblolly Storm damage
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore (American) Disease
Populus sp. Poplar Weak wooded
Pyrus sp. Common Pear Littering fruit
Robinia sp. Black Locust Shallow rooted
Salix sp. Willow Weak wooded
Thulja sp. Arbor-vitae Form-visibility hazard
Ulmus sp. Elm Disease
SECTION 4: SPACING
The spacing of trees will be in accordance with three species size classes listed in Section
2 of this Ordinance, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: Small
Trees - 30 feet; Medium Trees - 40 feet; and Large Trees - 50 feet; except in special plantings
designed and/or recommended by a landscape architect and approved by the City Tree Board.
Any person desiring to make a special planting shall submit such request in writing to the Tree
Board and shall provide such information and attend such meetings as may be required by the
Tree Board.
SECTION 5: DISTANCE FROM CURB OR SIDEWALKS
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in
accordance with the three species size classes listed in Section 2 of this Ordinance, and no trees
may be planted closer to any curb or curbline and sidewalk than the following: Small Trees - 2
feet; Medium Trees - 3 feet; and Large Trees - 4 feet.
SECTION 6: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS
No tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point
of the nearest intersecting curb or curblines. No tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any
fireplug.
SECTION 7: UTILITIES
No trees other than those species listed as Small Trees in Section 2 of this Ordinance may
be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility pole or over or within 5 lateral
feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. No tree may be
planted within 10 lateral feet of any utility pole.
SECTION 8: PUBLIC TREE CARE
The City has the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs
within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
SECTION 9: TREE TOPPING
No person shall top any Street, Park, or other tree on public property or within the public
right-of-way. ATopping@ is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or trees creating a hazard under utility wires or other
obstructions, shall be exempted from this prohibition.
SECTION 10: PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall
prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or
obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet
(8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owner shall remove all dead, diseased, or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it
interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with
visibility of any traffic control device.
SECTION 11: DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY
The City shall have the right to cause removal of any dead or diseased tree on private
property within the City, when such tree constitutes a hazard to life and property, or harbors
insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the City, or otherwise
creates a nuisance. The City Tree Board or designated City Department will notify in writing the
owner of such tree(s). Removal shall be done by said owner at their expense within sixty days
after the date of service of the notice. In the event of failure of the owner to comply with such
provisions, the City shall have the authority to remove such tree(s) and place a lien on the
owner's property to recover all costs incurred, including a reasonable attorney's fee; which lien
may be foreclosed in the same manner as other City liens. The owner of the property shall also be
personally liable for all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees.
SECTION 12: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Tree Board,
or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning,
spraying, or removing of any Street Tree, Park Tree, or trees on private grounds, as authorized by
this Ordinance.
SECTION 13: ARBORIST, LICENSE AND BOND
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of
pruning, treating, or removing Street or Park Trees within the City without first applying for and
procuring a license. The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance; provided, however, that
no license shall be required of any public service company or City employee doing such work in
the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant
shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of
$50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 for property damage indemnifying the City or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
SECTION 14: REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER
The City Manager shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the
City Tree Board. Any person may appeal any ruling of the City Tree Board to the City Manager,
who may hear the matter and make a final decision.
SECTION 15: VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or who fails to comply with
any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, upon being found guilty of
violation,' shall be subject to a fine not to exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each
separate offense; each day during which any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
occur or continue shall be a separate offense.
SECTION 16: SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is
held invalid by any court, other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provisions or applications shall not be affected, and to this end the
provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
ARTICLE 26
ORDINANCE NO. 2008 - 27
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Rate Change
Whereas, the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act created a simplified
municipal telecommunications tax and repealed the municipal tax on transmitting messages
under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the municipal telecommunications tax under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17, the
optional infrastructure maintenance fee under 35 ILCS 635/15, and the municipal infrastructure
maintenance fee under 35 ILCS 635/20 effective January 1, 2003; and
Whereas, the Illinois Department of Revenue was required under Sections 5-25 and 5-30
of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act to publish a list and calculate a rate for
the imposition of a simplified municipal telecommunications tax for each municipality that had
in place one or more of the following: a municipal tax on transmitting messages under 65 ILCS
5/8-11-2, a municipal telecommunications tax under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17, or a municipal
infrastructure maintenance fee under 35 ILCS 635/20 as of July 1, 2002; and
Whereas, the list published by the Illinois Department of Revenue listed the City of Mt.
Vernon and calculated a rate for the simplified municipal telecommunications tax of 1 % to be
collected on gross charges by telecommunications retailers beginning January 1, 2003;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois that:
Section 1. The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under
the authority of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-1 et
seq.) upon the act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality
intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person is hereby changed to 2 % of the gross
charges for such telecommunications purchased at retail.
Section 2. The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 3. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law, provided, however, that Section 1
of this Ordinance shall take effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on
and after the first day of January 2009. The City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy
of this Ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before September 20, 2008.
Section 4. All ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois this 27th day of July,
2008.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois this 27th day of July ,
2008.
APPROVED:
Mary Jane Chesley, Mayor
ATTEST: Jackie Sharp - CMC, City Clerk
PUBLISHED in pamphlet form this 5th day of August, 2008.
Jackie Sharp -CMC, City Clerk
CERTIFICATION
I, Jackie Sharp, City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, do hereby certify that
Ordinance 2008-27 ASimplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Rate Change@ above set
forth was adopted by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois at its regular meeting on
July 21, 2008.
Jackie Sharp, CMC
ORDINANCE 2010 -12
AN ORDINANCE DEDICATING AND RESTRICTING THE
EXPENDITURE OF REVENUE
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois previously enacted
Article 31 imposing a Food and Beverage Tax, enacted Article 24 A imposing a Motor Fuel Tax
on diesel, enacted Ordinance 2009-14 and Ordinance 2009-30, enacting certain increases in
Water and Sewer Rates, and enacted Ordinance 2008-27 increasing the rate of the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax imposed under the authority of the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act by 1%; and
WHEREAS, the City Council now desires to formally dedicate and restrict the revenue
generated by the Food and Beverage Tax imposed by Article 31, the revenue generated by the
Motor Fuel Tax imposed by Article 24A, the revenue generated from rate increases enacted by
Ordinance 2009-14 and Ordinance 2009-30, and the revenue generated by the 1% increase in the
rate of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax imposed by Ordinance 2008-27;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois as follows:
Section 1: That Article 31 of the Revised Code of Ordinances be and the same is
hereby amended by revising Section 31.8 to read as follows:
Section 31.8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article, including
penalties, interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into the Treasury of the
City and shall be credited to and deposited into the General Corporate Fund of the
City; all proceeds shall be expended solely for capital construction projects or for
capital equipment purchases of the City.
Section 2: That Article 24A of the Revised Code of Ordinances be and the same
is hereby amended by revising Section 6 to read as follows:
Section 6: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article, including
penalties, interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into the Treasury of the
City and shall be credited to and deposited into the General Corporate Fund of the
City; all proceeds shall be expended solely for capital construction projects or for
capital equipment purchases of the City.
Section 3: That Article 16 of the Revised Code of Ordinances be and the same is
hereby amended by adding the following paragraph to each Section 16.6 (i) and Section 16.7
(m):
The proceeds from 3% of the rate increase effective on May 1, 2009 enacted by
Ordinance 2009-14 and all proceeds from each increase effective November 1 of
2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 enacted by Ordinance 2009-30 shall be expended solely
for capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases for the Public
Utility Department.
Section 4: That all revenue received by the City of Mt. Vernon from the 1%
increase in the rate of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act imposed by
Ordinance 2008-27 shall be expended solely for capital construction projects or capital
equipment purchases of the City.
That Article 26 of the Revised Code of Ordinances imposing the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax enacted under the authority of the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act shall be amended by setting forth within Article 26 this Ordinance
in its entirety (provided that this Ordinance shall not be an Ordinance amending or superceding
Ordinance 2008-27, but only an Ordinance restricting and dedicating the revenues arising
therefrom).
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the City Manager and Finance Director shall
implement such procedures and accounting practices to ensure that the revenues subject of this
Ordinance are expended as restricted and dedicated herein.
This Ordinance constitutes a declaration of how the above described revenues have been
expended and will be expended and does not constitute a change in the manner in which said
revenues have been previously expended.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval as
provided by law.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois this 5th day of
April, 2010.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois this 5th day of April,
2010.
APPROVED:
Mary Jane Chesley
Mayor
ATTEST:
JackieSharp
City Clerk
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
(See above Ordinance 2008-27)
SECTION 26.1 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a) AGross Charges@ means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the
act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the City, and for all
services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. AGross charges@ for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the City, charges
for the channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and charges for that portion
of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the City. However, Agross charges@ shall not
include:
(1) any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: (i) the
fee imposed by this Section, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under Section
9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (v)
911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
(2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village [City];
(3) charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change
its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators,
computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented
by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately
identified from other charges;
(5) charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the Public
Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the City;
(6) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in
connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory
required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
(7) “Bad Debt@ means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the
debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
(9) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the
City.
(b) APublic Right-of-Way@ means any municipal street, alley, water, or public right--
of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the
City has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent
with telecommunications facilities. APublic Right-of-Way@ shall not include any real or personal
City property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include City
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
public right-of-way.
(c) ARetailer maintaining a place of business in this State@, or any like term, means
and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or
subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
(d) ASale of telecommunications at retail@ means the transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to
another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
(e) AService address@ means the location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are
received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging
systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, Aservice address@ shall mean the
location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
(f) ATelecommunications@ includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
Atelecommunications@ shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined.
ATelecommunications@ shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. ATelecommunications@ shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the
end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used
as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.
ATelecommunications@ shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable
system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an
open video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or
hereafter amended.
(g) ATelecommunications provider@ means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and
(2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs; owns, operates or controls
equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
(h) ATelecommunications retailer@ or Aretailer@ or Acarrier@ means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
Section. The City may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the
satisfaction of the City, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a
retailer maintaining a place of business within the City.
(i) AWireless telecommunications@ includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. '332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all
commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
SECTION 26.2 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
(a) Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Article shall register with
the City within 30 days after the effective date of this Article or becoming a telecommunications
provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the City, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to Section 26.4(c) of this Article shall
be deemed to have registered in accordance with this Section.
(b) Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City pursuant to
Section 26.2 (a) has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return
as required by Section 26.4(c), as the case may be, to the City within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the
registration form or most recent return on file with the City.
SECTION 26.3 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEE.
(a) A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of all gross charges charged by the
telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the City for telecommunications
originating or received in the City.
(b) Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this
Article, the City infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or
compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the City by telecommunications
retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Article does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise
authorized by law.
(c) The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this
Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in Section 26.4 of this Article.
SECTION 26.4 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION
OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEES.
(a) A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an
additional charge in an amount equal to the City, infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to
that customer's service address.
(b) Unless otherwise approved by the City Manager the infrastructure maintenance
fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the City not later than the last day of
the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however,
that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the City
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in
accounting for and remitting the fee. If the telecommunications retailer is otherwise required to
file a monthly return and if the telecommunications retailer's average monthly tax liability to the
City does not exceed $10.00, the telecommunications retailer may file his returns on a quarter
annual basis, with the return for January, February and March of a given year being due by April
30 of such year; with the return for April, May and June of a given year being due by July 31 of
such year; with the return for July, August and September of a given year being due by October
31 of such year; and with the return for October, November and December of a given year being
due by January 31 of the following year. Such quarter annual returns as to form and substance
shall be subject to the same requirements as monthly returns.
(c) Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be accompanied by
a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Manager, which shall contain such information as
the City Manager may reasonably require.
(d) Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this
Article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications
retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge
imposed under Section 26.4(a) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Article shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services
until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such
services.
(e) If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid
that was not due under the provisions of this Article, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this Article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Manager may request, and telecommunications
retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit
may be made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless, (1) the credit
is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the City within the applicable statutory
period of limitations, and (2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations.
(f) Amounts paid under this Article by telecommunications retailers shall not be
included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described immediately below:
(1) Agross charges@ for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
(2) Agross receipts@ for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in
Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(3) Agross charges@ for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as
prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(4) Agross revenue@ for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public
utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
(g) The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all
telecommunications retailers subject to this Article to determine whether the telecommunications
retailer has properly accounted to the City for the City infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee due to the City by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus five (5%) percent of the total amount of the
underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in an
amount not to exceed five (5%) percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the City within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice
for same.
(h) The City Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional
regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this Article, consistent with its
provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that
are registered pursuant to Section 26.2 of this Article of such regulations.
SECTION 26.5 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
Nothing in this Article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law,
including but not limited to:
(a) generally applicable taxes; and
(b) standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public
rights-of-way, including standards relating to free standing towers and other structures upon the
public rights-of-way, as provided; and
(c) any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or
standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public
rights-of-way; and
(d) compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures
not located on, over, or within the right-of-way.
SECTION 26.6 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES. Any franchise, license, or
similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the City entered into before the effective
date of this Article regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and for
their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
SECTION 26.7 PENALTIES. Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the general penalty provisions of the City Municipal Code.
SECTION 26.8 ENFORCEMENT. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Article.
SECTION 26.9 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
SECTION 26.10 CONFLICT. This Article supersedes all Articles or parts of Articles adopted
prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
ARTICLE 27
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED
AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE
SECTION ONE: TITLE. This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as,
the ALocally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance.@
SECTION TWO: SCOPE. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the
City's procedures in connection with all of the City's locally imposed and administered
taxes.
SECTION THREE: DEFINITIONS. Certain words or terms herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to them as follows:
AAct@ means the ALocal Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.@
ACorporate Authorities@ means the City's Mayor and City Council.
ALocally imposed and administered tax@ or Atax@ means each tax imposed by the
City that is collected or administered by the City not an agency or department of the State.
It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or
fees collected by the City other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
ALocal tax administrator,@ the City's Finance Director, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including
staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator
to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to implement the terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance.
The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with
this ordinance and the Act.
ACity@ means the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
ANotice@ means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the City's locally imposed and administered
taxes.
ATax Ordinance@ means each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
ATaxpayer@ means any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the City.
SECTION FOUR: NOTICES. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is
required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
(1) First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons
concerned at the persons' last known address, or
(2) Personal service or delivery.
SECTION FIVE: LATE PAYMENT. Any notice, payment, remittance or other
filing required to be made to the City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered
late unless it is (a) physically received by the City on or before the due date, or (b)
received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City, with adequate postage
prepaid.
SECTION SIX: PAYMENT. Any payment or remittance received for a tax
period shall be applied in the following order: (1) first to the tax due for the applicable
period; (2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and (3) third to the penalty
for the applicable period.
SECTION SEVEN: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
(a) The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered
tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.
However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer
lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if
the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(b) The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or
less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The City
shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or
penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the City.
(c) The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
(A) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim
for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
(i) the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
(ii) the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
(iii) the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
(iv) the taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
(v) a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties
overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and
only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies
to the City.
(B) Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(i) grant the claim; or
(ii) deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
(C) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim
for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the
rate of four percent (4%) per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the
grant of a credit.
SECTION EIGHT: AUDIT PROCEDURE. Any request for proposed audit
pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this
ordinance.
(a) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
(i) the tax;
(ii) the time period of the audit; and
(iii) a brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.
(b) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date
and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another
date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally
designated audit and during normal business hours.
(c) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted.
The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days
from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator
agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the
audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30)
days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator.
(d) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting
the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability,
exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be
subject to and available for inspection by the City.
(e) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its
books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer, which term includes the tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the
local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
(f) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed
and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment
shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the City's determination of the
amount of overpayment.
(g) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity
imposing such tax.
SECTION NINE: APPEAL.
(a) The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the
local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial,
or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following
information:
(i) the reason for the assessment;
(ii) the amount of the tax liability proposed;
(iii) the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
(iv) the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
(b) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a
determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written
protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a
hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
(c) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the
taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of
the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
(d) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five
(45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due
and owing without further notice.
(e) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment
of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the
local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the
forty-five day period.
SECTION TEN: HEARING.
(a) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and
petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a
hearing regarding any appeal.
(b) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be
grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(c) At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment.
The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
d) At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a
written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer
or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
SECTION ELEVEN: INTEREST AND PENALTIES. In the event a determination
has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent,
the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
(a) Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be twelve percent (12.0 %)
per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
(b) Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time
and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five percent
(5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a
late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is
filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the
City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or
payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
SECTION TWELVE: ABATEMENT. The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file
penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
SECTION THIRTEEN: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS. The City may enter
into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the
controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment
contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon
written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days
delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If
the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to
demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
SECTION FOURTEEN: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS. The City, through the
local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and
inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45)
days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or
provide any tax still due and owing.
(a) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
maximum years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was
due, whichever occurs later:
(b) If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for which a
notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the tax paid was less
than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the
end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
(c) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by
the taxpayer.
SECTION FIFTEEN: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE. For any locally imposed
and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit,
investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due,
along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the
application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A
taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any
additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed.
However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest
must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure
application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional
amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this Section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local
tax administrator, whichever is longer.
SECTION SIXTEEN: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES. Any locally
administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing
requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication
requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon
request at the City Clerk's office.
SECTION SEVENTEEN: The local tax administrator shall establish an internal
review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in
full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator
shall:
timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
SECTION EIGHTEEN: APPLICATION. This ordinance shall be liberally
construed and administered to supplement all of the City's tax ordinances. To the extent
that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this
ordinance shall be controlling.
SECTION NINETEEN: SEVERABILITY. If any section, paragraph or provision
of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity
or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the
remaining provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION TWENTY: EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force
and effect on January 1, 2001 after passage, approval and publication as required by law.
ARTICLE 28
MOTEL AND HOTEL TAXES
PART I. MOTEL/HOTEL TAX.
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
The terms Ahotel@ (which includes a motel), Aoperator@, Aoccupancy, Aroom@ or rooms@,
Apermanent resident@, Arent@ or Arental@, Adepartment@, and Aperson@ are hereby defined and shall
have the meanings provided in 35 ILCS 145/2 as that section may be in force from time to time.
The term ACity@ shall mean and refer to the City of Mt. Vernon, an Illinois municipal
corporation.
The term ADepartment@ shall mean and refer to the City Finance Department of the City
of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
The term Areturn@ shall mean any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this
ordinance.
SECTION 2. TAX. There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of five percent (5%) of the
gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting a hotel or motel room within the City of
Mt. Vernon for each 24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is
made: provided, however, that a tax shall not be levied or imposed upon any person who shall be
a permanent resident. A permanent resident is hereby defined to be a person who rents a hotel or
motel room in the same establishment for more than 30 consecutive days or to a person who
works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
Persons subject to the tax hereby imposed may reimburse themselves for their tax liability
for such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination and in single amount with the state tax imposed under AThe Hotel Operators'
Occupation Tax Act@ as provided in 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
The tax herein levied and imposed shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges. It shall be the duty of the operator to pay the amount of the tax to the Department under
procedures prescribed by the Department or as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
SECTION 3. RECORDS TO BE KEPT. Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and of all rent paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such
form as may be required by regulation prescribed by the Department or as otherwise provided in
this ordinance. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination for any proper
purpose at any reasonable time upon demand by the Department or a duly authorized agent or
employee of the City and shall be preserved for a period of three years unless the Department
shall prescribe a shorter period of time. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the Department or the duly authorized deputy or representative of the Department
in the discharge of the duties of the Department.
SECTION 4. RETURNS. Every operator shall file monthly with the Department a
return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon on forms prescribed by the
Department and consistent with returns required under The Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act
found in 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq on or before the 15th day of the calendar month succeeding the end
of the month filing period. A separate return shall be filed for each place of business within the
City regardless of ownership.
The first taxing period for the purpose of this ordinance shall commence on August 1,
2005, and the tax return and payment for such period shall be due on or before September 15,
2005. Thereafter reporting periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance. At the time of filing such tax returns, the operator shall pay the full amount of
all tax due hereunder.
If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one percent per
30-day period or portion thereof from the date of delinquency shall be added and collected.
SECTION 5. OFFICER LIABILITY. Any officer or employee of any corporation
which is an operation subject to the provisions of this Article who has control, supervision or
responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and/or transmitting collected tax
proceeds of the tax herein imposed by this Article and who fails to collect such tax or to file such
return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to the City shall be personally liable for any
such amounts required to be collected or collected, including penalties thereon and all costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the
dissolution of the corporation.
SECTION 6. COLLECTION. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax due
hereunder or penalty, the Department shall bring or cause to be brought in the name of the City
an action to enforce payment of the tax in any court of competent jurisdiction, together with the
costs of such collection.
SECTION 7. PROCEEDS OF TAXES. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of
the tax hereunder, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Mt. Vernon
and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate funds of the City.
SECTION 8. CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this Ordinance for any person to establish, operate or maintain or permit to be
established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him a hotel or
motel within the City without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration from the Department or
without complying with all provisions of this Article. Such registration shall be issued by the
Department and shall be subject to revocation by the Department. If the Department shall find
that any person has failed to pay the tax imposed by this Article or any fines and/or penalties
assessed or costs assessed for the nonpayment or late payment of such tax, the Department may
suspend or revoke the Certificate of Registration held by such evader. The owner, manager or
operator of the hotel or motel shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing to be held by the
Finance Director not less than 5-days after mailing of a notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the address appearing upon the Certificate of Registration. Any person who shall
operate without a Certificate of Registration or who shall continue to operate after revocation of
same shall be subject to a preliminary or permanent injunction issued by the Circuit Court of
Jefferson County, Illinois upon petition by the City to discontinue conducting business, and shall
be subject to the other penalties provided herein.
SECTION 9. VIOLATION. If any person shall violate the provisions of this ordinance
in addition to any and all other penalties provided herein shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed upon each day in which such violation occurs or continues.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the taxes provided herein, an action to enforce
payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any delinquent tax, interest and penalties and also
the reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other costs incurred by the City in enforcing any
provision of this Article.
PART II. MUNICIPAL SERVICE TAX.
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases when used in
this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) AHotel@ means any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns,
motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
(2) AOperator@ means any person owning or operating a hotel.
(3) AOccupancy@ means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to
the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
(4) ARoom@ or Arooms@ means any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations. One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be
considered as a single hotel or motel room; the number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite
shall be computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
(5) APermanent resident@ means any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel for at least
30 consecutive days.
(6) ADepartment@ means the Department of Finance of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(7) APerson@ means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
SECTION 2. TAX. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting a hotel or motel room within the City of Mt. Vernon a tax of $2.00 per room for each
24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is made, provided that the
tax shall not be levied and imposed on any person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than
30 consecutive days or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel; the tax must
be charged for the initial 30 consecutive days, unless a signed rental contract is on file with the
tax collector; upon the 31st consecutive day of rental, the renter is due a refund or credit from
the tax collector for the 30 consecutive days of tax paid. Persons engaged in the business of
renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel only to permanent residents are exempt from the
provision of Part II of this Article.
The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of the tax imposed herein shall be borne
by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying any such hotel or motel room, such person
being hereinafter referred to as Arenter@. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of every hotel
or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the City and to secure such tax from the renter of
the hotel or motel room and pay over to the City of Mt. Vernon such tax under procedures
prescribed by the Department of Finance of the City or as otherwise provided in this article.
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this Article shall secure such tax from the
renter at the time he collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice
receipt or other statement of memorandum, if the rent is given to the renter at the time of
payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this Article shall be stated separately on such
documents.
SECTION 3. CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this Ordinance for any person to establish, operate or maintain or permit to be
established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him a hotel or
motel within the City without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration from the Department or
without complying with all provisions of this Article. Such registration shall be issued by the
Department and shall be subject to revocation by the Department. If the Department shall find
that any person has failed to pay the tax imposed by this Article or any fines and/or penalties
assessed or costs assessed for the nonpayment or late payment of such tax, the Department may
suspend or revoke the Certificate of Registration held by such evader. The owner, manager or
operator of the hotel or motel shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing to be held by the
Finance Director not less than 5-days after mailing of a notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the address appearing on the Certificate of Registration. Any person who shall operate
without a Certificate of Registration or who shall continue to operate after revocation of same
shall be subject to a preliminary or permanent injunction issued by the Circuit Court of Jefferson
County, Illinois upon petition by the City to discontinue conducting business, and shall be subject
to the other penalties provided herein.
SECTION 4. BOOKS AND RECORDS. Every operator shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of every occupancy and of all rent paid and which shall include a
daily sheet showing (1) the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour period,
including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such shall occur and (2) the actual hotel
or motel tax receipts collected for the date in question. Such records shall be available for
inspection and examination for any proper purpose at any reasonable time upon demand by the
Department or a duly authorized agent or employee of the City and shall be preserved for a
period of 3-years unless the Department shall prescribe a shorter period of time. It shall be
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Department or the duly
authorized representative of the Department or of the City in the discharge of his/her duties and
the performance of this Article. Every hotel or motel operator shall keep separate books or
records of his business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under this
Article separately from transactions which are not taxable hereunder.
SECTION 5. TAX RETURNS; FILING. Every operator shall file monthly with the
Department a return of occupancy showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during
each calendar month and of the municipal service motel/hotel tax payable thereon on forms
prescribed by the Department. The return shall be due on or before the 15th day of the calendar
month succeeding the end of the month filing period. A separate return shall be filed for each
place of business within the City regardless of ownership. The first taxing period for the purpose
of this Ordinance shall commence on July 1, 2003, and the tax return and payment for such
period shall be due on or before August 15, 2003. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax payments
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. At the time of filing such tax
returns, the operator shall pay the full amounts of all tax due hereunder.
If for any reason any tax is paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one percent (1%) per
30-day period or portion thereof from the date of delinquency shall be added and collected.
SECTION 6. OFFICER LIABILITY. Any officer or employee of any corporation
which is an operation subject to the provisions of this Article who has control, supervision or
responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and/or transmitting collected tax proceeds
of the tax herein imposed by this Article and who fails to collect such tax or to file such return or
to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to the City shall be personally liable for any such
amounts required to be collected or collected, including penalties thereon and all costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the
dissolution of the corporation.
SECTION 7. PROCEEDS OF TAX. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the
tax hereunder, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Mt. Vernon and
shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate funds of the City.
SECTION 8. FINE AND COST OF COLLECTION. Any person who violates the
provisions of this Article shall be punishable by fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than
$200.00. Each day during which a violation continues shall be recorded as a separate punishable
offense.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the taxes provided herein, an action to enforce
payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any delinquent tax, interest and penalties and also
the reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other costs incurred by the City in enforcing any
provision of this Article.
ARTICLE 29
OFFICIALS= AND EMPLOYEES= ETHICS ACT
Section 1. Definitions.
Section 1-1. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be given
these definitions:
"Campaign for elective office" means any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any
federal, State, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection,
nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include
activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person's official duties.
"Candidate" means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in
nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as
defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).
"Collective bargaining" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3
of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
"Compensated time" means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this Ordinance, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time
off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or
employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time
when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time
when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
"Compensatory time off" means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum
work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
"Contribution" has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
"Employee" means a person employed by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois,
whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
"Employer" means the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
"Gift" means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to,
cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to
government employment or the official position of an officer or employee.
"Leave of absence" means any period during which an employee does not receive
(i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
"Officer" means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his
or her official capacity.
"Political activity" means any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities
(i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative
action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person's official duties.
"Political organization" means a party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of
organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under Section 9-3 of the
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing
with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.
"Prohibited political activity" means:
(1) Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political
rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
(2) Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling,
distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political
meeting, or other political event.
(3) Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report
regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
(4) Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
(5) Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an
election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective
office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
(6) Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
(7) Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political
organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters
to the polls.
(8) Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any
petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
(9) Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that
capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
(10) Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
(11) Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature,
campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.
(12) Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
(13) Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
(14) Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
(15) Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
"Prohibited source" means any person or entity who:
(1) is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the
officer or another employee directing that employee;
(2) does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an
employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
(3) conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the
officer or another employee directing that employee; or
(4) has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
Section 5. Prohibited Political Activities.
Section 5-1. Prohibited political activities. (a) No officer or employee shall
intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as
defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of
the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois in connection with any prohibited political activity.
(b) At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer
or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or
employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time
off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
(c) No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any
prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded
additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment,
bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer
or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his
or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
(d) Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or
employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken
by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(e) No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles
of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part
by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of
Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived
of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political
committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club.
Section 10. Gift Ban
Section 10-1. Gift ban. Except as permitted by this Article, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift
from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or
ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
Section.
Section 10-2. Exceptions. Section 10-1 is not applicable to the following:
(1) Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions
as for the general public.
(2) Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate
family member, pays the fair market value.
(3) Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii)
activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or
candidate.
(4) Educational materials and missions.
(5) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
(6) A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father,
mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin,
nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother,
half-sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
(7) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless
the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided
because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or
immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining
whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including
any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual
knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time
gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or
immediate family members.
(8) Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a single
calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises
from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this
Section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which
are delivered by any means.
(9) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from
outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to
the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or
enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and
are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
(10) Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this Act,
"intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another
officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity.
(11) Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
(12) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year
having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and independent
of every other.
Section 10-3. Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this
Ordinance if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
Section 15. Ethics Advisor B Omitted.
Section 20. Ethics Commission B Omitted.
Section 25. Penalties.
Section 25-1. Penalties. (a) A person who intentionally violates any provision of
Section 5 of this Ordinance may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be
fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(b) A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 10 of this
Ordinance is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.
(c) Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance to the local enforcement authorities, the State's Attorney or
any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be
fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(d) A violation of Section 5 of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted as a criminal
offense by an attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under
and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment
of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of Section 10 of this Ordinance may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, or, if an Ethics Commission
has been created, by the Commission through the designated administrative procedure.
(Omitted).
(e) In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or
civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of Section 5 or
Section 10 of this Ordinance is subject to discipline or discharge.
ARTICLE 30
REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sec. 1. Legislative findings, declaration, and purpose.
The Mt. Vernon City Council finds cigarette smoking and other tobacco use by
minors a grave public health problem. Therefore, the purpose of this Article is to
implement a strict and enforceable system to prevent the illegal sale of cigarettes and
other tobacco products to minors.
(1) Findings:
a. Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;
b. There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco
products causes cancer, heart disease, and various other medical disorders;
c. The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
d. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have found that among
persons who have ever tried a cigarette, more than eighty (80) percent
reported having had their first cigarette before age eighteen (18); and
e. The National Institute on Drug Abuse has found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use.
(2) The enactment of this Article intends to further the health, welfare and safety of
the residents of the City of Mt. Vernon, Jefferson County, Illinois, particularly
those residents under eighteen (18) years of age.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
"Compliance check" means an inspection conducted with the intention of assessing retail
sales of tobacco products to minors and enforcing age-of-sales laws. Compliance checks are
conducted by having designated persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age attempt to
purchase tobacco products from vendors.
"License" means a license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon for the retail sale of
tobacco products.
"Licensee" means the holder of a valid license for the retail sale of tobacco products.
"Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age
.
APerson" means:
1. Any human being who, as owner of a business, delivers tobacco in any form to a
minor and accepts money in payment therefor;
2. Any human being who, as an employee for an owner of a business, delivers
tobacco in any form to a minor and accepts money for the owner in payment
therefor, thus completes a sale by said owner to said minor;
3. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or body politic having legal
rights and duties;
4. Any human being who purchases for or makes a gift to a minor of tobacco in any
form.
"Public place" means an area to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including but not limited to any right-of-way, mall or shopping center, park,
playground, and any other property owned by the City, any school district, or any park district.
"Self-service displays" means open displays of tobacco products and point-of-sale
tobacco promotional products that the public has access to without intervention of a store
employee.
"Tobacco products" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
"Vending machine" means any mechanical, electrical or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses tobacco products.
Sec. 3. License required.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with
the intention of selling at retail, of giving away or of delivering tobacco products within the City
without having first obtained a valid Tobacco Retailer's License from the City of Mt. Vernon for
each location in which tobacco products are sold. All such licenses must be renewed annually.
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by the Revised Code of
Ordinances or by the State of Illinois. The license shall state the name of the Licensee and shall
designate the premises subject of the License. The license year shall be May 1 B April 30.
The license required herein shall be issued by the City Clerk upon such application and
forms as may be required by said City Clerk, upon compliance with the provisions of this
Article. However, the City Clerk shall not issue a license to any person who shall have
committed a violation of this Article and shall have failed to pay the fine or any costs owing
under Section 21 herein in full prior to application for a license.
Sec. 4. License fee.
The fee for a one-year Tobacco Retailer's License is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
tobacco retail location. The license fee will be waived during the first licensing year and during
each subsequent year if licensee is free of any violation of this Article during the previous
licensing year.
Sec. 5. Non-transferability of license.
A Tobacco Retail License is non-transferable to another person. In addition a new
license is required for a tobacco retailer who changes location.
Sec. 6. Prohibited sales/distribution
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco
products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Sec. 7. Warning signs.
Signs informing the public of the age-of-sale restrictions shall be posted by every licensee
at or near every display of tobacco products. Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF
AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW"
The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background, and said letters must
be at least one (1) inch high.
Sec. 8. Identification required.
No licensee or other person shall sell or permit to be sold or give cigarettes or other
tobacco products to an individual appearing younger than the age of twenty-seven (27) without
requesting and examining photographic identification establishing the purchaser's age as
eighteen (18) years of age or greater. A reasonable belief that by a licensee or other person that
the person purchasing or accepting cigarettes or other tobacco products is eighteen (18) years or
older is not a defense to any action under this Article unless said licensee or other person shall
have demanded and received some form of positive identification that such person is eighteen
(18) years or older.
Sec. 9. Minimum age to purchase or accept tobacco products.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase or
accept tobacco products or to misrepresent his/her age or use any false or altered identification
with the intention of purchasing or accepting tobacco products.
Sec. 10. Minimum age to sell tobacco products.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit any person under sixteen (16) years of
age to sell tobacco products on any vendor's premises.
Sec. 11. Vending machines prohibited.
Tobacco vending machines or any other devices for the sale or distribution of tobacco
products are prohibited.
Sec. 12. Proximity to certain institutions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, offer as a gift
or deliver tobacco products within one hundred (100) feet of any school, child care
facility or other building used for educational or recreational purposes by persons under
eighteen (18) years of age.
Sec. 13. Tobacco samples and certain free distributions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person, business, or tobacco retailer to
distribute, give away, deliver tobacco products free of charge, or deliver any coupon or
rebate for tobacco products, to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground,
parking lot or other property owned by the City, any school district, any park district, or
any public library.
Sec. 14. Out-of-package sales prohibited.
It is unlawful to sell cigarettes out of the manufacturer's package with required
health warnings. It is unlawful to sell cigarettes individually or in packages of fewer than
twenty (20) cigarettes per package.
Sec. 15. Vendor-assisted sales.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell,
permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service displays
or any other means other than vendor-assisted sales.
Sec. 16. Responsibility for agents and employees.
Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any provisions of
this Article by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee
shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by
the licensee personally.
Sec. 17. Use or possession by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to use or
possess any tobacco products, except that it shall not be a violation of this section for a
minor to use or possess any tobacco product where such use or possession takes place in an
established place of worship or tribal meeting place; provided, however, where such use or
possession takes place in an established place of worship or tribal meeting place, such use or
possession shall not be a violation only where use is in the performance of a religious service or
tribal ceremony and the religious group or tribe is legally established and recognized by the State
of Illinois.
Sec. 18. Inspection.
The Chief of Police and such other persons as designated by the City Manager are
hereby authorized and empowered, to conduct annual, random, unannounced inspections
of all places wherein such tobacco products are licensed to be sold, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the laws of the state and of the City in relation to the same, are
being complied with at such place.
Sec. 19. Sales/distribution violation.
Any person who shall violate or shall cause the violation of any provision of this
Article other than the purchasing and possession sections of this Article (Section 9 and
Section 17 respectively) shall be subject to a fine in the amount of seventy five dollars
($75.00) paid to the City within 72 hours of the violation which fine shall be paid to the
Mt. Vernon Police Department. If the fine is not paid within 72 hours of the violation,
then the violation shall be subject to the penalties as provided within Article 22 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances, except that the fine shall be not less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per each violation. In addition, a Licensee shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 21 herein providing for the suspension or revocation of license.
Section 20. Purchase/possession violations.
Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years that violates the purchasing and
use or possession sections (Section 9 and 17 respectively) of this Article shall be subject
to a fine in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00), if paid to the City within 72
hours of the violation; which fine shall be paid at the Mt. Vernon Police Department. If
the fine is not paid within 72 hours of the violation, then the violation shall be subject to
the penalties as provided within Article 22 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, except
that the fine shall be not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per each violation.
Sec. 21. Suspension and revocation of license.
In addition to any fine imposed by this Article, a Tobacco Retailer=s License shall
be subject to suspension or revocation as hereinafter provided. No license shall be
suspended or revoked until after notice and an opportunity to be heard has been afforded
to the Licensee, unless the Licensee waives such right. The City Manager or his
designee is hereby authorized to initiate enforcement against any Licensee who violates
any provision of this Article, is authorized to receive complaints of violations from any
citizen or from any law enforcing officer, is authorized to conduct hearings upon any
complaint or allegation that the provisions to this Article have been violated by a
Licensee and is authorized to impose additional fines as provided herein and to suspend
or revoke the license issued under Section 3 of this Article.
In the event the hearing officer imposes a fine in addition to or in lieu of a
suspension or revocation of a license, the fine shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
the first offense during a twelve month period and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each additional violation during any twelve month period; in the event any fine is
imposed by the hearing officer and said fine is not paid within ten days from date of
imposition, then the license shall be revoked, after notice and hearing as provided herein.
No Licensee whose license has been revoked nor any premises subject of a license
which has been revoked shall be eligible to receive and hold a license for a period of 24
months after revocation of the license.
All hearings before the City Manager or his designee shall be subject to the
following procedures:
1. The licensee shall be entitled to a three (3) day written notice of the
hearing.
2. Witnesses shall be sworn, but in all other respects hearings shall be
informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
3. A complete record of all evidence, testimony, and comments before the
hearing officer shall be taken by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
4. Review of the proceedings before the hearing officer shall be limited to a
review of the official record of the proceedings. No new or additional
evidence shall be admitted or considered.
5. Initial costs and hourly fees for the certified court or shorthand reporter's
attendance at the formal hearings before the hearing officer shall be paid by
the City of Mt. Vernon; said costs and hourly fees shall be assessed against
the Licensee if a fine, suspension or revocation is issued or imposed.
6. All costs of preparing and transcribing an official record on administrative
review shall be borne by the licensee requesting a review of the official
proceedings and shall be paid prior to the preparation of the official record.
The Licensee shall pay any costs imposed herein to the City within thirty
(30) days of notification of the costs. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of
notification is a violation of this Article and is cause for revocation of the license. In
addition, such costs shall be an obligation due and owing to the City and may be
collected and enforced in any manner permitted by law. In the event a civil action is
filed in any court of competent jurisdiction, the Licensee shall pay the reasonable
attorney=s fees and court costs incurred by the City.
Sec. 22. Non-retaliation.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such
employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of this Article.
Sec. 23. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the provisions of this article which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions are declared to be
severable.
Sec. 24. Enforcement.
That the provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the City Manager,
by such other persons as designated by the City Manager and by the police department.
Enforcement in the form of compliance checks shall take place on at least
three (3) occasions of each license year.
In addition to the specific provisions for enforcement as provided herein;
each provision of the Ordinance may be enforced as an ordinance violation or as an
injunction action in the Circuit Court of Jefferson County.
Sec. 25. Severability.
That all ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with
the provisions of this Article are, to the extent of such conflict, expressly repealed.
Sec. 26. Effective date.
That this Article shall be in full force and effect beginning August 1, 2008.
ARTICLE 31
FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
SECTION 31.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or
terms shall have the meanings respectively applied to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of
one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR FACILITY: Any establishment licensed under Article 6 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity.
PREPARED FOOD:
Prepared Food means and includes any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic
liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for human internal consumption, whether
simple, compound or mixed and which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
"Prepared food" may be purchased for consumption within or upon the premises where it is sold
or it may be purchased for consumption off the premises where it is sold. "Prepared food" does
not mean or include any food which is sold in a closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container
of the manufacturer or wholesaler or which has not been prepared for immediate consumption.
PREPARED FOOD FACILITY:
Any person or establishment which sells food at retail which has been prepared for immediate
consumption, whether or not such prepared food facility use is conducted along with any other
use(s) in a common premises or business establishment.
A "prepared food facility" includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called
an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter,
fastfood outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar,
cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, movie theater, mobile
food or beverage or ice cream vehicle, hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which
sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
A "prepared food facility" does not include churches, public or private schools, boarding houses,
daycare centers, nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities, or
programs for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences
of invalids or the elderly, or other facilities of not for profit associations or not for profit
corporations.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for consideration,
whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale.
RETAILER: Any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale.
SECTION 31. 2 IMPOSITION OF TAX
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchaser for the purchase of
prepared foods and alcoholic liquor at retail at any prepared food facility or alcoholic liquor
facility within the City, at a rate of one percent (1.0%) of the purchase price of such prepared
food and alcoholic liquor. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of which shall be
borne by the purchaser thereof.
SECTION 31. 3 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility
within the City shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and account for said tax from
each purchaser at the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid.
SECTION 31. 4 BOOKS AND RECORDS
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility
within the City shall jointly and severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books,
records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for sales of prepared food and alcoholic liquor
and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for examination and
for audit by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours.
SECTION 31. 5 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX COLLECTION
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility
within the City shall jointly and severally, have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn return with
the Finance Department for each such facility and for each such licensed premises located in the
City. The return shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the City. The return
shall be filed with the City by the filing date and at the same time intervals or frequencies as the
Retailers Occupation Tax Return, Form ST-1 is due to be filed with the Illinois Department of
Revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the City of all taxes imposed by
this Article which are due and owing for the period covered by said return. The return shall also
be accompanied with a copy of the return filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue for sales
within the City of Mt. Vernon covering the same reporting period.
SECTION 31. 6 TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTION
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby but which
amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale
greater than the amount of the tax so imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same
to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred,
said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the City along with the tax properly
collected.
SECTION 31.7 LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR
EMPLOYEE
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this Article who has the
control, supervision, or responsibility of filing returns or collecting and making payment of the
amount of tax herein imposed and who fails to file such returns or to collect and to make
payment to the City shall be personally liable for such amounts, including costs of collection.
The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the dissolution
of the corporation.
SECTION 31.8 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article, including penalties,
interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into the Treasury of the City and shall be
credited to and deposited into the General Corporate Fund of the City; all proceeds shall be
expended solely for capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases of the City.
SECTION 31.9 PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each day
during which the violation continues shall be recorded as a separate punishable offense.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of two percent (2%) per month on the
amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to enforce the
payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any delinquent tax, interest, and penalties and also
the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the City in enforcing any
provision of this Article.
SECTION 31.10 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on September 1, 2008.
ARTICLE 32 - DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING
A. Purpose The Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit is intended to facilitate
outdoor dining in the downtown area to create an active streetscape, enhance
the economic and social vitality of the downtown area, and promote pedestrian
and retail activity; to allow for the use of public sidewalks for such outdoor
dining; and to expedite the approval of such facilities while ensuring that the
public’s use of the sidewalks will not be significantly impaired by such dining;
and to prevent any adverse impact to adjacent properties from such dining.
B. Permitted Areas Sidewalk Dining shall be permitted only upon a property
which is located within the Downtown Special Service Area #1 of the City,
which is zoned B-1, Primary Business District, and which has a restaurant
business being operated thereon; for purposes of Article 32 “restaurant” means
a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as
a place where food and/or beverages are prepared for consumption on-premises
and then served on-premises.
C. Alcoholic Liquor No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served, consumed, or
possessed by any person within a sidewalk dining area unless the sidewalk
dining area is part of the “licensed premises” of a Restaurant or a Restaurant
With Lounge having a “Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit” issued
under Article 6, Section 6.5, Subparagraph 15 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
D. Application/Permit It shall be unlawful to operate a Sidewalk Dining Area or
to engage in or allow sidewalk dining without first having obtained a permit
therefor.
An applicant for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit shall file an application
with the City Clerk on such forms and subject to such procedures as the City
Clerk and City Manager may establish for such purpose. The application shall
be made to the City Clerk and shall be in writing, under oath, and signed by an
authorized agent of the proposed Permittee.
The application shall state the name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant and shall include a legal description and the address of the premises
proposed to be operated as a restaurant adjacent to the sidewalk subject of the
application.
The application shall include a plan with dimensions showing the layout for the
sidewalk dining area which accurately depicts the existing sidewalk conditions,
including sidewalk width from the building face to curb, location and
dimensions of tree wells, location of lamp posts, traffic and parking signs,
signal poles, trash receptacles, benches, and other sidewalk features or
obstructions, as well as the design, location, size, and space of the sidewalk
dining area, chairs, tables, barriers, umbrellas, and other facilities to be located
within the sidewalk dining area. The application shall also provide proof of
insurance complying with the provisions of this Article 32 and shall also
include such additional information as the City Manager may determine to be
necessary to establish compliance with Article 32.
No permit shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to the City,
including but not limited to any licensing fee under any Article of the Revised
Code, or any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any tax
imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer, or garbage
services, or to any person in default on any loan agreement, or contract with
the City, or in default on any amount owed to the City.
The City Manager shall review the application to determine if the proposed
sidewalk dining area meets the requirements of this Article 32. The City
Manager may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application; upon
receipt of written approval, the City Clerk shall issue the Sidewalk Dining
Permit. If the City Manager approves the application, then the approved plan
and permit shall be posted at the restaurant premises and be clearly visible to
customers and to the public. No material changes to an approved plan may be
made without prior written approval of the City Manager upon application of
the Permittee, although no additional permit fee will be assessed for such
change.
E. Permit Fee and Term The fee for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit shall
be $25.00 per year. The fee shall be nonrefundable and shall be nonproratable.
No permit shall be assigned or transferred to any other person. The
permit year shall be May 1 – April 30. The permit shall state the name of the
Permittee and shall specifically designate the sidewalk dining area subject of
the permit.
F. Standards for Downtown Sidewalk Dining
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all restaurants providing
sidewalk dining and to all sidewalk dining areas.
1) Space and Clearance - Sidewalk dining is permitted only on sidewalks with
a minimum width of 10 feet from the property line to the curb face;
provided that if a traffic lane is adjacent to the sidewalk, sidewalk dining
will be permitted only if the sidewalk width is 15 feet or more. The area
designated for the sidewalk dining shall be considered an extension of the
restaurant; therefore the location of the sidewalk dining area must be
immediately adjacent to and have direct access to the restaurant. In the
interest of public safety, sidewalk dining areas must maintain a clear
pedestrian path of at least 4 feet at all times; on sidewalks with an
adjacent traffic lane, the clear pedestrian path must be 10 feet wide. This
clear pedestrian path must be free of any obstructions such as trees,
parking meters, and utility poles to allow adequate pedestrian passage.
Sidewalk dining areas shall not interfere with any utilities or other
facilities such as telephone poles, fire hydrants, parking meters,
mailboxes, or signs located on the sidewalk and in the public right-ofway.
Sidewalk dining shall not interfere with snow removal within the
clear pedestrian path; snow removal within the sidewalk dining area shall
be the responsibility of the Permittee.
Sidewalk dining areas may not impinge on required clear distances for
maneuvering around entrances or exits. The sidewalk dining area must be
accessible to disabled patrons and employees. When a sidewalk dining
areas is located at a street corner, vision clearance requirements shall be in
accordance with city ordinance; and in all events the vision of pedestrians
and of operators of motor vehicles shall not be obstructed. These regulations
shall also apply if a sidewalk dining area is adjacent to an alley or driveway.
2) Furniture and Other Elements - Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings, and
any other elements associated with a sidewalk dining area must be of
quality design, workmanship, and materials to ensure the safety and
convenience of patrons as well as to enhance the visual and aesthetic
character of the streetscape and adjacent neighborhood. All sidewalk dining
area elements will be reviewed as part of the sidewalk dining permit
process.
Sidewalk dining areas tables and chairs must be placed only inside the area
designated for sidewalk dining. Table size should be kept to a minimum to
avoid crowding. Appropriate density of tables and chairs will be reviewed;
and same shall be subject to reasonable and appropriate conditions and
restrictions. Permanent structures are not permitted within sidewalk dining
areas. Elements cannot be attached permanently to sidewalks or other
public rights-of-way. The Permittee is responsible for the restoration of the
sidewalk or other public property if any damage is caused by Permittee’s
use of the sidewalk for sidewalk dining.
Temporary physical barricades to separate sidewalk dining areas from
pedestrian traffic are allowed if they are constructed of finished quality
materials including wrought iron chains, rope stanchions, picket fencing,
planters, etc. Physical barriers clearly designating the sidewalk dining area
(i.e. licensed premises) are required if liquor is consumed at a sidewalk
dining area. No signs shall be placed on barricades. Paper products for the
consumption of food or beverages are not permitted.
3) Overhead Structures - Umbrellas and other temporary overhead structures are
subject to approval during the sidewalk dining area permit process. No
portion of any umbrella shall be less than seven feet above the sidewalk.
Umbrellas and overhead structures cannot interfere with street trees, must be
weather resistant, and designed to be secure during windy conditions.
Awnings, either permanent or temporary, are subject to approval during
the sidewalk dining area permit process. Awnings shall have no support
posts located within the public right-of-way, and no portion of an awning
shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk.
4) Signage - Menus are restricted to a maximum size of 9x12 inches. . If the
sidewalk dining area is not subject of a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor
Permit issued under Article 6, Section 6.5, Subparagraph 15 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances, a sign shall be posted in a visible location within the
sidewalk dining area that states: "It is unlawful to possess or consume
alcoholic beverages within the sidewalk dining area."
5) Lighting - Lighting for sidewalk dining area is subject to approval during
the sidewalk dining area permit process. Lighting must complement the
existing building and sidewalk dining area design and shall not cause a
glare to passing pedestrians or vehicles. Electrical wires are not permitted
within the sidewalk dining area. Acceptable tabletop lighting includes
candles and low-wattage battery-operated fixtures. Additional lighting may
be attached to the adjacent restaurant structure provided that written
approval is obtained from the City Manager and all applicable City
requirements are met.
6) Outdoor Heaters, Fans and Coolers - Outdoor heaters, fans and coolers for
sidewalk dining areas are subject to approval during the sidewalk dining area
permit process.
7) Vending Machines, Carts - Vending machines, carts, or other objects for sale
are prohibited.
8) Service and Use - All services provided to sidewalk dining area patrons as
well as all patron activity (waiting, sitting, dining, etc.) must occur only
within the designated sidewalk dining area and not encroach on pedestrian
traffic areas (i.e. the clear pedestrian path) at any time. Equipment
necessary for dispensing any other items is subject to review during the
sidewalk dining area permit process. The restaurant must provide
supervision of the sidewalk dining area at all times to ensure that dining
operations and the conduct of patrons are in compliance with this Article
32.
9) Each Permittee shall maintain the insurance coverage required during the
permit period. The certificate(s) of insurance shall be filed with the City
Clerk and presented to the City Manager prior to the issuance of a permit.
Failure of the Permitee to maintain any required insurance shall subject
the Permit to suspension or revocation.
Insurance Requirements - Every Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit
applicant (and Permittee) must furnish a certificate of insurance proving
commercial insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for bodily injury,
death, disability, and property damage liability. The policy of insurance
shall provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the City if coverage is
substantially changed, cancelled, or not renewed. The City shall be named
as an additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any
liability arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk
dining area. Each permit holder shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City
harmless from any loss that results directly or indirectly from the permit
issuance or operation of the sidewalk dining area. If alcoholic beverages
are served at the sidewalk dining area, the permit holder shall provide
proof of liquor liability insurance for the sidewalk dining area with limits
not less than $1,000,000 or as required by Article 6 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances, whichever is greater.
G. Additional Regulations of Sidewalk Dining Areas
The sidewalk dining area must be kept sanitary, neat, clean, and litter free at all
times; the sidewalk dining area shall be free from accumulation of food, litter,
snow, ice, and other potentially dangerous or unsanitary conditions.
No food preparation is permitted on the sidewalk dining area; all food shall be
prepared within the kitchen of the restaurant.
Loud speakers are prohibited and amplified sound from inside the restaurant
shall not be audible within any sidewalk dining area nor upon any adjoining
sidewalk or public right-of-way or private property.
Furniture and other property used in the sidewalk dining area by Permittee
shall not be stored in the public right-of-way and all such furniture and
property must be removed from the sidewalk dining area when the restaurant is
closed to the public for any period in excess of seven days.
The Permittee shall not permit smoking within any sidewalk dining area nor
within 15 feet thereof; no person shall smoke within the sidewalk dining area
nor within 15 feet thereof. “No smoking” signs shall be posted within the
sidewalk dining area.
H. Additional Conditions of Downtown Sidewalk Dining License The use of the
sidewalk dining area by Permittee shall be subject to and conditioned upon the
Permittee maintaining liability insurance as provided above. Permission to
establish and maintain the sidewalk dining area shall not be construed to
relieve the restaurant of liability for any negligence on the restaurant’s part on
account of or in connection with the sidewalk dining area. By acceptance of
the authorization granted by the permit to establish and maintain a sidewalk
dining area and by establishing and maintaining the sidewalk dining area, the
Permittee shall be deemed to have promised and agreed to save harmless the
City of Mt. Vernon from any and all liability (including attorney’s fees) and
litigation fees arising by reason of the establishment, construction, placement,
existence, use or maintenance of the sidewalk dining area.
The authorization granted by a permit approved under this Article 32 to
establish and maintain a sidewalk dining area is not intended to constitute, and
shall not be deemed to be a waiver of sovereign immunity by or on behalf of
the City of Mt. Vernon or any of its officers or employees.
Neither the City of Mt. Vernon, nor any public utility company shall be
responsible for damage to property of Permittee placed into the sidewalk
dining area during repair, maintenance, or replacement of the sidewalk or
during repair, maintenance, or replacement of a right-of-way or any public
facility or utilities in the area of the sidewalk dining area. Permittee shall upon
reasonable notice from City remove any and all property of Permittee
designated by City whenever the City of Mt. Vernon desires to use the subject
sidewalk for any purpose whatsoever and when the City by written notification
requests from the Permittee to remove Permittee’s equipment. If Permittee
shall fail or neglect to remove the property of Permittee within the time
specified, the City shall have the right to remove the property at the expense of
the Permittee and City shall not be liable to the Permittee for any loss or
damage to any property of Permittee, including but not limited to any property
within the sidewalk dining area, caused by the removal.
I. Revocation of Permit The Permit issued herein may be immediately
suspended or revoked for cause, including violations of any provision of this
Ordinance, as provided within subparagraph J below. The permit issued herein
may also be permanently revoked upon 30 days prior notice to Permittee if and
when the City requires use of its public right-of-way for any purpose
inconsistent with the use of the right-of-way as and for said sidewalk dining.
J. Penalty Any Permittee or any person found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more
than $200.00 for each violation of this Ordinance; and a separate offense shall
be deemed to be committed on each date in which a violation occurs or
continues.
In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violation of this Ordinance, the
City Manager may suspend or revoke any permit for any violation of this
Ordinance after affording the Permittee due notice and opportunity to be heard
in its own defense.
I N D E X
Subject Section Number
AA@
Abandoned Vehicles 13.12
Accounts 1.5; 2.1
Administration 2.1
Administrative Inspection Warrant 5.8
Administrative Towing Fee 18.19 (n)
Adultery 12.16
Advancement of Programs For Handicapped
Commission 2.10
Air Pollution Control 13.13
Alcoholic Liquor Article 6
Alleys 2.4
Amendments, Zoning 21-114
Amusements 11.10-11.11
Amplification, Stereo 12.23
Animals, at large and nuisance 12.17-12.18; 13.4-13.5
Antenna, Towers 21-500
Appropriation 1.5; 2.1
Assistant City Manager 2.1 A
Auctions/Auctioneers 11.2
Auxiliary Police 8.6
_____________________________________________________________________
AB@
Barbers 11.3
Bed and Breakfast 21-600
Begging Alms 12.5
Bicycles 18.14
Billiards 11.10
Billposting/Billboards 11.4
Billboard, Off Premises Sign 21-125; 21-126; 21-127
Board of Appeals 21-111
Boarding House 12.10
Bond Register 1.5
Bow Hunting 12.8
Bowling Alleys 11.10
Brakes 18.18
Budget 1.5
Budget Officer 2.12
Buildings 5.1-5.10
Building Code 5.1 ; 5.11
Building Official 5.2-5.5
Building Permit Required 21-110
Burning Leaves/Rubbish 13.8
_____________________________________________________________________
AC@
Careless Driving 18.19
Carnival 11.11
Circus 11.11
City Attorney 2.2
City Clerk 1.4
City Council 1.3
City Emergency Management 2.5
City Engineer 2.3
City Manager 2.1
City Treasurer 1.6
Civil Defense 2.5
Claims 1.5
Commercial Design Standards 21-300 Class IPCA-PUD
Commission for Advancement of Programs for Handicapped 2.10
Community Development Director 2.11
Community Services Personnel 8.6
Conditional Sign 21-127
Conditional Uses 21-113; 21-124
Conflict of Interest 1.3
Contracts 1.5; 2.1; 2.2
Corporation Counsel 2.2
Cross - Connection Control (Plumbing) 15.7
Cruelty to Animals 12.18
Curfew 12.20
Curbs/Gutters 17.6
_____________________________________________________________________
AD@
Dancing/Dance Halls 11.5
Dangerous Buildings 5.10
Day Care 21-124, 21-300
Dead Animals 13.1; 13.4
Deer Hunting 12.8
Defense 2.5
Diesel Tax 24.2
Disaster 2.5
Discrimination 2.9
Disturbing the Peace 2.5; 12.1; 12.2
Dogs/ Cats 12.17; 12.18; 13.5
Downtown Sidewalk Dining Article 32
Dram Shops Article 6
Driving Rules 18.10
Drive Through Food Order 12.21
Drugs, Driving 18.19
Drunkenness 12.4
Drunken Driving 18.19
Dwelling Units Above Main Floor 21-300 (B-1)
_____________________________________________________________________
AE@
Easements 17.6
Economic Development Commission 2.13
Economic Development, Department of 2.13
Elected Officers
(See also specific offices) 1.1
Electrical Code 7.2
Electrical Commission 7.7
Electrical Inspector 7.3
Electrician/Contractor Registration 7.8
Emergency Vehicles 18.4; 18.10
Employees 2.1
Energy Park 21-300
Erosion Article 20
Equipment, vehicles 18.18
Ethics Act, Officials= and Employees= Article 29
Excavation, streets 18.21
Exterminators 11.12
_____________________________________________________________________
AF@
Fair Housing Board/Regulations 2.9
Fences, Walls, Hedges 21.109.1; 21.109.2
Finance, Department of 1.5
Fires 13.8
Fire Access Road 9.13
Fire Alarms 9.12; 12.11
Firearms 12.8
Fire and Police Commission 8.1
Fire Department 8.3; 18.4
Fire Insurance Tax Article 4
Fire Lane 9.13
Fire Limits 5.8
Firemen's Pension Fund 8.5
Fire Prevention Article 9
Fire Prevention Code Article 9
Fireworks 9.8; 12.8
Flammable Liquids, Storage 9.3
Flood Hazard Area (100 Year Flood) 21-400
Flood Plain Zoning 21-300
Food and Beverage Tax Article 31
Fortune Telling 12.9
_____________________________________________________________________
AG@
Gambling 12.14; 12.16;
6.17; 11.16
Garbage - Pick-up and Containers 2.6, 12.24
Garbage Collection Charge 2.6(a)
Gift Ban 29.10
Grease Traps 16 A
Groundwater as Potable Water 15.8
Guns, discharge 12.8
_____________________________________________________________________
AH@
Handicap Accessibility 5.12
Handicap Parking 18.20 B
Health 2.6; 13.1-13.11
Health Inspector 10 - A.3
Home Day Care 21-124
Homeless Shelter 21-124
Home Occupation 21-124
Horn, vehicle 18.18
House Movers 11.6
Hotels 12.10
Hotel Tax Article 28
Housing Code for Owner Occupied Article 10
Housing Code for Non-Owner Occupied Dwellings Article 10A
Housing Inspector 10-A.3
Human Resources Department 2.8
Hunting 12.8
_____________________________________________________________________
AI@
Ice Box 13.10
Incinerators 9.7
Indecent Exposure 12.6
Industrial Park Conservation Area - Planned Unit Development 21-300
Injunction (General Provision) 22.6
Inspection, Bureau of 10-A
Intoxication 12.4
Inventory 2.1
IPCA-PUD 21-300
Itinerant Vendors 11.7
_________________________________________________________________
AJ@
Jaycee Lake 16.8
Juke Boxes 11.8
_____________________________________________________________________
AK@
Kennels 13.5; 21-124;
21-300
_____________________________________________________________________
AL@
Leaf / Landscape Burning 13.8
Leaving Curb 18.10
Leaving Driveway 18.10
Legal Department 2.2
Lien, Nuisance 13.11
Levy of Taxes 2.1-2.7; 3.4
License 6.3-6.12; 7.8; 11.1-11.15; 15.6
Lights, vehicle 18.18
Liquor Control Commissioner 6.21
Liquor License Classifications 6.5, 6.9
Liquor Transportation 17.1-17.12
Littering 12.22
Loud Noise 12.1; 13.9
Loud Stereo 12.23
_____________________________________________________________________
AM@
Manufactured Home Article 19A, 21-203
Maps 2.1
Massage Establishments/Services 11.14
Mayor 1.2
Meetings(Council) 1.3
Miller Lake 16.8
Minimum Housing Standards Article 10
Minors 6.9
Misdemeanors 12.1-12.22
Mobile Home Article 19, 19A; 21-300
Manufactured Home Development Article 19A, 21-203
Motel Tax Article 28
Motor Fuel Tax Article 24
Mt. Vernon Economic Development Commission 2.13
Mt. Vernon Municipal and Services Occupation Tax 23
Mufflers 18.18
Municipal Service Tax Article 28
_____________________________________________________________________
AN@
Narcotics, driving 18.19
Noises 13.9; 18.18
Non-Conforming, Lot, Uses or Structures 21-108
Nudity, Public 12.6
Nuisances 13.1-13.11
Nuisance Liens and Fines 13.11; 13.16
_____________________________________________________________________
AO@
Obstructing Streets or Sidewalks 18.19
Officers 1.1-1.6
Off Premises Signs 21-125; 21-126; 21-127
One Way Streets 18.7-18.8
Open Burning 9.5; 13.8
_____________________________________________________________________
AP@
Parks Director 2.7
Park Board 2.7
Parks 2.7
Parking, Stopping 18.15-18.17
Parking Lots 5.13; 18.20 A
Parking Meters 18.20 A
Parking Streets 18.20
Passing 18.11; 18.13
Pawn Brokers 11.9
Peddlers 11.7
Pedestrians 18.13
Peeping Tom 12.12
Penalty (General Provision) 22.6
Permits 5.9; 7.5; 9.6; 15.7; 18.21
Pest Control Contractors 11.12
Pinball Machines/Galleries 11.10
Plan Commission 14; 21
Planned Unit Developments 21-200
Plats 2.1; 17.4-17.12
Plumbing Code 15; 15.1
Plumbing License 15.6
Plumbing Inspector and Inspections 15.2; 15.5
Plumbing Permits and Fees 15.3; 15.4
Poker Runs 11.17
Police Department 8.2; 18.4
Police Dogs 12.18
Policemen's Pension Fund 8.4
Political Activity (Prohibited) 29.5
Pollution, Air 13.13
Pool 11.10
Pretreatment Ordinances 16.7
Prostitution 12.14; 12.1
Public Comment 1.3(k) Fourteenth
Public Facilities Department 2.7
Public Intoxication 12.4
Public Participation 1.3(k) Fourteenth
Public Shelter Manager 2.5
Public Utilities 15.1-16.8
Public Utility Commissioners 16.5
Public Works 2.4
Publication of Ordinances 1.3; 2.1
Purchasing 1.5; 2.1
_____________________________________________________________________
AQ@
Qualifications of Officers 1.1-1.6
_____________________________________________________________________
AR@
Raffles 11.17
Reckless Driving 18.19
Records 2.1
Recreation 2.7
Recreational fires 13.8
Recreational Vehicle Parking Prohibited 21-109.7
Refrigerator, Nuisance 13.10
Refuse 2.6, 12.24
Registrar of Vital Statistics 1.4
Remote Station Signaling Systems 9.13
Rental Property Article 10A
Report, Annual 1.5; 1.6; 3.5
Report, Monthly 1.5; 1.6; 2.2
Residential Facility For Homeless Persons 21-124
Retirement 8.2
Revenues 1.5
Right of Entry-Administrative Inspection Warrant 5.8
Right of Way (Driving) 18.11; 18.13
Rooming Houses 18.11
Room Tax Article 28, Part II
Rules of Order 1.3
_____________________________________________________________________
AS@
Salaries 1.2-1.4; 1.6; 2.1-2.3
Sale of City Property 1.5
Sales from Vehicle 18.22
Sales Tax Article 23
Sanitation 2.6
Schedule of District Regulations 21-300
Search Warrant 5.8
Sewer 16.1; 16.4; 16.7
Sewer Rates 16.7(m)
Sexually Oriented Businesses 11.15; 21-124; 21-300
Shooting Galleries 11.10
Shows 11.11
Sidewalk Dining Article 32
Sidewalk Dining, liquor 32.C
Sidewalks 2.4; 18.10
Signals 18.11
Sign Regulations 21-125; 21-126; 21-127
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Article 26
Skate Boards 18.14 A
Skating Rinks 11.11
Small Wireless Facility 21-500.1, 21-500A
Smoking - Minors Article 30
Solar Farm 21-300
Special Flood Hazard 21-400
Speed (laws) 18.6
Spitting 13.6
Stereo, Loud 12.1; 12.23
Stopping/Stand Motor Vehicles 18.16; 18.17
Storm Damage and Sediment Control Article 20
Storm Water Detention 5.13
Storm Water Runoff Article 20
Streets 2.4; 13.12; 17.6; 18
Street Excavations 18.21
Subdivisions 14.5; 17
Sunday Blue law - Repealed 12.13
Superintendent of Public Utilities 16.2
Superintendent of Public Works 2.4
Superintendent of Sewer System 16.4
Superintendent of Water System 16.3
Swimming Pool 2.7
_____________________________________________________________________
AT@
Taverns Article 6
Tax Payers Rights Article 27
Taxis 11.13; 18.18
Telecommunications Infrastructures Maintenance Fee Article 26
Termite Exterminators 11.12
Theatricals/Theaters 11.11
Through Streets 18.9
Tobacco Regulation Article 30
Towers; Antenna 21-500
Tourism, Department of 2.1
Towing Abandoned Vehicles 18.19
Towing Fee 18.19 (n)
Tow Trucks 18.24
Transient Merchant 11.7
Traffic Article 18
Traffic Control Device 18.5
Traffic Division 18.2
Trailer Coach Parks 19 B
Trains 18.12
Trash Burning (Prohibited) 9.5
Trash Debris as Nuisance 13.2
Travel Trailer Parks 19 B
Tree Board 2.14
Trees Article 25
Trespassing 12.7; 12.12; 12.15
Truancy 12.20
Truck Parking Prohibited 21-109.8
Turn Signal,-vehicle 18.18
_____________________________________________________________________
AU@
Unattended Vehicles 18.19
Unfit Dwellings 10.10
Unlawful Assembly 12.3
Utilities 2.1; 16.1; 16.8
Vagrancy 12.15
Vehicles 13.12; 18.1-18.20
Vehicles for-Hire 11.13
_____________________________________________________________________
AV@
Variances, Zoning 21-112; 21-124
Video Gaming 12.14; 11.16
____________________________________________________________________
AW@
Warrants 1.5 ; 1.6
Waste Water Pretreatment 16.7
Water 16.1; 16.3; 16.6
Water Rates 16.6(i)
Weeds 13.2; 13.3; 13.14
Well as water supply 15.8
Wind Farm 21-300
Wireless Communications Facilities 21-500, 21-500A
_____________________________________________________________________
AX, Y, Z@
Zoning Article 21
Zoning Board of Appeals 21-111; 21-112
Zoning and Planning Commission 21-111; 21-112; 21-113;
21-114; 21-115
Zoning Classifications 21-300
Zoning Performance Standards 21-200