12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 1/377
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19-1749
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
APPENDIX A, THE ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, ILLINOIS
A duly noticed public hearing was held by the Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield on September 3, 2019 on the application for
a text amendment to Article IV, Section 4-5 of the Village of Northfield Zoning Ordinance.
The Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield has now filed its report of findings and recommendation to the President and Board of
Trustees with respect to the application. The report and recommendation has been considered by this President and Board of Trustees.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Northfield, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1: Small wireless facilities in a right of way shall be a permitted use within all zoning districts in the Village of Northfield.
SECTION 2: Small wireless facilities outside of a right of way shall be a permitted use in the O/R and M-1 zoning districts in the Village of
Northfield.
SECTION 3: Small wireless facilities outside of a right of way shall be a special use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, NC, B-1, B-2 and VC
zoning districts in the Village of Northfield.
SECTION 4: Section 4-5 “Permitted and Special Use Table” and Sections 5-2 “R-1 Use Regulations”, Section 6-2 “R-2 Use Regulations”, Section
7-2 “R-3 Use Regulations”, Section 8-2 “R-4 Use Regulations”, Section 9-2 “R-5 Use Regulations”, Section 10-2 “R-6 Use Regulations”, Section 12-2 “B-1
Use Regulations”, Section 12.1-2 “B-2 Use Regulations”, Section13-2 “VC Use Regulations”, Section 11-2 “NC Use Regulations”, Section 14-2 “O/R Use
Regulations”, and Section 15-2 “M-1 Use Regulations” of Appendix A shall be amended in accordance with Sections 1, 2 and 3 above.
SECTION 5: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and upon its passage, approval and publication in the manner provided by law.
AYES: Terrill; Orth; Fowler; Goodwin; Lungmus; Whittaker
NAYS:
ABSENT:
RECUSE/ABSTAIN: _____________________________________________________
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 2/377
APPROVED this 17th day of September 2019, by the President of the Village of Northfield.
/S/ Joan Frazier
Joan Frazier, Village President
ATTESTED and FILED in the office of the Village Clerk this 17th day of September, 2019.
_____/S/ Stacy A. Sigman___________
Stacy A. Sigman, Village Clerk
PUBLISHED by me in pamphlet form this 18th day of September, 2019.
_____/S/ Stacy A. Sigman___________
Stacy A. Sigman, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19-1750
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
APPENDIX A, THE ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, ILLINOIS
A duly noticed public hearing was held by the Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield on September 3, 2019 on the application for
a text amendment to Article IV, Sections 4-5, 11-2, 12-2, 12.1-2, 13-2, 14-2 and 15-2 of the Village of Northfield Zoning Ordinance.
The Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield has now filed its report of finding and recommendations to the President and Board of
Trustees with respect to the application. The report and recommendation has been considered by this President and Board of Trustees.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Northfield, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1: A medical/dental office with 5,000 square feet or more of floor area shall be a special use in the NC, B-1, B-2, O/R or M-1 zoning
districts.
SECTION 2: A medical/dental office with less than 5,000 square feet of floor area shall be a permitted use in the NC, B-1, B-2, or O/R and M-1
zoning districts.
SECTION 3: A medical/dental office of less than 5,000 square feet in the VC zoning district located above the first floor shall be a permitted use.
Any other medical/dental office on the first floor shall be a special use.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 3/377
SECTION 4: Section 4-5 “Permitted and Special Use Table” and Sections 11-2 “MC Use Regulations”, Section 12-2 “B-1 Use Regulations”,
Section 12.1-2 “B-2 Use Regulations”, Section 13-2 “VC Use Regulations”, Section 14-2 “O/R Use Regulations”, and Section 15-2 “M-1 Use Regulations”
of Appendix A shall be amended in accordance with Sections 1, 2 and 3 above.
SECTION 5: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and upon its passage, approval and publication in the manner provided by law.
AYES: Terrill; Orth; Fowler; Goodwin; Lungmus; Whittaker
NAYS:
ABSENT:
APPROVED this 17th day of September 2019, by the President of the Village of Northfield.
/S/Joan Frazier
Joan Frazier, Village President
ATTESTED and FILED in the office of the Village Clerk this 17th day of September, 2019.
______/S/ Stacy A. Sigman__________
Stacy A. Sigman, Village Clerk
PUBLISHED by me in pamphlet form this 18th day of September, 2019.
______/S/ Stacy A. Sigman__________
Stacy A. Sigman, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. _19-1751______
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
APPENDIX A “ZONING ORDINANCE”
OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, ILLINOIS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 4/377
A duly noticed public hearing was held by the Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield on September 3, 2019 on the application for a text
amendment to Article XIX, Section 19-3 of the Village of Northfield Zoning Ordinance.
The Plan and Zoning Commission of the Village of Northfield has now filed its report of findings and recommendation to the President and Board of Trustees with
respect to the application. The report and recommendation has been considered by the President and Board of Trustees.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Northfield, Cook County, Illinois, acting in the exercise of their
home rule powers, as follows:
SECTION 1: Paragraph B of Section 19-3 “Standards for all Zoning Districts” of Appendix A “Zoning Ordinance” of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Northfield, Illinois, shall be amended as follows:
A. Section 19-3(B)(3)(a) shall be amended by deleting the last sentence of the paragraph.
B. Section 19-3(B)(3) shall be amended by deleting the last paragraph.
C. A new Section 19-3(B)(4) shall be added and shall be and read as follows:
(4) Relief from the restrictions set forth in this Subsection (B) of Section 19-3 may be granted only by the Village Board. Such relief
may be granted only for specific special events and for a specific time frame. Any person seeking such relief shall file a petition with the Village Clerk not
less than 45 days prior to the event for which the relief is sought. The person seeking relief shall provide notice of the application by mail to the owner or
occupant of all properties located within two hundred fifty feet (250’), excluding rights of way, of the subject property. This notice shall be given not less
than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which the Village Board will consider the application. An affidavit certifying that
the above notices have been sent must be tendered to the Department of Community Development not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.
The fee for such a petition shall be as set forth in Section 19-3 of Appendix D. The Village Board may apply such conditions as it may deem appropriate
to any relief granted pursuant to this paragraph.
C. Article I, “Fees” of Appendix D “Fees and Bonds” shall be amended by adding the following new fee in numerical order as follows:
Sec. 19-3 Application for relief, special
event permit
$50.00
SECTION 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and upon its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
AYES: ___Terrill; Orth; Fowler; Goodwin; Lungmus; Whittaker___________
NAYS: ______________________________________________________
ABSENT: ____________________________________________________
RECUSE/ABSTAIN: ____________________________________________
PASSED and APPROVED this 17th day of September, 2019, by the President of the Village of Northfield.
________/S/ Joan Frazier___________
Joan Frazier, Village President
ATTESTED and FILED in the office of the Village Clerk this 17th day of September, 2019.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 5/377
________/S/ Stacy Sigman__________
Stacy Sigman, Village Clerk
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Northfield, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 19-1740, passed March 19, 2019.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. INFORMATIONAL MATTERS
Sec. 1-1: HOME RULE AUTHORITY; HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the NORTHFIELD VILLAGE CODE 1986.
This code and each of its individual provisions and requirements are hereby ratified, adopted, and readopted pursuant to the home rule authority of the
village of Northfield. If any previously adopted provisions or requirements would have been declared an inappropriate exercise of nonrule home power,
each such individual provision or requirement is now readopted in the exercise of the village's home rule powers. (Ord. 10-1470, 12-6-2010)
Sec. 1-2: PURPOSE.
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restriction upon the subject matter than the
general provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-3: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the interpretation and construction of this code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the board of trustees or the context clearly required otherwise:
COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a
Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The president and board of trustees of the village of Northfield, Illinois.
COUNTY. The words "county" or "the county" mean Cook County in the state of Illinois.
COURT. The circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, including all its divisions, districts and branches.
GOOD CHARACTER AND REPUTATION. That the applicant lack good character and reputation in the community in which he resides, may be
determined by previous arrest record, association with persons known to lack good moral character, open and notorious adultery or other acts of moral
turpitude or other conduct contrary to good morals.
IN THE VILLAGE. The words "in the village" or "within the village" mean and include all territory over which the village now has or shall hereafter acquire
jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 6/377
authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
LIMITS. The corporate limits of the village of Northfield.
MASCULINE GENDER. Any word signifying the masculine gender shall also be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders.
MONTH. A calendar month.
NAME OF ANY OFFICER. Where any title of any officer appears in this code, the title shall be interpreted as though the words "of the village of Northfield"
were added to such name.
NUMBER. Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things and words importing the plural number may
include the singular.
OATH. Shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT. Applied to a building or land, mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
OFFICER. An officer of the village of Northfield. Only elected officials, the village manager, department heads or other persons specified in this code or in
the Illinois municipal code as officers shall be considered officers of the village of Northfield.
OWNER. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant
of the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association, club, society, association or any city, village or state, or any subdivision thereof;
and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Personal property includes every species of property except "real property" as defined by this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. The words "preceding" and "following" mean immediately before and next after, respectively.
PRESIDENT. The president of the village of Northfield.
PROPERTY. Shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY. Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
RULES AND REGULATIONS. Shall include all properly published standards set forth by an officer of the village of Northfield pursuant to a valid delegation
of authority from the corporate authorities.
SEAL. The seal of the village of Northfield.
SHALL. Wherever the word "shall" appears in this code, it shall be considered mandatory and not directive.
SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE. The words "state" or "the state" mean the state of Illinois.
STREET. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TENSE. Words in the present tense include the future.
VILLAGE. The words "village" or "the village" mean the village of Northfield in Cook County, state of Illinois, except as otherwise provided. When the word
"village" is capitalized, as here, it means the municipal corporation. When it is uncapitalized, it means the territory enclosed with the village limits.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING. The words "written" and "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark.
YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
ZONING ORDINANCE. The zoning ordinance of the village of Northfield, including all amendments, alterations, additions and revisions thereto, which
ordinance is on file in the office of the village clerk. The zoning ordinance is contained in appendix A of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-4: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
The boldfaced catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be
deemed to taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-5: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code, since
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 7/377
the same would have been enacted by the board of trustees without the incorporation in this code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-6: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCES.
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision, or any chapter, article or section of this code shall itself be repealed, such repeal
shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision or any chapter, article, or section of this code, unless it shall be therein so
expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution
or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-7: SEAL ESTABLISHED.
The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the village, the impression of which is a scroll bearing the inscription, "Village of Northfield, Cook County,
Illinois" shall be, and is hereby established and declared to have been and now to be the seal of the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-8: CUSTODY OF SEAL.
The village seal, as established in the preceding section, shall remain in the custody of the village clerk, to be used by the village clerk and the president of
the village whenever required by law. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-9: FISCAL YEAR DETERMINED.
The fiscal year of the village is hereby fixed and determined to commence on the first day of May in each year. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-10: OFFICIAL TIME.
Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the village for the transaction of all village business; provided that from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the
last Sunday in April in each year, official time for the village shall be advanced one hour. At two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the last Sunday in October in each
year, official time shall, by the retarding of one hour, be returned to Central Standard Time. All legal or official proceedings of the village board of trustees
and all official business of the village shall be regulated as to time in accordance with the provisions of this section. When by ordinance, resolution or
action of any municipal officer or body, an act must be performed at or within a prescribed time, it shall be performed according to the official time as herein
prescribed. When the words "daylight saving" or "daylight saving time" are used in any official document or contract, it shall be understood to have
reference to the time herein fixed for the period from the last Sunday in April to the last Sunday in October. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-11: VILLAGE DATUM AND BENCH MARK ESTABLISHED.
The datum for the establishment of grades in the village is hereby established as that of the United States coast and geodetic survey, which is based on
mean sea level.
The standard elevation of the top of the circular bronze disc located at the base of the in the Village of Northfield shall be and is hereby
established at feet above datum, which elevation shall be the Northfield Standard Bench Mark from which all Village grades and benches shall
be established.
Note: The City of Chicago and some other municipalities use the "Chicago City Datum" which was based on the low water line of Lake Michigan for the
year A.D. 1847. The precise level of this datum was determined in A.D. 1903 by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey to be 579.938 feet above
mean sea level. By Chicago City Datum the Northfield Standard Bench Mark would therefore have an elevation of feet.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 1-12: ALL OFFICIAL MEETINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC; EXCEPTIONS.
(1) Exceptions. As provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, all meetings of all legislative, executive, administrative or advisory bodies shall be open and
public, subject only to the following exceptions1:
(a) In a matter of collective negotiating between the village and its employees. (1986 Code)
(b) Where the acquisition of real property is being considered, or where the consideration for the sale or lease of village property is to be discussed.
(Ord. 01-1064, 5-21-2001)
(c) Where a pending court proceeding against or on behalf of the Village is being considered. This shall include meeting to discuss threatened litigation,
establish reserves and to settle claims under the Local Government Tort Immunity Act.
(d) Where there are constitutional provisions for closed meetings.
(e) Where Federal regulations provide for closed meetings.
(f) Where the appointment, employment, or dismissal of an employee or officer of the Village is to be considered or where testimony on a complaint
lodged against an employee or officer is to be heard, but no final action may be taken in closed session.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 8/377
(g) Where an advisory committee appointed to provide the Village with professional consultation on matters germane to its operation meets to consider
matters of professional ethics or standards of performance.
(h) Where the Village Board is considering the filling of a vacancy to the Village Board. (1986 Code)
If these exceptional matters are on the agenda along with other matters, the consideration of the other matters must be open and public. Further, the
body may go into closed or executive session only upon a vote of a majority of its members present at an open meeting for which proper notice was
given. Minutes must be taken at all executive sessions. Audio and/or video recordings are required to be kept of closed session meetings. The tapes
of closed session meetings shall be destroyed eighteen (18) months after the final adjournment of the meeting if, upon review by the Village Attorney,
it is determined that the conditions as set forth by the Open Meetings Act and Village policy have been met. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 06-1304, 12-5-
2006)
(2) Discrimination Complaints. This section shall not prevent the Village from enacting ordinances which provide for closed meetings for conciliating
complaints or discrimination under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-11.1-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(3) Notice Of Meetings. The Village shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year and shall
state the regular dates, times, and places of such meetings.
Public notice of any special meeting, or of any reconvened meeting, shall be given at least twenty four (24) hours before such meetings. However, this
requirement of public notice of reconvened meetings does not apply to any case where the meeting is to be reconvened within twenty four (24) hours
nor to any case where announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting and there is no change in the
agenda.
(4) Method Of Notice. Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice in the lobby of the Village Hall.
The Village shall supply copies of the notice of its regular meetings, and notice of any special, rescheduled or reconvened meeting, to any reasonably
proximate news medium that has filed an annual request for such notice. Any such news medium shall also be given the same notice of all special,
rescheduled or reconvened meetings in the same manner as members of the meeting body, provided that the medium has given the Village an
address within the Village at which such notice may be given.
(5) Notice Of Schedule Changes. If a change is made in regular meeting dates, at least ten (10) days' notice of such change shall be given by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Notice of such change shall also be posted in the lobby of the Village Hall. Notice of such change
shall also be supplied to those news media which have filed an annual request for notice as provided in subsection (4) of this section. (1986 Code)
Sec. 1-13: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, any act is prohibited or when any act or
failure to act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance
shall be punishable by a fine as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
A violation of any provision of this Code, or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation continues. It is also hereby
declared to be an offense for any person to command, encourage, request, aid, abet, or agree with another to commit a violation of this Code when such is
made with the specific intent that said violation be committed. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 95-866, 11-27-1995)
ARTICLE II. ETHICAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-14: DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
BUSINESS ENTITY. Any organization or enterprise (operated for profit), including, but not limited to, a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, firm,
business, trust, joint venture, syndicate or association.
CONSIDERATION FROM THE VILLAGE. Any request from the village, whether involving official discretion or a purely ministerial function, for any license,
permit, legislation, cooperation, financing or litigation aid. This does not include vehicle or animal licenses.
CONTRACT OR DOING BUSINESS WITH THE VILLAGE. Any agreement between the village and any person, firm, corporation or other business entity
for the purchase of materials, goods, services or real estate. Contract shall also mean a deposit of monies, loans, or other financial services provided to
the village by banks and thrift institutions. Contract shall include employment by the village.
DIRECT BUSINESS COMPETITION. Direct business competition occurs when one or more business entities provide a similar product or service and as a
matter of practice compete for the same market or customers.
EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the village of Northfield whether part time or full time.
ENTITY. Shall include the definition of a person and business entity, and shall include not-for-profit corporations.
FINANCIAL INTEREST. Any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership, trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment,
employment, gift, fee or otherwise; whether present, promised or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect; whether or not legally enforceable;
whether in the person or in a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in another subsidiary of the same parent corporation. A financial interest shall include, but
is expressly not limited to, any economic interest, as set forth above, of a spouse or minor child, as well as any economic interest held by an agent on
behalf of an official, appointee or employee, his spouse or minor child, by a business entity managed or controlled by, or by a trust in which an official,
appointee or employee has a substantial interest. A business entity is controlled by an official, appointee or employee when that person's spouse or minor
child, singly or in the aggregate, possess a majority ownership interest in the entity. An official, appointee or employee has a substantial interest in a trust
when that person, the spouse or minor child, singly or in the aggregate, have a present or future interest worth more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). "Financial Interest" shall not include ownership through purchase at fair market value of less than one percent (1%) of the share of a parent,
subsidiary or other affiliated corporation whose shares are registered and traded on a nationally recognized securities market. "Financial Interest" shall
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 9/377
also not include authorized compensation or salary paid to an official, appointee or employee for services rendered to the village of Northfield, or any
economic benefit generally available to the residents of the village of Northfield.
GIFT. Shall be defined as in the text and regulations of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY. An individual's spouse, dependent children, or others claimed by the individual as dependents for income tax purposes. All reference
to a "person" or "person filing the statement" shall include spouse and minor children.
NOTIFICATIONS. Whenever notification of interested village residents is required by this code in contemplation of a zoning or other land use or structure
change, it shall be the responsibility of the person seeking the consideration to provide written notice to the residents. Unless otherwise stated in this code,
interested village residents shall mean all owners of record of real estate within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the boundaries of the property for which the
change is sought. Unless otherwise stated, this notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the required
hearing or public meeting. All notices pursuant to this section shall be delivered by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
OFFICIAL. Any person appointed or elected to any board, commission or other office of the village and any person appointed to any office listed in
chapters 2 and 3 of this code.
OWNERSHIP INTEREST. A person has an ownership interest if the person is the sole proprietor, partner, stockholder, other equity interest owner, joint
venturer, beneficial owner or any other legally recognized interest normally indicating ownership.
PAST YEAR. The preceding calendar year plus any time elapsed during the current year prior to the filing of the disclosure statement.
PERSON. Any individual, entity, corporation, proprietorship, partnership, firm, association, trade union, trust, estate or group, as well as any parent or
subsidiary of any of the foregoing entities, whether or not operated for profit.
PUBLIC BODY. Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the village. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994; amd. Ord. 99-957, 1-25-
1999; Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005)
Sec. 1-15: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT2.
A. Time For Filing. Officials shall file the disclosure statement immediately upon taking office and it shall apply to the three hundred sixty five (365) days
immediately preceding the taking of office. Reference to "doing business with the village" shall apply to the same period as references to the person's
interest in business. Persons already holding office at the time of adoption of this article II shall file the disclosure statement within thirty (30) days of
such adoption. If the information furnished in the disclosure statement changes during the official's tenure or term of employment, the official shall so
notify the village clerk in writing within thirty (30) days of the change.
B. Persons Required To File. The following persons shall be required to file a disclosure statement:
(1) Zoning board of appeals members.
(2) Plan and zoning commission.
(3) Architectural commission members.
(4) Employees as defined in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-101 et seq. (disclosure of economic interest).
(5) Village attorney.
(6) Village engineer.
(7) Village prosecutor.
(8) All persons holding an elective office.
C. Contents Of Disclosure Statement. The disclosure statement shall report the following:
(1) Real Property. Any financial interest in real property located inside or in an unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
corporate limits of the village of Northfield. The statement shall include the common address and permanent index number ("PIN") of each parcel of
real estate owned and shall indicate the nature of the interest held in the real estate.
The property in which the person resides shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
(2) Interest In Business Entity Doing Business With Or Seeking Consideration From The Village. Any financial or ownership interest of one
percent (1%) or more in any business entity which has done business with or sought consideration from the village during the past year. The
disclosure shall include the extent and nature of the ownership interest and the type of business conducted with or consideration sought from the
village.
(3) Position Of Influence In Business Entity Doing Business With Or Seeking Consideration From The Village. Any position of influence such as
officer, director, partner, attorney for, or consultant of any business entity doing business with or seeking consideration from the village of Northfield.
The disclosure shall include your position and the type of business conducted with or consideration sought from the village.
(4) Employment By Business Entity Doing Business With Or Seeking Consideration From The Village. Any employment by any entity doing
business with or seeking consideration from the village. The statement shall include the name of the employing entity and the type of business
conducted with or consideration sought from the village.
(5) Personal Business Done With Or Consideration Sought From The Village. Any business which you have done with or any consideration which
you have sought from the village. This statement shall include the type of business with or consideration sought from the village. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-
1994; amd. Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 10/377
D. Requests For Release. All disclosure statements filed under this article shall be available for examination and copying by the public at all reasonable
times. Each person examining a statement must first fill out a form identifying the examiner by name and address with the date of examination.
The village clerk shall promptly notify each person required to file a statement under this article of each instance of an examination of his statement by
sending him a duplicate original of the identification form filled out by the person examining his statement. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-16: PROHIBITIONS.
A. Use Of Position To Obtain Employment For Others. No official shall, directly or indirectly obtain or seek to obtain preferential treatment for any
person seeking employment or other consideration from the village for any purpose other than the betterment, advantage or best interests of the
village. Nothing shall preclude the corporate authorities from exercising the full authority vested in them in the hiring of the village manager or other
official which it has a duty to hire.
B. Discrimination On Account Of Race, Religion, National Origin Or Sex. No official shall appoint or remove from, or in any way favor or discriminate
against any other person with respect to any appointive office because of his or her race, religion, national origin or sex. However, this provision does
not impair the appointing authority's discretion in determining the requirements for a position or in specifying a job assignment for a person already
employed. Neither shall this provision affect any right or obligation of the village to function as an affirmative action employer.
C. Rewards For Political Activity. No official shall promise an appointment to any remunerated municipal position as a reward for any political activity or
cause or require any village employee to contribute to or perform services for any political party as a condition of continued employment or under threat
of detriment to employment.
D. Use Of Village Equipment. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of the village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for
convenience, profit or political purposes, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as village policy for the use of
such public official.
E. Representation Of Persons In Matters Involving The Village Of Northfield. No person serving in the following capacities within the village shall,
while serving or within two (2) years after his or her office or employment has ceased, act as agent, consultant or attorney for any party requesting any
consideration from the village or making any claim against the village:
(1) Village president.
(2) Village trustee.
(3) Village manager or assistant village manager.
(4) Department head.
(5) Member of plan and zoning commission (prohibition shall apply only to appearances before that commission).
(6) Member of zoning board of appeals (prohibition shall apply only to appearances before the zoning board of appeals).
(7) Village attorney.
(8) Village engineer.
(9) Village prosecutor.
F. Pecuniary Gain From The Village. No elected village official, the village manager, the assistant village manager, finance director, village attorney,
superintendent of public works, police chief or fire rescue chief shall do any business of any kind or nature with the village except for the performance
of those duties specified for the particular office holder by statute, ordinance or other regulation or order. This shall not prevent an entity in which one of
those officials has an ownership interest from doing business with the village so long as the conflicting ownership interest is one percent (1%) or less or
the affected official complies with the conflict of interest requirements of section 1-17 of this article. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994; amd. Ord. 99-985, 6-21-
1999; Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 1-17: POLICY REGARDING CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A. Persons Who Are To Avoid Conflict Of Interest. All officials, employees or professional consultants for the village shall attempt to avoid conflicts of
interest with the village. However, if any person develops a conflict of interest due to business commitments or other matters of personal advantage
that were not designed to exploit the official's or employee's position with the village, the person shall comply with subsection C of this section.
B. Standard For Determining Conflict Of Interest. For purposes of this section, a conflict of interest is created when a nonvillage interest would cause
an impairment of the official's ability to exercise independent judgment on behalf of the village. The standard for determining impairment of independent
judgment is objective rather than subjective and shall be whether a person of ordinary and reasonable judgment would be affected.
Any of the foregoing notwithstanding, a person shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest in the following circumstances:
(1) The person has or is about to acquire more than a one percent (1%) ownership interest in or is about to become an officer, director, management
official, employee, attorney or other professional consultant in any entity seeking consideration from or attempting to establish a business relationship
with the village.
(2) The person is representing another person or entity as an advocate or consultant in a circumstance in which the other entity or person has an
interest which is adverse to the interests of the village, or when that other entity or person is actively seeking consideration from the village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 11/377
C. Resolving Conflicts Of Interest.
(1) If a member of the corporate authorities develops a conflict of interest, that member shall be permitted to issue written statements with respect to or
participate in public meeting discussions of the issue involved in the conflict, however the member shall also abide by the following:
(a) Make full written or other public disclosure of the conflict.
(b) Refrain from voting on the issue involved in the conflict.
(c) Refrain from private discussions with other members of the corporate authorities, village staff members or village consultants with respect to the
issue involved in the conflict.
(2) If the village manager, assistant village manager or finance director develops a conflict of interest with respect to a village matter or if any other
employee or consultant develops such a conflict of interest and may reasonably be expected to advise or participate in the discussion of the issue
that is the subject of the conflict, that person shall:
(a) Make full written or other public disclosure of the conflict; and
(b) Abide by any prohibitions or restrictions issued by either the corporate authorities or the village manager, with respect to participation in the
resolution of the issue that is the subject of the conflict.
(3) If the conflict involves numerous issues or is so pervasive that it would render the person unable to properly carry out his or her obligations to the
village, the person should resign the office or position. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-17.1: COMPETING WITH AN ENTITY SEEKING CONSIDERATION FROM THE VILLAGE.
An official shall comply with subsection 1-17C(1) of this article when the official: 1) has actual knowledge that an entity is seeking consideration from or
attempting to establish a business relationship with the village; and 2) has actual knowledge that the same entity is in direct business competition with
another entity in which the same official has or is about to acquire more than a one percent (1%) interest in or is about to become an officer, director,
management official, employee, attorney or other professional consultant. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-17.2: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
A. The regulations of section 5-153 and article 104 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is hereby
prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the village under the act, is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 04-1208, 5-18-2004)
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined in sections 1-3 of this chapter and 1-14, "Definitions", of this article.
(Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005)
F. To the extent allowed by law, the penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those set forth in section 1-24, "Penalty", of this article.
(Ord. 04-1208, 5-18-2004; amd. Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005)
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
H. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the village.
I. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this section
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 04-
1208, 5-18-2004)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 12/377
Sec. 1-18: PURCHASE OF PROPERTY.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as precluding an official or employee from buying property which may someday be the subject of zoning or similar
action as long as such official or employee does not acquire such property on the basis of information which is unavailable to other members of the public
and does not vote or attempt to influence the vote of others with respect to such property. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-19: FILING OF COMPLAINT.
The village clerk is authorized to receive and maintain a log of all complaints made against individuals subject to this article. Each complaint shall be
submitted to the village attorney. Upon a review of the evidence, the village attorney shall make a recommendation to the corporate authorities as to
whether or not prosecution is warranted. The corporate authorities shall then, by majority vote including the president, authorize or not authorize
prosecution for violation of a local ordinance. If it is a member of the corporate authorities who is accused, that member shall not participate in the vote. If
the vote is to not authorize prosecution, then neither the village attorney nor the village prosecutor may commence prosecution.
For purposes of this section, "prosecution" shall mean the filing of an action in the circuit court of Cook County, by either the village attorney or village
prosecutor alleging violations of this article. In the event no prosecution is commenced, the village attorney's log and complaint files shall not be open for
public inspection, unless requested by the individual who was the subject of the complaint. However, the person making the complaint shall be notified in
writing of the decision of the corporate authorities. To the extent that it is practicable to do so, an elected village official should use his or her best efforts to
notify, in writing, other elected village officials prior to filing a complaint or charges against any village official or employee. If the complaint is against the
village attorney or if it is otherwise inappropriate for the village attorney, the corporate authorities shall retain independent counsel to evaluate and if
necessary prosecute the complaint. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-20: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to or in any way restrict the application of any state statute or any common law provision with respect to conflict of
interest, malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance in office which would otherwise be applicable to any person subject to the provisions of this article. The
provisions of this article shall be deemed additional requirements and shall in no way be construed to be in derogation of present statutory penalties and
other local remedies for acts prohibited in this article. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-21: DEFENSE OF GOOD FAITH.
It shall be an absolute defense to any action brought against any official, employee or agent that, prior to acting, the person received in writing and in good
faith from the Village Attorney, or person appointed by the Corporate Authorities to act in his stead, an opinion that the action is not a violation of this
article. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-22: OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
In addition to the provisions of this article, the Village Manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for employees relating to outside
employment and business interests, conflict of interests, or other ethical matters as he may deem necessary. In the event of a conflict between such rules
and regulations promulgated by the Village Manager and the requirements of this article, the more stringent rules, regulations or requirements shall apply
to Village employees. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-23: SEVERABILITY.
The various provisions of this article are to be considered as severable, and if any part or portion of this article shall be held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this article. (Ord. 94-814, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 1-24: PENALTY.
Any person guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
ARTICLE III. MAILING LISTS
Sec. 1-25: REQUESTS FOR LISTS; COSTS.
The following shall apply to organizations or businesses or individuals desiring to obtain a mailing list of residents and/or businesses (names and
addresses) generated through water/sewer billings:
(1) Nonprofit organizations, businesses and individuals can obtain the Village's mailing list or labels for a charge as set forth in appendix D, article I of
this Code.
(2) For profit organizations, businesses and individuals can obtain the Village's mailing list or labels for a charge as set forth in appendix D, article I of
this Code.
All requests must first be made in writing to the Village Manager and must certify (by form provided) that the list is for a single event and that the individual,
organization or business will not lend or sell the list to any other group or agency. Any organization, business or individual reusing or selling the mailing list
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 13/377
in violation of the certification set out shall pay an administrative fee as set forth in appendix D of this Code and shall be permanently barred from
purchasing the mailing list thereafter, unless appealed to the Village President. (Ord. 01-1080, 9-24-2001; amd. Ord. 05-1235, 4-19-2005)
ARTICLE IV. REIMBURSEMENT FOR PRIVATE FACILITIES
Sec. 1-26: STATEMENT OF POLICY.
It has been and is the policy of the Village of Northfield to approve the creation and maintenance of private roadways and service facilities ("private
facilities") in appropriate circumstances. This policy has recognized that the owners of private facilities are solely responsible for the installation, operation
and maintenance costs of the private facilities and their accompanying safety and other appurtenant devices ("appurtenant devices") such as traffic signals
and signs which control traffic on the private roadways. (Ord. 05-1260, 10-18-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
Sec. 1-27: CHARGES BY GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES.
In each instance in which the village is billed by a governmental agency, including, but not limited to, the state of Illinois and the county of Cook or the
metropolitan water reclamation district for the installation, operation and/or maintenance of appurtenant devices serving a private facility, the village may
pay such bill. The village shall, in turn, promptly bill the full amount of such payment to the record owner or owners of the private facility for reimbursement.
(Ord. 05-1260, 10-18-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
Sec. 1-28: OWNER(S) OF PRIVATE FACILITIES RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
The owner or owners of a private facility shall reimburse the village for the payment of any bill from a governmental agency for the installation, operation
and maintenance costs of appurtenant devices serving their private facilities. For purposes of this article, "owner" shall mean the record or beneficial
owner and in the case where the property is served by a homeowners' association that is responsible for the private facilities, it shall mean that
association. If more than one owner is served by the private facilities, the village shall have the sole authority to reasonably allocate the cost between or
among these owners. (Ord. 05-1260, 10-18-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
ARTICLE V. PAYMENT OF VILLAGE OBLIGATIONS
Sec. 1-29: PAYMENT OF ALL VILLAGE OBLIGATIONS PRIOR TO ANY VILLAGE ACTION.
The village shall not enter into any contract, neither shall the village take any action on any request for a license, permit, annexation, rezoning or
development, if the person/business seeking the contract or action owes any fees, fines, forfeitures or taxes to the village of Northfield or is in violation of
any laws or regulations of the village of Northfield, or that the village is authorized to enforce. This provision shall not be construed so as to prevent the
issuance of a permit or license when the issuance of the permit or license would have the effect of bringing the applicant or the applicant's property into
compliance with the laws or regulations that are applicable. (Ord. 09-1420, 7-21-2009)
ARTICLE VI. PROPERTY TAX CAP POLICY
Sec. 1-30: PROPERTY TAX CAP.
Even if the village of Northfield is a home rule unit, the village board shall abide by the property tax limitation as set forth in property tax extension limitation
law5, commonly referred to as the property tax cap, except upon the affirmative vote of five (5) trustees and then only if one of the following has occurred:
(1) The Northfield electorate, at an advisory referendum, has approved an increase in a percentage that exceeds the statutory limitations; or
(2) The village board has declared by resolution either: a) a fiscal emergency, or b) a budgetary mandate from the Illinois legislature; or c) a budgetary
mandate from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 10-1452, 5-18-2010)
Footnote 1: 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: See exhibit A attached to ordinance 94-814, on file in the office of the village clerk.
Footnote 3: 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
Footnote 4: 5 ILCS 430/10-10 _ 10-40.
Footnote 5: 35 ILCS 200/18-185 _ 200/18-245.
Title Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
ARTICLE I. OFFICERS GENERALLY
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 14/377
Sec. 2-1: ELECTIONS FOR MUNICIPAL OFFICERS.
Elections for municipal officers shall be held as provided by statute and shall be at the time provided by statute. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-2: APPOINTMENT, SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL OF CERTAIN OFFICERS.
Unless otherwise provided, all appointive officers shall be appointed by the president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, at the
first regular meeting of the board held after the regular election of members of the board of trustees, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, and shall
hold their office for such time as required by statute or as the board by ordinance or resolution provides. Any officers so appointed may be removed from
office by the president acting in accordance with the laws in such case made and provided. All vacancies so made may be filled in the manner in this
section provided. These appointive officers shall include the village treasurer, village clerk and such others as may be designated by statute or this code.
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 92-721, 5-26-1992)
Sec. 2-3: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
All elected officials, the village clerk, the village treasurer and members of village boards and commissions shall reside within the corporate limits of the
village of Northfield for at least one year prior to the date of election or appointment. However, any contract employee of the village who holds the position
of village clerk or village treasurer, and is not otherwise required to live in the village, shall be exempt from this requirement. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-
1228, 1-18-2005)
Sec. 2-4: OATH OF OFFICE.
All elected or appointed officers of this village shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or
affirmation, "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge
all the duties of according to the best of my ability", which oath or affirmation, so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
In addition, the corporate authorities may require any such elected or appointed officer to execute such statements, affidavits, or certificates to evidence
compliance with and observation of the provisions of "an act to prevent fraudulent and corrupt practices in the making and accepting of contracts by public
officers", 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1-4, as in the sole judgment of the corporate authorities may from time to time be deemed advisable. In
addition, the corporate authorities, in its discretion, may require village employees to execute statements, affidavits or certificates for the purpose of
disclosing conflicts of interests, if any, which would be inconsistent with the policy enunciated in said act. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-5: BOND - REQUIRED.
Any bond required to be filed of an officer, employee or agent of the village shall be paid out of the village treasury unless otherwise specified by resolution
of the corporate authorities. The amount of the respective bonds shall be determined from time to time by the corporate authorities as set forth in appendix
D of this code. If any such officer shall not take the oath or affirmation as required, and shall not present such bond to the village clerk within ten (10) days
after notification by the village clerk of his election or appointment or in such other time as is expressly authorized by the corporate authorities, his duties
shall be declared vacant. Such bond, however, if not already approved as to form and sureties by the corporate authorities, shall be received by the clerk
subject to the approval of the corporate authorities, and in case the corporate authorities shall at the next regular meeting require a different form of bond
or other sureties, the village clerk shall immediately notify the officer filing such bond of the required changes, and in case a new bond is not filed
complying with such requirements within ten (10) days after such notification, or such other time as is expressly authorized by the corporate authorities,
the office of the principal in the bond shall be declared vacant. The bond of each officer or employee of the village as required shall be executed in favor of
the village and must be secured by a surety company licensed to do business in the state of Illinois. Nothing in this section shall prevent the corporate
authorities from including in its insurance coverage a bond or similar security for any or all officers, employees or agents who are required to supply bonds.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 2-6: DELIVERY OF BOOKS TO SUCCESSOR.
Any officer of the village whose term of office has expired shall, within five (5) days after notification and request by the village president, deliver to his
successor in office all books, property, and effects of every description that may be in his possession and that belong to the village of Northfield. (1986
Code)
Sec. 2-6.1: ISSUANCE OF IDENTIFICATION BADGES TO ELECTED AND APPOINTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND
REGULATIONS ON THEIR USE.
A. It is the policy of the village of Northfield to issue identification badges to elected and appointed officials of the village to facilitate their interaction with
the public in the community when in performance of their public duties.
B. Village staff is hereby directed to acquire and maintain the necessary equipment for the production of identification badges for each elected and
appointed village official. These badges shall contain a photo of the official, the village's logo, the official's name, the title of the office, and an expiration
date, which shall be the same as the date of the expiration of the official's term. Such badges shall be uniform in appearance.
C. Such an identification badge shall be issued to each official as soon as is practicable after he or she is sworn into office.
D. All badges and other indications of village office issued prior to the effective date hereof shall be returned to the village at the time the new identification
badges required herein are issued to village officials currently holding office.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 15/377
E. It is the policy of the village that identification badges be used only during the course of an official's performance of his or her official duties, and then
only as needed to identify the official to the public as a duly empowered village official. When displaying such a badge for identification purposes, the
official shall inform the individual to whom he or she is presenting identification of the official's title of office.
F. Badges issued under this section shall not be used to convey or imply that the village official holding the badge is authorized to act as a police officer, to
effect an arrest, or to detain, search or question an individual. Badges issued under this section shall not be displayed as part of an attempt to influence
or gain favor or to avoid being ticketed, charged, or detained by a law enforcement officer of any jurisdiction.
G. Any report of misuse of a village identification badge issued under this section shall be reviewed by the village board of trustees and may result in
censure, other sanction, or removal from office where circumstances warrant and acting in accordance with the law in such case made and provided.
H. Identification badges of elected and appointed village officials must be returned to the village upon expiration of the term of office or other termination of
office with the village. (Ord. 05-1253, 8-16-2005)
Sec. 2-7: ACCESS TO BOOKS BY GOVERNING BODY.
The president or any member of the board of trustees and the village manager shall, at any time so desired, have free access for the examination of all
books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries or accounts of each and every such office, and upon a resolution adopted by the corporate authorities, or an
order promulgated by the village manager, demand a written report on any matter which may be designated in such resolution or such order of the village
manager, and within the time so set forth. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-8: SALARIES.
All officers and employees of the village shall receive such salaries as may be from time to time provided by ordinance or otherwise fixed by the corporate
authorities. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Sec. 2-9: COMPOSITION.
The board of trustees shall consist of six (6) trustees. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-10: ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
The trustees are to be elected to office for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and shall have qualified. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-11: VACANCY.
Whenever a vacancy in the office of a trustee occurs during his or her term, that vacancy shall be filled pursuant to the Illinois municipal code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-12: DUTIES.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the board of trustees shall exercise the same powers and perform the same duties as the city council in cities,
according to the Illinois municipal code. The board shall be the legislative department of the village government, and shall perform such duties and have
such powers as may be delegated by statute to it. It shall pass ordinances, resolutions, and motions in the same manner as a city council. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-13: QUORUM.
No business shall be conducted by the corporate authorities unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the corporate authorities
then elected and holding office. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-14: APPROVAL AND VETO.
All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any liability against the village, or 2) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or 3) to
sell any village property and all ordinances passed by the board of trustees, shall be deposited with the village clerk. If the president approves of them, he
shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves, he shall return to the board of trustees, with his written objections at the next regular meeting of the board
of trustees, occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The president may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any
ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective. If the president fails to return any ordinance or any
specified resolution or motion with his written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his signature.
Every resolution and motion herein specified and every ordinance or part of any which is returned to the board of trustees by the president shall be
reconsidered by the board of trustees. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees then holding office shall agree to pass an ordinance,
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 16/377
resolution or motion, notwithstanding the president's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the
president's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded.
No vote of the board of trustees shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless there are present at the special meeting as many trustees
as were present when the vote was taken. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-15: REGULAR MEETINGS.
The regular meeting of the board of trustees shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month or as otherwise set forth in the annual schedule to be
posted prior to January 1 of each year. The meetings shall commence at such time as may be set by the village board pursuant to law and no notice of
such regular meeting shall be required. In the event the regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, or for any other reason cannot be held, the meeting
shall be held on such other day as the president or the board may appoint. (Ord. 06-1305, 12-5-2006)
The meeting place of the said board, and of all commissions and committees appointed by the board, shall be at the Northfield village hall, unless
otherwise ordered by the board. (Ord. 99-1001, 10-28-1999)
Sec. 2-16: SPECIAL MEETINGS, NOTICE TO BOARD MEMBERS.
Special meetings may be called by the president or any three (3) trustees upon at least forty eight (48) hours' notice to all members and the president,
except that if all the trustees and the president are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary and such notice shall be
deemed waived. (Ord. 07-1327, 4-17-2007)
Sec. 2-17: COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.
The committee of the whole of the board of trustees shall be a standing committee, along with any such other committees the board shall from time to time
create. The village president may appoint trustees to serve as liaisons to staff to advise and direct on the specialized activities of the village in areas such
as finance, legal, and public works and safety. All such specialized activities shall be reported out to the committee of the whole. (Ord. 06-1300, 10-17-
2006)
Sec. 2-18: COMMITTEES; APPROVAL OF CLAIMS.
No claim against the village shall be allowed by the board of trustees until it has been referred to the committee of the whole for examination and approval.
(Ord. 06-1300, 10-17-2006)
Sec. 2-18.1: DETERMINING THE AGENDA FOR ALL MEETINGS OF THE CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.
An agenda shall be deemed set when it has either been distributed to the corporate authorities or has been posted for public review. Once an agenda for a
special meeting has been set, no items may be added to that agenda for that particular special meeting. The village president shall have the authority to
determine the agenda for all meetings of the corporate authorities subject only to the following conditions:
(1) The president may delegate the responsibility for development of the agenda to the village manager.
(2) An item shall be placed on the agenda if that item has received an affirmative vote for such placement from a standing or other duly appointed
committee of the village board.
(3) An item shall be added to an agenda if the following circumstances apply:
(a) If any two (2) trustees submit such a request in writing to the village president at least five (5) days in advance of any meeting for which the
request is made; or
(b) If any two (2) trustees jointly make such a request at an open session of a consolidated committee meeting of the board; or
(c) If a motion to add such an additional item at a regular board meeting is adopted by a majority of those present and voting.
(4) If in the ordinary course of business a village trustee or chairperson of a village commission or board has requested that a matter be placed on the
village board agenda, the village president or the village manager, as the case may be, shall notify the corporate authorities of the request.
(5) Once an agenda is set, items may be added or removed only by declaration of such addition or removal by the village president at an open session
meeting of the corporate authorities. Additionally, an item may be added to the agenda of a regular board meeting as set forth in subsection (3) of
this section. This shall apply to items which have been removed by declaration of the village president. (Ord. 94-813, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 2-19: RULES OF ORDER.
Rule 1. Call To Order. The president shall take the chair at the hour at which the meeting shall have been called, and call the meeting to order.
Rule 2. Order Of Business. The board of trustees shall then take up business in the following order:
(1) Roll call
(2) Minutes of the preceding meeting
(3) Petitions and communications
(4) Reports of officers
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 17/377
(5) Reports of committees
(6) Reading and consideration of proposed ordinances and resolutions
(7) Other business
Rule 3. Order And Decorum. The president shall preserve order and decorum; may speak to points of order in preference to any other member and shall
decide questions of order, subject to an appeal to the trustees by any two (2) members, on which appeal no member shall speak more than twice, unless
by leave of the board of trustees.
Rule 4. Right To Speak. Every member, previous to speaking, shall address the presiding officer, but shall not proceed with his remarks until named and
recognized by the chair.
Rule 5. Transgression Of Rules. If any member transgresses the rules of the board of trustees, the president or any member may call him to order, and
when called to order, the member shall take his seat unless permitted to explain.
Rule 6. Duty To Vote; Motions In Writing. Every member, when a question is taken, shall vote unless excused by the board of trustees, unless he be
directly interested in the question, in which case no such member shall vote. All motions shall be in writing if the president, clerk, or any member so
demands.
Rule 7. Disposition Of Reports Or Motions. After a report is made or a motion stated by the president, it shall be in possession of the board of trustees
but it may be amended or laid on the table, or withdrawn at any time before the question is put.
Rule 8. Order Of Motions. When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received but to adjourn; lay on the table; the previous question;
postpone to a certain day; to commit; to amend; to substitute, or postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall be considered only on a majority vote of
the members present.
Rule 9. Preclusion Of Amendments. A motion for the "previous question", to lay on the table, or to commit until it is decided, shall preclude all
amendments or substitutes and debate of the main question; and a motion to postpone a question indefinitely, or to adjourn it to a certain day, until it is
decided, shall preclude all amendments and substitutes to the main question.
Rule 10. Blanks To Be Filled. When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times proposed, the question shall first be put upon the largest sum or
the longest time.
Rule 11. Report Of Committees. All special committees to whom any matter may be referred, shall report thereon in a timely fashion giving the
recommendation of the majority of the committee. Those not in favor may present a minority report.
Rule 12. Questions Containing Several Propositions. When a question before the board of trustees contains several distinct propositions, any member
may call for a division of the question, so as to take a vote on each proposition separately.
Rule 13. Petitions. All petitions addressed to the board of trustees shall be in writing and filed by the clerk, unless withdrawn by leave of the board of
trustees, except as otherwise provided by statute.
Rule 14. Reconsideration. A member who votes with the prevailing side or any trustee who was absent at the time the vote was taken may move a
reconsideration, but no such motion shall be in order after the expiration of the next meeting of the board of trustees following the meeting when such vote
was taken.
Rule 15. Nonmembers Addressing Board. It shall not be allowable for any person not a member of the board of trustees, except the village officers, to
address such board without the consent of the presiding officer.
Rule 16. Robert's Rules Of Order. Whenever a question of parliamentary law not fully covered by the preceding rules shall arise, the same shall be
decided in accordance with the rules of parliamentary law as laid down in "Robert's Rules Of Order".
Rule 17. Suspension Or Amendment Of Rules. Any or all of the preceding rules or amendments thereto may be suspended or amended or additional
rules adopted by consent of the majority of the board of trustees then present. (1986 Code)
Rule 18. Voting Procedure; Telephone Meeting; Quorum1. Any matter requiring a roll call vote at a regular meeting of the board of trustees may be
voted on by an absent trustee via a conference telephone call or other electronic means between the absent trustee and the rest of the board present at
the regular meeting under the conditions set forth in section 2-15 of this article. The absent trustee's vote shall be made and recorded as if he or she were
physically present at the regular meeting. Only those trustees physically present at the meeting may be counted in determining the existence of a quorum.
(Ord. 06-1273, 1-17-2006)
Sec. 2-20: PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
The following shall be the procedure for passage of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions by the board of trustees and may not be waived or modified
except by an ordinance for that purpose and only as provided by law:
(1) Ordinances. A proposed ordinance, when first introduced at a board meeting, shall be read to the board or a written copy shall be submitted to
each member. Any alterations in the proposed ordinance suggested by the board member and generally agreed upon shall then be incorporated in
the draft, after which the president shall call for a vote on the proposed ordinance.
(2) Resolutions. Any resolutions or amendments thereto shall be reduced to writing before presentation, upon the request of any member of the
board, and after being read, shall be handed to the village clerk. If the resolution consists of several distinct propositions, each shall be voted upon
separately at the request of any member.
(3) Motions. Any motions or amendments thereto shall be reduced to writing upon the request of any member of the board. Each motion shall be
limited to one proposition.
(4) Passage. The passage of all ordinances, and any resolutions or motions shall require the concurrence of a majority of the corporate authorities
then holding office, unless a greater number is required by law. The president may vote on all questions coming before the board, and shall vote on
any ordinance, motion or resolution:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 18/377
(a) Where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; or
(b) Where no more than three (3) of the trustees elected or appointed have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is
no tie vote; or
(c) Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by law to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-20.1: PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS VIA TELEPHONE CONFERENCE CALL OR OTHER ELECTRONIC MEANS.
For the purposes of this section and as per amendments to the open meetings act effective January 1, 2007, the term "meeting" is redefined as "any
gathering whether in person, by video, audio conference, telephone call, electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat and
other instant messaging or other means of interactive communication) of a majority of a quorum of the public body held for the purpose of discussing
public business (including closed session meetings)".
Any meeting of the board of trustees may be attended by a maximum of two (2) absent trustees via telephone conference call or other electronic means
provided there is a quorum of the public body physically present and subject to the following conditions:
(1) The absent trustee(s) cannot be present at the meeting or public hearing because of one of the following three (3) reasons:
(a) Personal illness or disability,
(b) Employment/business related reasons or business of the public body, or
(c) A family or other emergency;
(2) A maximum of two (2) elected officials may attend a meeting or public hearing by telephone conference call or other electronic means provided a
quorum of the board is physically present and following approval of the remote attendance by the board members. The elected official(s) who first
makes the appropriate request shall be given first consideration;
(3) The trustee(s) must provide notice of participation by telephone conference call or other electronic means to the village clerk at least forty eight (48)
hours in advance, when possible, so that the public notice of the meeting or public hearing contains as its first item, "Consideration of and possible
actions on any request(s) for electronic participation in the meeting" and includes the following information:
(a) The name(s) of the trustee(s) attending in that manner,
(b) The reasons for not being present at the meeting or public hearing to vote in person, and
(c) The type of medium through which the trustee(s) will attend.
If appropriate, a listing of locations, if any, where the public may attend the meeting or public hearing through use of the technology being used will
be included as part of the agenda;
(4) Where it is not practicable for the absent trustee(s) to provide forty eight (48) hours' notice of participation by telephone conference call or other
electronic means, the president, or presiding officer, prior to the convening of the meeting or public hearing, shall announce the information noted in
subsection (3) of this section;
(5) If the president or other presiding officer attends the meeting or public hearing by telephone conference call or other electronic means, he or she
may participate in the meeting discussions and vote in such circumstances as may require the vote of the president, but a presiding officer pro tem
shall be appointed to chair the meeting. Such presiding officer pro tem shall retain the ability to vote as an elected official on any issue before the
board in that meeting;
(6) The voice of the absent elected official(s) participating by telephone conference call or other electronic means, after being identified by the rest of
the board as belonging to the absent trustee(s), shall be simultaneously broadcast to the public present at the meeting or public hearing so that their
voice(s) can be heard. The absent trustee(s) must also be able to hear any public comment regarding the issue(s) elicited at the meeting or public
hearing before the vote is taken;
(7) An absent trustee participating in a vote on any agenda item by telephone or other electronic means shall attend to and participate in the entire
discussion of that agenda item before being permitted to vote. If there is an interruption of telephonic or other service for any reason during the
discussion of that item, the meeting shall proceed and the absent trustee(s) may not vote on the item during which the interruption occurred;
(8) The board, in its discretion, and by majority vote, may authorize its staff, consultants or other individuals to participate in the proceedings of the
meeting by telephone conference call or other electronic means, to the extent permissible under Illinois law;
(9) The village clerk shall record as part of the minutes of the meeting, the name of the trustee(s) attending electronically, the reason for the trustee(s)
not being present at the meeting to vote in person, and the type of medium (telephone conference or other electronic means) through which the
trustee(s) attended the meeting;
(10) It shall be the sole responsibility of the absent trustee(s) to provide, prior to the meeting, the telephone number where they can be contacted, if
attending via telephone conference. Absent trustee(s) must ensure that all televisions, radios, other telephones or loud distracting noises within
hearing range of the absent trustee during the course of the meeting are turned off or eliminated. (Ord. 07-1350, 12-3-2007)
ARTICLE III. VILLAGE PRESIDENT
Sec. 2-21: ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
The village president shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-22: DUTIES; POWERS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 19/377
The president shall be the chief executive officer and chief presiding officer of the village board and:
(1) Shall be the president of the board of trustees as provided by statute.
(2) Shall vote according to the requirements of subsection 2-20(4) of this chapter.
(3) Shall be, ex officio, a member of all boards and commissions of the village of Northfield.
(4) Shall be the liquor control commissioner of the village of Northfield.
In addition, the president shall perform all such duties and have such powers as may be required or granted by statute or by provision of this code or other
ordinances, including the power to solemnize marriages as set forth in 750 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/209. (Ord. 95-832, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 2-23: BOND, OATH OF OFFICE.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the president shall give a bond as provided in section 2-5 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-24: ABSENCE, TEMPORARY DISABILITY OR VACANCY.
(1) If the president is absent from an individual meeting but is capable of performing his duties, a member of the board shall be selected as a presiding
officer by the board members present.
(2) Upon notice of a temporary absence from the village or temporary disability of the president, the chairman of the finance committee shall act as
president pro tem, and during the absence or disability of the president, shall perform the duties pertaining to the office. If the temporary absence or
disability lasts longer than thirty (30) days, the board of trustees shall then elect one of its members to act as president pro tem at the first board
meeting occurring at least thirty (30) days after said notice. The elected president pro tem shall serve until the president resumes his duties or until
the office is declared vacant.
(3) Whenever a vacancy in the office of president occurs during his term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next election of
trustees, unless the vacancy is filled by a special election as provided by law. During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until a
president is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the election of an acting president by the board of trustees.
(4) Nothing in this section shall deprive a temporary presiding officer or president pro tem from voting in his capacity as a trustee, but he shall not be
entitled to another vote in his capacity as temporary presiding officer or president pro tem. Where a president's vote is required by subsection 2-20(4)
(a) or (4)(b) of this chapter, the issue voted upon shall be tabled until one of the following has occurred:
(a) The permanent president is present.
(b) A new president has been elected.
(c) An acting president has been elected pursuant to subsection 2-24(3) of this section; or
(d) There is a unanimous vote of the trustees present to permit the presiding officer or president pro tem to vote as the president. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE IV. VILLAGE MANAGER
Sec. 2-25: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL: QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCY.
The village manager shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees for an indefinite term. He shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice respecting the duties of his office
hereinafter set forth. It is the policy of the village of Northfield that the village manager shall establish residency in the village within one year of
appointment. The corporate authorities, at their sole discretion, may waive this requirement on such conditions as they deem appropriate. Once waived,
the village manager may not subsequently be required to establish residency within the village of Northfield.
Neither the village president nor any village trustee shall be appointed as village manager during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within
one year after the expiration of his term.
The village manager may be removed by the village board by a majority vote of the members holding office at any time.
A vacancy in the office shall be filled as soon as possible. (Ord. 91-671, 3-18-1991)
Sec. 2-26: BOND.
(Rep. by Ord. 93-756, 3-22-1993)
Sec. 2-27: EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The president and board of trustees, on behalf of the village, may execute an employment agreement with the village manager subject to the provisions of
this code.
The village manager shall receive such compensation as the board shall from time to time fix in accordance with section 2-8 of this code. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 20/377
Sec. 2-28: POWERS AND DUTIES.
The village manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the village. He shall be responsible to the corporate
authorities for the proper administration of all affairs of the village. The president and board of trustees shall deal with the administration solely through the
village manager. The village manager shall have sole responsibility for appointment and removal of employees within such administration unless otherwise
provided by law.
The village manager shall have power and be required to:
(1) Appoint and remove all nonelective officers and employees of the village except as provided by law or this code. Such appointments and removals
by the village manager shall be based upon merit and upon the qualifications of such officers or employees without regard to any political belief or
affiliation.
(2) Appoint and remove the Village Attorney and Village Prosecutor with the advice and consent of the Corporate Authorities.
(3) Appoint and remove the Village Engineer with the advice and consent of the Corporate Authorities.
(4) Be responsible for the preparation of the annual budget and submit it to the Corporate Authorities and be responsible for its administration after
adoption.
(5) Prepare and submit to the Corporate Authorities from time to time as they may require reports on the finances and the administrative activities of
the Village.
(6) Keep the Corporate Authorities advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Village and make such recommendations as he may deem
desirable.
(7) Recommend to the Corporate Authorities the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the Village.
(8) Recommend to the Corporate Authorities, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary and expedient.
(9) Attend all meetings of the Village Board unless otherwise directed by the Board. The Village Manager shall have the privilege of taking part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the Board. He shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the Board. (1986 Code)
(10) Purchase materials, supplies, equipment and services not exceeding the Illinois compiled statutory allowance for which funds are provided in the
budget, but no such purchase which exceeds any officially budgeted amount may be made until the Village has increased that amount as provided
by law. He may issue such rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of the business of purchasing between himself as
purchasing agent and the heads of departments, officers, and employees of the Village, provided such rules are consistent with the provisions of this
Code and applicable by law. (Ord. 94-810, 8-22-1994)
(11) See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
(12) Conduct reasonable investigations into the affairs of the Village or any department or division thereof.
(13) Investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the Village and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the Village, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the Village are faithfully observed.
(14) Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
(15) Perform such additional duties as may be required of him by the Village Board or the President, not inconsistent with the Village ordinances or the
law.
(16) Make quarterly reports to the Corporate Authorities of activities of all departments under his jurisdiction.
(17) Enter into mutual assistance agreements with approval of the Corporate Authorities with any other police, fire, or public safety agencies. May
adopt rules governing the assignment of the personnel and equipment of the Police and Fire Departments and emergency medical service outside
the corporate limits of the Village, and may determine the charges to be made for such services. Such agreements, rules and charges, upon
approval of the Corporate Authorities, shall be binding upon the members of the Police and Fire Departments and the emergency medical service.
(1986 Code)
(18) Act in the capacity of Village Clerk or Deputy Village Clerk as appropriate. (Ord. 94-810, 8-22-1994)
(19) Act in the capacity of Assistant Treasurer of the Village and the Police Pension Board. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
(20) Sign payroll and disbursement checks as necessary. (Ord. 94-810, 8-22-1994)
(21) Act in the capacity of Assistant Village Treasurer. (Ord. 96-889, 10-28-1996)
(22) a) When purchases are made within the Village Manager's statutory purchasing power pursuant to subsection (10) of this section; the Manager
may offset the cost of a new item by trading surplus Village personal property in on the new item to be purchased; b) when the new item exceeds the
statutory limit of the Village Manager's purchasing power, the Manager may recommend to the Village Board, and the Village Board may approve,
the trade-in of any surplus Village personal property on the new item of personal property being purchased by the Village. (Ord. 17-1692, 10-17-
2017)
Sec. 2-29: ACTING MANAGER.
During the temporary absence or disability of the village manager, the village manager may appoint an acting village manager to act in his stead, unless
the corporate authorities shall provide otherwise. If not already bonded, the acting village manager shall provide a bond as set forth in section 2-5 of this
chapter. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 21/377
ARTICLE V. VILLAGE CLERK
Sec. 2-30: APPOINTMENT.
There is hereby created the office of village clerk who shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees. He shall serve for one year and until his
successor shall have been appointed and shall qualify. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-31: DUTIES.
The village clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the corporate authorities, and all papers belonging to the municipality, the custody and
control of which are not given to other officers.
He shall attend all meetings of the corporate authorities and keep a full record of their proceedings.
The clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or by the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village.
The clerk shall file and preserve according to date of filing and subject matter, all oaths of office and written reports of officers and committees.
The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
(1986 Code)
The village clerk shall be the designated freedom of information officer and her/his designee(s) shall be responsible for complying with requests for access
to public records per the freedom of information act effective July 1, 1984, and amended by PA 96-0542 effective January 1, 2010. See article IX,
"Freedom Of Information Act", of this chapter. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-32: DEPUTY.
The clerk may appoint a deputy, by and with the consent of the corporate authorities who, in the temporary absence of the clerk, in case of sickness or
otherwise, shall be empowered to perform all, or specifically designated duties of the village clerk. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-33: VACANCY; CLERK PRO TEM.
In case the office of village clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of an acting clerk by the president and
board of trustees voting jointly. Such acting clerk may serve until a permanent village clerk has been appointed. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-34: BOND.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the clerk shall execute a bond as provided in section 2-5 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE VI. VILLAGE TREASURER
Sec. 2-35: APPOINTMENT.
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer, who shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees, as is provided by statute. He shall
serve for one year, and until his successor shall have been appointed and shall qualify. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-36: BOND.
Before entering the duties of his office, the village treasurer shall execute a bond, as provided in section 2-5 of this chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-37: DUTIES.
The treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute or by the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village. He
shall receive all money paid into the village treasury, either directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer or employee
who may receive it. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-38: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
The treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such depositories as may be designated from time to time by the corporate authorities. He shall keep the
deposit of the village money separate and distinct from his own money, and shall not make private or personal use of any village money. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-39: RECORDS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 22/377
The treasurer shall keep records showing all money received by him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid, and
he shall keep accurate records at all times showing the financial status of the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-40: ACCOUNTING.
The treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by statute, by the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village, and he
shall keep them in the manner required by the corporate authorities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-41: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS.
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the improvement or
bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for no other
purpose unless to reimburse the village for money expended for such improvement. Payments on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the
statutes and the law and the treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such a manner so that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest
can be made and ascertained. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-42: WARRANTS; TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
All warrants drawn on the treasurer must be signed by the president, by the clerk, or by some other officer authorized so to do, stating the particular fund
or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and the person to whom payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid except as may be provided by
statute. Money shall not be transferred by the treasurer from one fund to another, after it has been received by him, nor appropriated to any purpose other
than that for which it has been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the president and board of trustees in manner and form prescribed by
statute. (1986 Code)
Sec. 2-43: REPORTS.
The treasurer shall make a monthly report to the board of trustees showing the receipts and disbursements during the month previous, and the state and
condition of every account not closed on his books. He shall also make an annual report, during the last month of the fiscal year, showing all the activities
of his office. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE VII. VILLAGE BUDGET OFFICER
Sec. 2-44: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.
There is hereby created the office of the village budget officer pursuant to chapter 24, section 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois municipal code (1991
edition). (Ord. 92-735, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 2-45: BOND.
Before entering the duties of office, the village budget officer shall execute a bond, as set forth in section 2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-735, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 2-46: DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET CHANGES.
Upon approval of the village manager and so long as there is not an overall increase in the budget for any fund, the budget officer shall have the following
authority with respect to a departmental budget:
(1) Move monies from one established classification to another within a fund with the exception of specific salaries approved by the board; and
(2) Change the name or subject matter of a classification; and
(3) Create subclassification within an established classification. (Ord. 92-735, 8-24-1992)
ARTICLE VIII. UNIFORM COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
Sec. 2-47: ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURE.
An employee or community member should notify any complaint coordinator (or such alternate person as is specifically designated by the village) if she/he
believes that the village, its employees, officials, or agents have engaged in unlawful discrimination or have violated his or her rights guaranteed by the
state or federal constitution, state or federal statute, or other legal right, including:
(1) Title II of the Americans with disabilities act;
(2) Title VI of the civil rights act or Illinois human rights act;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 23/377
(3) Equal employment opportunities act (title VII of the civil rights act), equal pay act of 1963 or Illinois equal pay act of 2003;
(4) Age discrimination in employment act;
(5) Illinois whistleblower act;
(6) Sexual harassment (Illinois human rights act, title VII of the civil rights act of 1964, and title IX of the education amendments of 1972).
Such complaints should be discussed with the complaint coordinator, who will make efforts to address and resolve the complaint without any further
procedures hereunder. If the problem is not resolved, a written complaint can be filed hereunder and the complaint coordinator will act in good faith to
address the complaint promptly and fairly. This procedure shall not affect, nor be affected by, other remedies such person may have under the law.
Any time lines hereunder may be extended by the complaint coordinator as she/he finds appropriate. As used in this policy, "business days" means those
days when the village hall is open. (Ord. 09-1439, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-48: FILING A COMPLAINT.
A written complaint can be filed with the complaint coordinator. The complaint coordinator will assist the person with such filing, as may be needed. If the
person attempting to file a complaint wishes to file with a person of the same gender, the village will designate an appropriate alternate complaint
coordinator of such gender. The complaint coordinator can request at any time that a complaint be put in writing, or arrange a meeting with an employee
as determined necessary by the complaint coordinator. (Ord. 09-1439, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-49: PROCESSING A COMPLAINT.
The complaint coordinator will gather such information, or conduct an investigation, as may be appropriate to the complaint. The complaint, and
information gathered pursuant to the complaint, will be kept confidential except as needed to complete the investigation, resolve the complaint, comply
with applicable law or otherwise properly inform and receive feedback from the officials or persons necessary to a resolution of the complaint. The time
lines related to the complaint process are as follows:
(1) Within thirty (30) business days of filing a complaint, the complaint coordinator will complete a written response setting forth his or her findings and
provide such report to the board of trustees. The time will be extended, if necessary, to conduct an accurate and thorough investigation. The
complaint coordinator will keep the board informed of all written complaints.
(2) At its next regular meeting after receiving the complaint coordinator's response, the board shall review the response and make a decision regarding
such response. The board shall affirm, reverse, or amend the response or require the complaint coordinator to take certain further actions or request
additional information.
(3) Within ten (10) business days of the board's decision on the complaint coordinator's response, the board will provide a written copy of its final
decision to the person filing the complaint, by appropriate means, and provide a copy of the decision to the complaint coordinator.
This complaint procedure shall not be construed to create any independent right to any specific remedy or to a board hearing. The complaint coordinator
will make good faith attempts to follow this procedure, in a timely fashion. The nature and extent of each investigation will be dependent upon the specific
facts of each case.
Complaint(s) are to be brought to the attention of the complaint coordinator for the village of Northfield. Contact the complaint coordinator by going to the
village website, www.northfieldil.org and clicking under administration or as follows:
Name: Village of Northfield Complaint Coordinator
Address: 361 Happ Road, Northfield, IL 60093
Telephone: 847-446-9200
If for some reason that is not feasible, the alternate person with whom the complaint can be raised will be:
Name: Village Manager, Village of Northfield
Address: 361 Happ Road, Northfield, IL 60093
Telephone: 847-446-9200
Legal reference: Americans with disabilities act, 42 USC section 12101 et seq.
Equal employment opportunities act (title VII of the civil rights act), 42 USC section 2000e et seq.; equal pay act, 29 USC section 206(d); equal pay act of
2003, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 112.
Illinois human rights act, 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101; title VI of the civil rights act, 42 USC section 2000d et seq.
Age discrimination in employment act, 29 USC section 621 et seq.
Illinois whistleblower act, 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes 174/1 et seq.
Title IX of the education amendments of 1972, 20 USC section 1681 et seq. (Ord. 09-1439, 12-7-2009)
ARTICLE IX. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
Sec. 2-50: DESIGNATION OF FOIA OFFICER.
The village clerk is hereby designated as the FOIA officer to whom all initial requests for access to the records of the village are to be referred. Such
requests are to be made in writing and submitted at or mailed to the offices of the Village Clerk at 361 Happ Road, Northfield, IL 60093, between the hours
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 24/377
of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., Monday through Friday, or faxed to 847-446-4670. In the event that the village clerk is not
available during the times described above, the deputy village clerk is designated the deputy FOIA officer to handle such requests. Except in instances
when records are furnished immediately, the FOIA officer, or her/his designees, shall receive requests submitted to the village under the freedom of
information act, ensure that the village responds to requests in accordance with the time designated by the act, and issue responses. The FOIA officer or
her/his designees shall develop a list of documents or categories of records that the village shall immediately disclose upon request. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-
2009)
Sec. 2-51: PROCEDURE FOR HANDLING FOIA REQUESTS.
Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA officer shall:
(1) Note the date the village receives the written request;
(2) Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request;
(3) Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied; and
(4) Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of
other communications. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-52: TRAINING OF FOIA OFFICER AND DESIGNEES.
The FOIA officer, deputy FOIA officer and her or his designees (coordinators) shall, within six (6) months after January 1, 2010, successfully complete an
electronic training curriculum to be developed by the public access counselor of the state of Illinois and, thereafter, successfully complete an annual
training program. Whenever a new freedom of information officer, deputy officer and/or coordinator is designated by the village, that person shall
successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within thirty (30) days after appointment to the position. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-53: RECORD RETRIEVAL.
Any records which are the subject of a request under the freedom of information act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored, by the FOIA
officer, or by an employee of the village acting under the direction of the FOIA officer. In no event shall records be retrieved by the party requesting them or
by any person who is not employed by the village. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-54: FEES.
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the FOIA officer pursuant
to section 6(b) of the freedom of information act. The village clerk shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the clerk's and FOIA coordinator's
offices. The fees charged for copying records and the cost of certifying copies, if certification is requested, shall reflect the rates allowable under the FOIA
act and as noted in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-55: DENIAL OF FOIA REQUEST.
In the event that a request to inspect village records is denied by the FOIA officer or her/his designee the denial may be appealed to the public access
counselor of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 09-1440, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 2-56: DOCUMENTS AVAILABLE.
The village clerk or her/his designee shall prepare: 1) a village information directory; 2) a block diagram of the functional subdivisions of the village; 3) a
village records directory; and 4) a records catalogue. This information shall also be posted on the village's website. (Ord. 10-1442, 1-19-2010)
Footnote 1: This will expire one year from the date of its adoption and approval.
Title Chapter 3
DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
Chapter 3
DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
ARTICLE I. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Sec. 3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT; PUBLIC WORKS, WATER AND SEWERAGE DIVISIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 25/377
There is hereby established a public works department for the village. The department shall be made up of three (3) divisions: the public works division
(including parks and forestry), the sewerage division, and the water division. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Sec. 3-2: ADMINISTRATION.
The village manager shall supervise the public works department. The three (3) divisions (public works, sewerage, and water) shall be administered by a
director of public works. The village manager shall have the power to appoint and remove the director of public works. The village manager shall report
any such appointment or removal decisions, and the reasons therefor, to the corporate authorities at their next regular meeting. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Sec. 3-3: COMPENSATION.
The village manager, subject to the approval of the corporate authorities, shall fix the salary of the director of public works. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Sec. 3-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The director of public works and the department of public works, subject to the direction of the village manager, shall have the following duties and
functions:
(1) Maintain and repair all public streets, lighting, alleys, sidewalks, viaducts, bridges and other structures pertaining thereto in the village.
(2) Have charge of all physical property of the village which is not assigned to the charge or supervision of some other department of the village.
(3) Keep records of all inspections, complaints, repairs and installations as may be attended to by the public works division.
(4) Act as municipal arborist pursuant to chapter 10 of this code.
(5) Manage and operate the village water distribution and sewerage systems.
(6) Be responsible for the enforcement of all ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to the use and operation of the municipal water and sewerage
systems, in particular, but not limited to, those found in chapter 7 of this code.
(7) Keep records of all inspections, complaints, repairs, and installations, as may be attended to by the divisions of water and sewerage.
(8) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the village manager. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Sec. 3-5: DUTIES: SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWERAGE.
(Rep. by Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Sec. 3-6: DUTIES: BUILDING AND ZONING COMMISSIONER.
(Rep. by Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
ARTICLE II. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Sec. 3-7: APPOINTMENT OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.
There is hereby established the office of finance director, an administrative office of the village. The finance director shall be appointed by the village
manager and shall be subject to removal by him. The village manager shall report such discharge and the reasons therefor to the corporate authorities no
later than the next regular meeting of the corporate authorities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-8: COMPENSATION.
The salary of the finance director shall be fixed by the village manager, subject to approval by the president and board of trustees. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-9: BOND.
(Rep. by Ord. 93-756, 3-22-1993)
Sec. 3-10: DUTIES.
The finance director shall have the following duties and functions:
(1) Preparation of proposed annual budgets, appropriation ordinances and tax levy ordinances. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 26/377
(2) Supervision of collections, expenditures and investments. (Ord. 92-721, 5-26-1992)
(3) Shall cause all financial records of the village to be duly kept.
(4) Preparation of financial reports and statements.
The finance director, in performance of his duties, shall be subject to the control and direction of the village manager. He shall perform such other services,
within or without the finance department, as may be required by the village manager. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE III. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Division - General
Division I - Police Department
Sec. 3-15: OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
The department shall be administered by the chief of police who shall be appointed by the village manager. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-15.1: OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE.
(1) The chief of police shall be assisted in the duties of administering the department by a deputy chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall be
appointed by the chief of police from among those officers of the department having at least five (5) years of experience with the department.
(2) If the chief of police is of the opinion that there are no officers within the department who are qualified to hold the office of deputy chief of police, then
the chief shall notify the village manager, in writing, of such circumstances. The chief of police and the village manager shall then seek to otherwise fill
the office as may be permitted by law.
(3) The deputy chief of police shall be subject to removal or suspension by the chief of police, who shall promptly report such removal or suspension and
the reasons therefor to the village manager. If the deputy chief of police held a rank within the police department prior to assuming the office of deputy
chief of police, he or she may not be removed or suspended from said rank except according to the law governing such removal or suspension.
(4) The deputy chief of police shall have such duties as may be assigned to the chief of police. (Ord. 99-992, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-16: BOND.
(Rep. by Ord. 93-756, 3-22-1993)
Sec. 3-17: REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
The chief of police shall be subject to removal or suspension by the village manager who shall promptly report such removal or suspension and the
reasons therefor to the corporate authorities. If removed, such removal shall not be effective until confirmed by a majority vote of the corporate authorities.
If the chief of police held a rank within the police department prior to assuming the office of chief of police, he may not be removed or suspended from said
rank except according to the law governing such removal or suspension. (Ord. 91-676, 4-22-1991)
Sec. 3-18: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
The chief of police shall have the following duties:
(1) He shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of its functions. All persons who are members of the police department and all
nonsworn personnel within the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police.
(2) The chief of police shall be keeper of the village detention facility which is established and located in the village hall and shall have charge and
custody of it and of all persons incarcerated therein.
(a) In all cases of arrest in which detention and custody of any person arrested for violations of this code shall be authorized, it shall be the duty of
the keeper of the village detention facility to receive, and he is authorized and empowered to receive from any person legally empowered to make
arrests, any person arrested, and to detain such prisoner until such prisoner shall furnish proper bail or can be safely brought before a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(b) It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep the village detention facility in such condition and to care for all persons incarcerated therein, in a
manner conforming to the requirements of the department of correction, bureau of detention standards.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 27/377
(3) He shall make and retain such records and reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute, the corporate
authorities or the village manager.
(4) Such other duties as may be assigned by the village manager. (Ord. 91-676, 4-22-1991)
Sec. 3-19: COMPENSATION.
The fixing of compensation for police officers shall comply with statute and section 2-8 of this code.
The salary of the chief of police shall be fixed by the village manager subject to the approval of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 91-676, 4-22-1991)
Sec. 3-20: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; CITIZENSHIP QUALIFICATIONS.
A. No person shall be appointed or considered for appointment as a sworn police officer in the Northfield police department unless, at the time of
application, that person is an elector of the United States Of America.
B. Except as set forth in subsection C of this section, all patrol officers and sergeants of the Northfield police department shall be selected and appointed
by the board of police commissioners as provided in the Illinois municipal code.
C. The board of police commissioners shall have the authority to adopt rules for the appointment of current village employees as sworn patrol officers
provided those rules to contain, at least, the following standards:
(1) The person has served as a village of Northfield public service officer or a part time village of Northfield police officer for a minimum of eighteen (18)
months; and
(2) Has been recommended, in writing, for hiring as a sworn patrol officer by the chief of police.
Such rules may include a waiver of testing and waiver of eligibility list placement similar to the hiring of qualified members from other police departments.
(Ord. 15-1633, 10-20-2015)
Sec. 3-20.1: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS.
A. "Part time officer" means a member of the Northfield police department who is employed by the village of Northfield for less than one thousand (1,000)
hours in a twelve (12) month period beginning May 1 of any calendar year and who has completed the training requirements for part time police officers
as promulgated by the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board.
B. The chief of police of the village shall have the authority to hire part time police officers subject to the approval of the village manager and to appropriate
funding for such officers by the village board.
C. Part time police officers are not subject to the village of Northfield board of police commissioners, but are at will employees whose employment may be
terminated or their hours diminished at the sole discretion of the chief of police.
D. Part time police officers employed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be subject to any of the provisions contained in section 10-2.1-1 et
seq., of the Illinois municipal code for the hiring, discipline and termination of full time police officers.
E. Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the following standards:
(1) Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
(2) Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
(3) Pass a medical examination.
(4) Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
(5) Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
(6) Possess no prior felony convictions.
(7) Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged. (Ord. 12-1531, 8-20-2012)
Sec. 3-21: RULES AND REGULATIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 28/377
The chief of police shall make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the department as he or she shall
deem advisable, and all such rules and regulations shall be binding upon all members of the police department. Such rules and regulations may include,
but are not limited to, the chain of command within the department, residency requirements for sworn police personnel, and necessary policies and
procedures. (Ord. 08-1370, 3-18-2008)
Sec. 3-22: STOLEN PROPERTY, CUSTODY OF.
The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered by the village and may designate a property custodian whose
responsibility it shall be to keep a record of all stolen or abandoned property. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-23: RECORDS.
All records and reports of the police department shall be preserved within the custody of the chief of police. (1986 Code)
Division II - Fire Rescue Department
Sec. 3-24: CREATION OF THE NORTHFIELD FIRE RESCUE DEPARTMENT.
There is hereby created a fire rescue department for the village as a constituent part of the department of public safety. It shall be known as the Northfield
fire rescue department and shall consist of a fire rescue chief and such assistants and members as the corporate authorities shall from time to time
authorize. The Northfield fire rescue department shall consist of a fire department component and an emergency medical service component. The function
of the emergency medical service shall be to provide emergency medical services to persons in need of such services when called upon or otherwise
ordered to do so. The emergency medical service shall be a part of the fire rescue department, and shall at all times be subject to the rules and regulations
governing the fire rescue department. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-25: OFFICE OF THE FIRE RESCUE CHIEF.
The department shall be administered by the fire rescue chief, who shall be appointed by the village manager. The fire rescue chief may, for both official
and unofficial purposes, be referred to as the fire chief. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-26: REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION OF FIRE RESCUE CHIEF.
The fire rescue chief shall be subject to removal or suspension by the village manager, who shall promptly report any such removal or suspension, and the
reasons therefor, to the corporate authorities. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-27: DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FIRE RESCUE CHIEF.
(1) The fire rescue chief shall be responsible for the performance by the fire rescue department of all of its functions. All persons employed by or
connected with the department, including emergency medical service personnel, while on duty shall serve subject to the orders of the fire rescue chief.
(2) The fire rescue chief shall have and retain custody of any and all village firefighting apparatus and equipment and emergency medical apparatus and
equipment.
(3) It shall be the duty of the fire rescue chief, if practical, to attend all fires and emergency situations occurring within the village. In the event of his or her
absence from any fire or emergency situation, it shall be the duty of the highest ranking officer present to take charge of the department and exercise
all powers of the fire rescue chief.
(4) The fire rescue chief may prescribe boundaries in the vicinity of any fire or other emergency situation within which no unauthorized person shall be
permitted to go.
(5) The fire rescue chief shall have the power and authority to cause the removal of any property whenever, in his or her judgment, it shall be necessary for
the protection of persons or property from fire or other emergency situations, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining property. (Ord. 99-
993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-28: SALARY OF THE FIRE RESCUE CHIEF.
The salary of the fire rescue chief shall be set by the village manager with the approval of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-29: RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The fire rescue chief shall prescribe and establish from time to time such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of members as he or she may
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 29/377
deem advisable, and such rules and regulations shall be binding upon all members of the fire rescue department. Such rules and regulations may include,
but are not limited to, chain of command within the department, residency requirements, response time and necessary policies and procedures. (Ord. 08-
1370, 3-18-2008)
Sec. 3-30: RECORDS.
It shall be the duty of the fire rescue chief to maintain records of the employment and activities of all firefighting and emergency medical personnel. The fire
rescue chief shall also maintain records of any and all fire and emergency medical apparatus and equipment owned and maintained by the fire rescue
department. The fire rescue chief shall record all activities of the Northfield fire rescue department, including, but not limited to, the answering of fire
alarms, calls for emergency medical assistance and firefighting and emergency medical training and exhibitions. These records shall include the extent of
and damage caused by all such fires and emergency situations. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-31: EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
Every person who shall be present at the scene of a fire shall be subject to the orders of any officer of the fire rescue department. Any person disobeying
such orders shall be subject to a citation and fine in accordance with the general penalty provision of this code. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-32: USE OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.
Neither the fire rescue department nor any of its members shall make use of village firefighting equipment or apparatus, or water from water mains located
within the village, except in cases of fire, fire alarm or training and exhibition purposes. Permission for use of equipment or water for training and exhibition
purposes is required and shall be given only upon the written order of the fire rescue chief or under his immediate supervision and direction. Any member
of the fire rescue department who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to immediate discharge from the fire rescue department upon the
recommendation of the fire rescue chief. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-33: MEMBERSHIP.
All members of the Northfield fire rescue department except fire rescue chief shall be selected and appointed by the fire rescue chief, subject to the
approval of the village manager. The fire rescue chief may suspend from duty or discharge any of such members, subject to the approval of the village
manager. A written report of any such suspension or discharge shall be made to the village manager within twenty four (24) hours of the action. The village
manager shall in turn report any such suspension or discharge to the corporate authorities at the next scheduled meeting. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-34: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
The members of the Northfield fire rescue department shall be compensated only for services rendered in connection with attending the extinguishing of
fires, answering fire alarms or alerts, answering emergency calls, answering or responding to calls for emergency medical services, performing emergency
medical services, attending training sessions, routine maintenance of equipment, apparatus and buildings, and such other functions as may be authorized
by the fire rescue chief which are reasonably related to fire prevention, fire protection and/or emergency medical services. Such compensation shall be in
accordance with an appropriate wage schedule as approved by the corporate authorities, and shall comply with all requirements of this code and any other
applicable statutory provisions. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-35: ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The members of the fire rescue department shall have an annual election of officers on the first Monday in October. This election of officers shall not be an
encroachment upon the power and authority granted to the fire rescue chief pursuant to this code. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-36: TAX ON FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
On or before July 15 of each year, every corporation, company, provider and/or association not incorporated under the laws of the state, but engaged in
the provision of fire insurance within the village, shall pay to the finance director for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire rescue department, an
amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts collected during the preceding twelve (12) month period ending on July 1 of that year from fire
insurance on properties situated within the village. It shall be unlawful for any foreign fire insurance company to transact any business of fire insurance
within the village while in default of this section. However, such default shall not relieve or otherwise excuse any company from the payment of any risk
that may be undertaken or incurred in violation of this section. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-37: DEPARTMENT FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD.
A. The village of Northfield foreign fire insurance tax board (the "board") is hereby created to consist of five (5) members. Five (5) officers shall comprise
the board and shall be elected from all members of the village fire rescue department and shall have full voting privileges on any matter before the
board. Each such officer shall hold one of the following titles:
(1) President
(2) Vice president
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 30/377
(3) Treasurer
(4) Secretary
(5) Assistant secretary
The officers of the board shall be filled by election by the members of the village fire rescue department. In addition to the officers as provided above,
the fire rescue chief of the Northfield fire rescue department or his/her designee shall be an ex officio member of the board, unless otherwise elected
to the board at an election held in accordance with the provisions of this section. As an ex officio member, the fire rescue chief shall not have any
voting privileges, but shall have the right to participate in all open or closed session discussions regarding the management of foreign fire insurance
tax funds, preparation of annual budgets, or any other matter within the scope of the powers and duties of the board and notice of any regular or
special meeting in the same manner given to any voting member.
B. The term "member" as used in this section shall mean any nonprobationary member in good standing, including firefighters, paramedics and
emergency medical technicians, paid-on-call firefighter, or officer of the village fire rescue department, including the fire rescue chief and all promoted
positions. No probationary member of the department may hold an office during the period of his/her probation.
C. The initial election of the board shall be held prior to December 31, 1999, and shall be held in odd numbered years thereafter. Officers shall take office
on January 1 and shall serve up to and including December 31 two (2) years thereafter. The terms for all officers shall be two (2) years. The initial
election shall be held in accordance with guidelines and procedures established by the village attorney and, thereafter, the board shall adopt any and
all necessary rules and regulations governing the nomination and election of such officers for subsequent elections.
D. A village fire rescue department foreign fire insurance tax fund (the "fund") is hereby created and all revenue received by the village from the foreign fire
insurance tax shall be deposited in the fund and shall be held and expended in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) The treasurer of the board shall provide to the village finance director an annual accounting of receipts and expenditures of the fund.
(2) By December 31 of each year, the officers of the board shall approve a preliminary budget for the expenditure of funds received pursuant to the
foreign fire insurance tax. The officers of the board shall, no later than April 1, adopt a final budget for the collection and expenditure of the foreign
fire insurance tax, to be approved by ordinance by the president and board of trustees of the village in order to comply with the statutory mandate of
a prior appropriation for all expenditures. The final budget may be amended at any time by a majority vote of the officers of the board with the
concurrence of the president and board of trustees consistent with established practice. Expenditures shall be made only for items specifically
described in the final budget as originally adopted or subsequently amended.
(3) The board shall have the power to approve the expenditure of monies from the fund for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the department. Any
expenditure in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees; provided, however,
that said expenditure shall be approved if it is for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the department.
(4) Any expenditure made from the fund shall be made in accordance with the village rules and regulations, practices, and ordinances, as may be
amended from time to time, which govern the procurement of goods and services.
(5) No expenditure shall be made from the fund without approval of the board.
(6) The board treasurer shall give a bond in an amount equal to three (3) times the amount of foreign fire insurance tax revenue to the president and
board of trustees of the village to ensure the treasurer's faithful execution and performance of his/her duties as imposed by law and by board rules
and regulations. Any fees for said bond shall be paid from funds collected pursuant to the foreign fire insurance tax.
(7) The board treasurer shall be responsible for paying the service charge levied by the Illinois municipal league for the collection of the foreign fire
insurance tax from the proceeds of the foreign fire insurance tax; provided, however, that such charge is chargeable pursuant to state law, and
further provided that such charge has not already been retained by the Illinois municipal league prior to disbursement of the foreign fire insurance
tax.
E. The board shall, in accordance with the open meetings act, establish a regular time and place for its meetings. The board president shall preside at the
meetings. The board secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the board, and these records shall be open to the
public. Three (3) members of the board shall be sufficient to constitute approval of business before the board. Special meetings, with appropriate
notice, may be called by the president or by no less than three (3) members of the board.
F. The board may promulgate written rules and regulations governing board matters so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with any
applicable law. All rules and regulations promulgated by the board must be approved by a majority of the president and board of trustees of the village
in the same manner as for the passage of village ordinances. All rules and regulations shall be available in each fire rescue station. Such rule or
regulation shall be filed with the village clerk and shall be made available for public inspection. Rules or regulations of the board shall become effective
when the ordinance approved by the president and the board of trustees of the village becomes law. The board secretary shall maintain a record of all
board rules and regulations, which shall be available for public inspection.
G. At no time shall the actions of the board or its officers interfere with the rights of the fire rescue chief, or the composition of the village fire rescue
department, or in any way impede the normal and regular operation of the Northfield fire rescue department. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 31/377
Sec. 3-38: CHARGES.
Any fees imposed in relation to the provision of emergency medical services shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Division III - The Fire Prevention Bureau
Sec. 3-39: CREATION OF THE FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU.
A bureau of fire prevention is hereby established in the Northfield fire rescue department. The fire prevention bureau shall be operated under the
supervision of the fire rescue chief. The fire rescue chief may designate a member of the fire rescue department as official of the fire prevention bureau
("fire official") or he may hold this office himself. The fire rescue chief may designate other members of the fire rescue department as inspectors. The fire
rescue chief may employ technical fire inspectors as may be authorized by the village manager. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-40: ENFORCE LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
It shall be the duty of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all provisions of the village's fire prevention code, life safety code and building code as
approved by the corporate authorities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-41: INVESTIGATE CAUSE OF FIRES.
The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the village involving loss of life or injury to
person or damage to property. To the extent possible, the fire prevention bureau shall determine whether the fire is a result of negligence or design. Such
investigation shall be commenced immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. If it appears that the fire is of suspicious origin, the fire rescue chief
shall be notified immediately; the fire rescue chief shall take charge of the physical evidence, notify the director of public safety of the investigation of such
matters and cooperate with another duly authorized investigation and prosecution of the case. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-42: ISSUE PERMITS, CERTIFICATES, NOTICES, APPROVALS, ORDERS.
The fire prevention bureau may issue permits, certificates, notices, approvals and other orders pertaining to fire control and fire or life hazards as provided
in appendix C of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-43: REVIEW PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION.
The fire prevention bureau shall assist the building department in reviewing the planning, design and construction of new buildings, building alterations and
building additions to provide appropriate egress facilities, fire protection and built-in fire protection equipment as required by village codes and ordinances.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 3-44: PUBLIC EDUCATION.
The fire prevention bureau may initiate within the fire rescue department the development of informational and instructional programs to village residents
concerning the prevention of fires and fire safety practices. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-45: INSPECTIONS.
The fire prevention bureau shall inspect all structures and premises, except single-family and duplex dwelling units as often as may be necessary for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations,
endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of village codes and ordinances affecting fire safety. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-46: RECORDS.
The fire prevention bureau shall keep a record of all inspections, complaints, fire protection systems installed within the village and other information as
required by the fire rescue chief and state and federal law. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 3-47: FEES.
The corporate authorities may establish such fees as may be necessary for the permits, certificates, approvals, plan reviews and other functions to be
performed under appendix C of this code. Such fees shall be payable to the village and shall accompany each application for such permit, approval,
certificate or other fee-related code provision. Such fees shall be in an amount set forth in appendix D of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-48: REPORTS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 32/377
The annual report of the fire rescue department shall be made on or before April 30 and be transmitted to the village manager. It shall report all fires, fire
losses, fire prevention activities, the status and condition of fire equipment and other information and statistics as the fire rescue chief may wish to include
or as may be required by the village manager. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Division IV - The Emergency Medical Service
(Rep. by Ord. 99-993, 9-27-1999)
Division V - Health Department
Sec. 3-58: CREATION.
A health department is hereby established for the village to operate under the direction and supervision of the village health officer. The health department
shall be staffed with such personnel and perform such duties and functions as the village manager may from time to time assign. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-59: HEALTH OFFICER.
There is hereby created the position of health officer, an administrative officer of the village. The health officer shall be a person suitably trained or
experienced in public health administration, and shall be appointed by the village manager and be subject to removal by him.
At such time or times as this village shall have a health department, he shall be head of the health department, and shall be responsible to the village
manager for the efficient administration of the department's services to said village.
Whenever in this code detailed duties and responsibilities of the department of health are prescribed and the term "health officer" is used, it shall be
understood to include not only that officer but any member of the department's staff assigned to act in his stead.
The health officer shall be an ex officio chief health inspector. The salary of the health officer shall be fixed by the village manager subject to the approval
of the corporate authorities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-60: DUTIES AND POWERS.
It shall be the duty of the health officer to execute and enforce all statutes, all ordinances of the village, and all rules and regulations related to the health of
residents of Northfield. He shall take such action as is necessary for the determination of the status of and the promotion and improvement of the public
health, not inconsistent with the state statutes, and ordinances, rules and regulations. The health officer shall accept appointment as a registrar as
provided by state statute and shall execute the duties required by that statute. He shall also collect and keep records pertaining to environmental sanitation
matters related to the public health. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-61: PROCEDURE IN CASE OF VIOLATIONS.
The health officer shall have the right to issue citations for violations of health ordinances or regulations pursuant to the provisions of this code, state law
and court rule. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-62: DEPUTY BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
The health officer is hereby made a deputy building commissioner. It shall be and is hereby made his duty to aid the superintendent of public works in
administering and enforcing the provision of this code and other building ordinances pertaining to health, sanitation, and home safety. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-63: REPORTS AND RECORDS.
The health officer shall at suitable intervals or at the request of the village manager submit a written report detailing pertinent information and
recommendations. He shall maintain records of all services performed by and for the village. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE IV. NORTHFIELD EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Sec. 3-64: ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby created the Northfield emergency services and disaster agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or danger
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action or from natural disaster, in accordance with "the Illinois emergency
services and disaster act of 1975".
The ESDA shall consist of a director and additional members as selected by the director. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 33/377
Sec. 3-65: DIRECTOR.
The director of the Northfield ESDA shall be the village manager unless some other person is appointed by the corporate authorities and shall serve until
removed by the majority vote of the corporate authorities.
The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of
the village president as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve of the director, the village president or any person designated by him shall be and act
as director until a new appointment is made as provided in this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-66: FUNCTIONS.
The Northfield ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions as shall be prescribed by the state ESDA plan, and such orders, rules, and regulations as may be
promulgated by the governor. In addition he shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipalities entered into as provided by the "state ESDA act of 1975".
The Northfield ESDA shall also, when called upon by the village president, take steps to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from any explosion, accident or other disaster occurring in the municipality including rendering such service in a disaster due to natural causes, hostile
action, or explosion of bombs or missiles. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-67: SERVICE AND COMPENSATION, MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
Any or all members of the Northfield ESDA organization may volunteer for and be appointed by the director as members of a mobile support team, created
by the coordinator of the state ESDA, as provided by law. All such appointments of officers or employees of the village of Northfield shall first be approved
by a majority of the corporate authorities. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the director.
Any person thus appointed to a mobile support team may receive from the state of Illinois such reasonable compensation as may be provided by state law,
or as may hereafter be provided by the village of Northfield. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-68: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
The director of the Northfield ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the state, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the corporate authorities and by the state coordinator of ESDA. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-69: EMERGENCY ACTION.
If the governor declares that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of
Illinois of major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Northfield ESDA to
cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-70: SERVICE AND COMPENSATION FOR STATE TRAINING.
Any and all members of the Northfield ESDA may volunteer for and be appointed by the director as participants in any training program established by the
state coordinator of the ESDA, provided that all such appointments of officers or employees of the village of Northfield shall first be approved by a majority
of the corporate authorities.
Any officer or employee of the village of Northfield who is thus approved for appointment and is appointed to participate in any such state training program
shall continue to receive full compensation incident to his or her usual office or employment.
Any person thus appointed to participate in any such state training program who is not a village officer or employee may receive from the state of Illinois
such reasonable compensation as may be hereafter provided by the village of Northfield. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-71: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
The treasurer of the state of Illinois may allocate to the village of Northfield any reimbursement by the state of Illinois to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the Northfield ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside of the
village in response to a call by the governor or state coordinator of ESDA as provided by law and any other reimbursement made by the state of Illinois
incident to ESDA activities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-72: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
The corporate authorities may, on recommendation of the municipal director of NESDA, authorize any purchases or contracts necessary to place the
municipality in a position to meet effectively any disaster arising from war or natural causes.
In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the director of NESDA is authorized, on behalf of the municipality, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment, or materials as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 34/377
prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by "the state ESDA act of 1975", provided that if the corporate authorities
meet at such time, the director shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (1986 Code)
Sec. 3-73: OATH.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Northfield ESDA shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall
be filed with the coordinator:
I, , of the ESDA of the Village of Northfield, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities, thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States nor of this State by force or violence; and that
during such time as I am affiliated with the ESDA of the Village of Northfield, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 3-74: OFFICE.
The village president is authorized to designate space in the village hall or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village board for the Northfield ESDA
as its office.
In the event that the incumbent of any municipal office shall be rendered incapable of performing the duties of such office as a result of a disaster within
the scope of this article, such office shall be filled until such time as a successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law as follows: appointment
shall be in the following order of preference: village president, remaining members of the board by seniority, village manager, clerk, director of public
service, chief of police, chief of the fire department, director of the emergency medical service, and director of public works. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 98-
928, 2-23-1998)
ARTICLE V. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING
Sec. 3-75: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
The community development director and the department of community development and building shall be responsible for the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance1. In addition, he and the department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of the zoning ordinance of the village; enforce
village ordinances pertaining to signage, subdivision and floodplain regulation.
(2) Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to zoning administration, including, but not limited to, zoning maps, amendments, special uses,
variations, appeals and applications therefor.
(3) Serve as liaison with residents, prospective builders and developers; advise such parties of the building and zoning requirements of the village and
assist them with the application process to and appearances before the architectural commission, plan and zoning commission, and the zoning
board of appeals. Provide staff support, as village staff liaison, for the architectural commission, plan and zoning commission, zoning board of
appeals, and the planning, zoning and community development committee of the board of trustees. This includes attending meetings and supplying
commission and boardmembers with required information pertaining to the issues and petitions before such bodies.
(4) Responsible for the publication of all required notices of public hearings relating to variations or amendments to the zoning ordinance. Review and
revise the village comprehensive land use plan as directed by the corporate authorities.
(5) Receive, file and forward to the board of appeals applications for variations under the zoning ordinance.
(6) Receive, file and forward to the plan and zoning commission, and to the architectural commission, all applications involving matters appropriately
referable to these bodies.
(7) Review all property which has been the subject of legal action invalidating the zoning as applied by the existing zoning ordinance and recommend,
as appropriate, an amendment for reclassification of such property to the plan and zoning commission.
(8) Determine, and disseminate to the public, the use, lot, bulk, and other zoning requirements of buildings.
(9) Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time and at the request of the corporate authorities, a study of the provisions of the zoning ordinance and
make recommendations to the planning, zoning and community development committee of the board of trustees.
(10) Issue building, plumbing and electrical permits with the assistance of the building commissioner for the construction, repair and removal of all
buildings and other structures within the village; issue occupancy permits and enforce all ordinances relating thereto.
(a) Application For Building Permit: Every application for a permit for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure
shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of plans, together with a detailed statement written upon blank applications furnished by the building
commissioner, regarding the location of the proposed operation, a full description of said building or structure or part thereof, its proposed use, and
the estimated cost of the work. This statement shall be signed by the owner or his agent. Plans may be retained by the building commissioner for a
reasonable time for inspection before a permit is issued.
1. No permit shall be granted or plans approved unless such plans are signed by the owner or signed and sealed by a licensed architect.
2. No permit shall be granted or plans approved unless all required permits from all tradesmen are received.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 35/377
3. It shall be unlawful for any architect, or other person permitted under state law, to submit for approval any final plans for any building or structure
which do not comply with the structural requirements of this code. All final plans submitted for approval of any building or structure shall be
accompanied by a certificate of such architect or other person preparing plans affirming that the plans and specifications submitted comply with
the structural requirements of this code.
4. The commissioner may require detailed drawings of any part or parts of the building, specifications, and a property survey.
(b) Changes In Plans And Specifications:
1. No changes in plans or specifications shall be made without first filing an amendment to the original application and securing the approval of the
building commissioner.
2. After plans for any proposed work have been approved, one set of such plans shall be filed and kept in the office of the building commissioner,
and another set of such plans, with the approval of the commissioner stamped or written thereon, shall at all times be kept on or about the
building or other structure to be erected.
(c) Supervise the construction, erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal and inspection of all buildings, walls, structures or portions thereof
and all appurtenances related thereto, within the village, and enforce all ordinances relating thereto.
(d) Supervise the construction, installation, alteration, repair and inspection of all installations and house connections to sewers within the village,
and enforce all ordinances relating thereto.
(e) Supervise either alone or in conjunction with the fire official, the construction, erection, installation, alteration, repair, removal, and inspection of all
tanks or containers for the storage or use of inflammable liquids within the village as regulated by this code.
(11) Keep records of all requests for permits, reviews, hearings or inspections received by the department of community development and building.
(12) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the village manager. (Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
Footnote 1: The zoning ordinance is found in appendix A to this code.
Title Chapter 4
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 4
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, the following shall be applicable to all boards and commissions:
(1) Each member of any board or commission shall be a resident of the village as required by section 2-3 of this code.
(2) All members shall be appointed by the village president with the approval of the board of trustees.
(3) The chairman of each board or commission, unless otherwise stated herein, shall be appointed by the village president with the approval of the
board of trustees.
(4) A vice chairman may be elected by each respective board and commission.
(5) Each member shall hold office until his or her successor has been appointed and has qualified.
(6) If the establishment section for any board or commission provides that certain members must possess certain qualifications, then persons
designated as members fulfilling those requirements shall cease to be members if they should cease to possess such qualifications.
(7) Any member may be removed for cause upon due notice by the village president with the approval of the board of trustees.
(8) Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms only.
(9) A majority of the members as designated by the establishment section shall constitute a quorum and a concurring vote of a majority of members
present is necessary in order for the board or commission to take affirmative action or to make a recommendation.
(10) Each board and commission shall keep minutes of each meeting and a secretary may be elected or the village manager or his designate may act
as secretary. Reports of each meeting shall be submitted to the corporate authorities.
(11) All meetings shall be open and public, subject to section 1-12 of this code.
(12) Each commission or board may adopt such administrative rules, not inconsistent with this code, as may be appropriate in the judgment of its
respective membership.
(13) Unless otherwise stated herein, each member of a board or commission shall serve a term of four (4) years or until a successor has been
appointed. Said term shall commence on September 1 of the year in which the appointment is made. Appointments shall be made so that to the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 36/377
extent possible, no more than two (2) terms shall expire in any one year. The village president shall have the authority to adjust the terms of board
and commission members for the purpose of maintaining the required number of members and providing for the efficient transition of members.
(14) In addition to the number of members of each board and commission set forth in this chapter, the president may appoint a member of the board of
trustees to be a member ex officio of a board or commission. Such member ex officio shall be entitled to take part in the discussion of issues, but
shall not be entitled to a vote.
(15) All members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation.
(16) All boards and commissions are subject to the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, as amended. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Sec. 4-2: CREATION.
There is hereby created a board of police commissioners consisting of three (3) members, whose terms of office, except as otherwise provided by statute
of the state of Illinois for the first appointees, shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. The president
shall make no appointment to the board of police commissioners within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. (1986 Code; amd. Ord.
96-889, 10-28-1996)
Sec. 4-3: QUALIFICATIONS, BOND, REMOVAL OF BOARD MEMBERS.
The members of the board of police commissioners shall be considered officers of the municipality, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such
amount as may be required by the corporate authorities.
No person holding an office under a municipality shall be a member of the board of police commissioners, or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any
such office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board or secretary thereof. No person shall be
appointed as a member of the board of police commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected
official of the village. No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same political party existing in the village at the time of such
appointment, as defined in chapter 46, section 10-2 of the state of Illinois election code. If only one or no political party exists in the village at the time of
such appointments, then the state or national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be
determined by the affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or their
own defense, before the corporate authorities. A majority vote of the corporate authorities shall be required to remove such member from office. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 96-889, 10-28-1996)
Sec. 4-4: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL BY BOARD.
The board of police commissioners shall appoint all full time officers of the police department of the village, except the chief of police and exempt
command positions as otherwise specified in this code. All promotions made by the board of police commissioners shall be from the rank next below that
to which the promotion shall be made. Said board shall have sole power of removal over such officers as they shall appoint. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 96-
889, 10-28-1996)
Sec. 4-5: RULES AND POWERS.
The board of police commissioners shall make such rules and regulations with respect to appointments, promotions and discipline, as are consistent with
chapter 3, article III, division I, "Police Department", of this code, this article, and the Illinois municipal code, as supplemented or modified by the
ordinances of the village pursuant to its home rule authority. The rulemaking authority of the board shall include, without limitation, the authority to
establish procedures, qualifications and standards for the recruitment, testing and selection to the position of police officer of individuals who have been
full time police officers of a state municipal police department and certified by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board as having successfully
completed the minimum standards basic law enforcement course required by that board. (Ord. 11-1495, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 4-6: ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN.
The board of police commissioners shall elect its own chairman to serve during the village fiscal year. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 96-889, 10-28-1996)
Sec. 4-7: SECRETARY.
The board of police commissioners may employ a secretary or may designate one of its own members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the
minutes of the board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all examinations held,
and shall perform such other duties as the board shall prescribe. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 96-889, 10-28-1996)
ARTICLE III. POLICE PENSION BOARD
Sec. 4-8: CREATION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 37/377
There is hereby created a police pension board as provided by statute. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-9: MEMBERS.
The board shall consist of five (5) members; two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the village president and two (2) of whom shall be elected from the
regular police force and one from the beneficiaries under the police pension fund act as created by statute; the term of such members shall be two (2)
years as is provided by statute. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-10: DUTIES.
The police pension board shall have the powers and duties delegated to it by statute. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-11: TERMS.
All terms, definitions and requirements that are within the scope of this article shall be in accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
(1986 Code)
ARTICLE IV. COMMUNITY LIFE COMMISSION
Sec. 4-12: COMMISSION DISBANDED.
The duties of the community life commission, which was disbanded in September 2005, are being handled by other committees of the village board, by
village administration, or by a special committee/commission that would be formed by the corporate authorities as needed, or combinations of the
foregoing as more specifically set out below:
(1) Public health issues involving traffic or public safety are handled by the traffic and transportation committee which reports to the village board, by
village administration and the police department. Specific studies or issues requiring more extensive work could result in the formation of a special
committee/commission.
(2) Environmental duties and issues related to land, water and air preservation and protection of the environment within the village as well as sources
outside, are handled by various village departments. Specific studies or issues requiring more extensive study might result in the formation of a
special committee/commission.
(3) Human relations issues including investigating complaints or alleged disputes involving discrimination in any category; acts requiring mediation and
conciliation or that require hearings to be conducted; and human relations issues that require studying existing and/or potential problems involving
discrimination, will be handled by the formation of a special committee/commission appointed by the village board.
(4) The functions of the Northfield shade tree commission are handled by the village forester and the community development department and guided
by the tree preservation ordinance in chapter 10 of this code. (Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
Secs. 4-13. — 4-15:
(Rep. by Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
ARTICLE V. ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
Secs. 4-16 — 4-17: RESERVED.
(Ord. 11-1482, 3-15-2011)
ARTICLE VI. ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
Sec. 4-18: MEMBERSHIP OF COMMISSION.
The Village Architectural Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. Two (2) of the members shall be licensed architects, if available. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-19: SECRETARY.
The Building Commissioner shall serve as Secretary of the commission. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-20: POWERS AND DUTIES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 38/377
The Architectural Commission shall review and decide the design for the following matters:
(1) Site Plan Review. All nonresidential uses not subject to special use or planned unit development review. (Ord. 03-1147, 2-18-2003)
(2) Signage Review. Review the design of all signage in accordance with chapter 12 of this Code. This shall include requests for variations. (Ord. 03-
1147, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1715, 5-15-2018)
(3) Design Review. On any application before the Plan and Zoning Commission, the Architectural Commission shall review the design of the building,
signage, lighting and landscaping only and shall make their recommendation to the Corporate Authorities on these elements.
(4) Fence Variations. Review of fence variations in accordance with chapter 18 of this Code.
(5) Antennas. Review of antenna installations in accordance with chapter 18 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1147, 2-18-2003)
(6) Tennis And Sport Courts. Review of tennis and sport court installations and consideration of variations in accordance with chapter 18 of this
Code. (Ord. 18-1715, 5-15-2018)
(7) Personal Wireless Service Facilities. Review personal wireless service facility installations in accordance with chapter 18 of this Code.
Approvals shall be made in strict conformity with Village regulations. The Architectural Commission shall have no authority to grant exceptions to Village
regulations, except as may be provided in this Code. (Ord. 03-1147, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-21: APPLICATION PROCESS.
A. Requirements For Application. An application to appear before the Architectural Commission may be filed with the Community Development and
Building Department by the legal or equitable owner of the subject property, a bona fide contract purchaser or leaseholder. Applications shall be made
on a form provided by the Community Development and Building Department and must be accompanied by all necessary information and exhibits, as
set forth on the application and as required by Village regulations.
B. Notification. The Architectural Commission shall not hold a meeting on any application unless the following notifications have been paid for by the
applicant:
(1) The Village shall post a sign on the subject property for at least fifteen (15) consecutive days prior to the hearing.
(2) The Village shall publish a notice of the application in at least one newspaper having a general circulation in the Village.
(3) On signage or fence variations, the applicant also must send a notification letter to all property owners of record within two hundred fifty feet (250'),
excluding right of way, of the boundary of the property. This notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to
the hearing. An affidavit certifying that the above notices have been accomplished must be tendered to the department of community development
and building within fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.
C. Staff Documentation. The village staff shall provide the architectural commission with a detailed report and recommendation relative to the application.
D. Architectural Commission Meeting. The commission shall review the proposed project relative to the appearance of any structure and site
improvements to ensure the exterior materials and colors maintain the appropriate aesthetic relationships and standards of design within the village. As
part of its report, the architectural commission may recommend specific design conditions and limitations regarding architecture, signage, lighting,
landscaping, screening or other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of the village regulations as it deems appropriate to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon adjacent properties or improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions
shall be expressly set forth in the architectural commission's recommendation.
For any review conducted by the architectural commission as part of a plan and zoning commission application, the architectural commission shall be
advisory only and make their recommendation to the corporate authorities. For all other matters before the architectural commission, its review shall be
final.
E. Appeals. In those cases where the owner or architect is unwilling to make the changes required by the architectural commission, the director of
community development and building shall not issue any permits. The owner shall have the right to appeal the decision to the corporate authorities
within thirty (30) days of the last architectural commission hearing at which the owner's proposal was considered. This section shall not be construed to
give a right of appeal in those matters such as fence or sign variations where the architectural commission's determination is final. Appeals for such
variations shall be taken pursuant to the Illinois administrative review act.
F. Fee Schedule. Fees and escrows required for any action requiring architectural commission review shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code and
shall be paid at the time an application is filed. (Ord. 03-1147, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-22: MEETINGS.
Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the commission, the director of community development and
building or the corporate authorities may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the attendance and vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be filed in the office of the village manager and shall be a public record. (Ord. 03-1147, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE VII. PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 39/377
Sec. 4-23: MEMBERSHIP OF COMMISSION.
The village plan and zoning commission shall consist of not less than nine (9) nor more than eleven (11) members. The exact number of members shall be
as declared by the chairman in writing to the village president, provided that such declaration shall be made within sixty (60) days of the appointment of a
new chairman; and if the number is reduced, such reduction may be accomplished only by attrition through the expiration of existing terms. (Ord. 89-597,
7-25-1989)
Sec. 4-24: TERM.
The initial terms of members shall be staggered so that an approximate equal number of terms expire after the second, third, and fourth years. Thereafter,
all terms shall be for four (4) years or until a successor has been appointed. (Ord. 89-597, 7-25-1989)
Sec. 4-25: TECHNICAL ADVICE.
Technical advice or other services may be obtained and other expenses incurred only upon authorization of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 89-597, 7-25-
1989)
Sec. 4-26: POWERS AND DUTIES.
A. To prepare and recommend appropriate changes or revisions to the comprehensive official plan and map as enacted on August 13, 1958, and recorded
September 26, 1958, as document no. 17329867 in the recorder's office of Cook County, Illinois, and as subsequently amended from time to time.
Such proposed changes may include: 1) standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivision of unimproved land and of areas subject to
redevelopment in respect to public improvements; 2) recommended requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public streets
and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, other public grounds,
size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm sewers and sewage collection and treatment; 3) annexation of suitable land to the village of
Northfield; and 4) jurisdictional boundary lines between the village of Northfield and other municipalities whose limits lie within one and one-half (11/2)
miles at any point from the limits of the village of Northfield.
B. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities plans for specific improvements in furtherance of the official plan and map.
C. To give aid as requested to village officials charged with directing projects for improvements embraced within the official plan and map.
D. To generally promote the realization of the official plan.
E. To act as a zoning commission in accordance with section 11-13-2 of the Illinois municipal code1 only upon appointment by the corporate authorities.
F. To act as a plan commission pursuant to section 11-12-4 of the Illinois municipal code2, to hear applications for subdivisions, resubdivisions, zoning map
changes, appendix A text changes, special uses and planned unit developments.
G. To exercise such other jurisdiction germane to the powers granted by this article, as may be conferred by the corporate authorities, including particularly
those powers conferred by any ordinance establishing subdivision regulations, and other ordinances and official records from time to time comprising
and implementing the official plan and map.
H. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities schemes for regulating or forbidding structures or activities which may hinder access to solar
energy necessary for the proper functioning of solar energy systems, as defined in section 1.2 of the comprehensive solar energy act of 1977, or to
recommend changes in such schemes.
I. To hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the corporate authorities on planned unit developments, special uses, and subdivisions and to
attend to any other duties set forth in appendix A or appendix B of this code.
J. To attend to any other duties assigned by the corporate authorities.
As part of any of the above matters the plan and zoning commission may also consider and recommend to the corporate authorities relief from the
strict application of appendix A when considering a petition for resubdivision, special use or planned unit development. (Ord. 03-1146, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-27: AMENDMENTS TO OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAP INITIATED BY THE CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.
Upon submission by the corporate authorities of any suggested amendment to the official plan and map to the plan and zoning commission for
consideration and recommendation, the corporate authorities may require a report thereon from the plan and zoning commission with its recommendation
within ninety (90) days. Should the plan and zoning commission fail to make such report within ninety (90) days, then the corporate authorities may
proceed to consider such amendment for adoption, including arranging for and holding of a public hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter contained in the same manner as if the plan and zoning commission had made its recommendation. (Ord. 89-597, 7-25-1989)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 40/377
Sec. 4-28: AMENDMENTS TO OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAP INITIATED BY THE PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Upon submission by the plan and zoning commission to the corporate authorities of a proposed amendment to the official plan and map, the corporate
authorities shall schedule a public hearing thereon before the plan and zoning commission. Not less than fifteen (15) days' notice of the proposed hearing,
and the time and place thereof, shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within Cook County or within the area thereof located
within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the limits of the village of Northfield. The hearing shall be informal, but all persons desiring to be heard in support, or
opposition to the amendment shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard, and may submit their statements orally or in writing, or both. The
hearing may be recessed to another date, if notice of the time and place thereof is publicly announced at the hearing or is given by newspaper publication
not less than five (5) days prior to the new hearing date. Within ninety (90) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the corporate authorities, after
considering the plan and zoning commission's recommendations and the information gathered at the hearing, shall either adopt the amendment in whole
or in part or reject the entire amendment. If adopted, the corporate authorities shall enact an ordinance amending the official plan and map. If at the
expiration of such ninety (90) days, the corporate authorities have taken no formal action, the amendment thereto may thereafter not be acted upon by the
corporate authorities without again complying with the conditions of notice of hearing hereinabove provided. (Ord. 89-597, 7-25-1989)
Sec. 4-29: APPLICATION PROCESS.
A. Requirements For Application. An application to appear before the plan and zoning commission may be filed with the community development and
building department by the legal or equitable owner of the subject property or a bona fide contract purchaser. Applications shall be made on a form
provided by the community development and building department and must be accompanied by all necessary information and exhibits, as set forth on
the application and as required by village regulations.
B. Notification. The plan and zoning commission shall not hold a hearing on any application unless the following notifications have been both
accomplished and paid for the applicant:
(1) The applicant shall provide notice of the application by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or occupant of all
properties located within two hundred fifty feet (250'), excluding rights of way, of the subject property. This notice shall be given not less than fifteen
(15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. An affidavit certifying that the above notices have been sent must be tendered to the
department of community development and building within fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting. With respect to condominiums and nonresidential
properties, the notice requirements of section 4-36 of this chapter shall apply.
(2) A sign shall be posted by the village on the subject property for at least fifteen (15) consecutive days prior to the hearing.
(3) A notice of the application shall be published, by the village, in at least one newspaper having a general circulation in the village. This notice must
contain the same information as that required in the mailings. This notice must be published within three (3) days of the original mailing. The director
of community development and building shall determine whether to use a common address, intersection designation or legal description in the
newspaper notice.
C. Staff Documentation. The village staff shall provide the plan and zoning commission with a detailed report and staff recommendation relative to the
application.
D. Plan And Zoning Commission Hearing. The commission shall have ninety (90) days in which to make a report regarding the proposed application's
conformance with village regulations, the effect upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters
pertaining to the public health, public safety and general welfare. No action shall be taken by the corporate authorities upon any application until the
report of the plan and zoning commission has been filed. However, if no report is received from the commission within the ninety (90) days, the
approval of the commission shall be assumed. Before submitting the report, the plan and zoning commission shall hold at least one public hearing. Due
notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given as required by law and the above stated standards.
As part of their report to the corporate authorities, the plan and zoning commission may recommend specific conditions and limitations concerning use,
construction, character, location, landscaping, screening and other matters related to the purposes and objectives of this code as it deems necessary
or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property or improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities
and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the recommendation to the corporate authorities.
E. Village Board Of Trustees Approval. Final approval of any application shall be reserved to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities may
also impose such other restrictions and conditions, as are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of village regulations and the village's
adopted comprehensive plan. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of
the approval of the requested action by the corporate authorities.
F. Fee Schedule. Fees and escrows required for any action requiring plan and zoning commission review shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code
and shall be paid at time of application.
G. Appeal. Appeal of any final action of the corporate authorities on a plan and zoning commission recommendation shall be taken pursuant to the Illinois
administrative review act. (Ord. 03-1146, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-30: MEETINGS.
Meetings of the plan and zoning commission shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the commission, the director of community
development and building or the corporate authorities may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The commission shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the attendance and vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the village manager and shall be a public record. (Ord. 03-1146, 2-18-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 41/377
ARTICLE VIII. ZONING COMMISSION
Sec. 4-31 through Sec. 4-33:
(Rep. by Ord. 89-597, 7-25-1989; amd. Ord. 03-1146, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE IX. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 4-34: ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
A. A zoning board of appeals is hereby established, which shall consist of seven (7) members serving as follows:
The successor to each member of the existing board of appeals and all subsequent appointees shall serve terms of five (5) years each, except for
those members named to fill unexpired terms. One of the members shall be named chair by the village president. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only, and the appointing authority shall have the right to remove any member of the board for cause and after notice and hearing. No
affirmative action or recommendation shall be taken or made without the concurring vote of at least four (4) members.
Terms of members appointed to serve (except those appointed to fill unexpired terms) shall commence on September 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made, and terms of incumbent members of the existing board may be adjusted to expire in accordance with this provision.
Appointments shall be made in such a manner that if reasonably possible, the board shall have at least one former member each from the plan and
zoning commission and the architectural commission. However, no action taken by the board shall be deemed to be invalid for failure to have one
former member of these commissions.
B. The board of appeals shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations, as it deems necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-35: MEETINGS.
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board, the director of community development or the village
board may determine. The chair, or in his or her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths. All meetings of the board shall be conducted in
conformance with the requirements of law. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the attendance and the vote of each member upon
each question. The minutes shall be filed in the office of the village manager and shall be a public record. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-36: NOTICE.
The zoning board of appeals shall not review or decide any application unless the following notices have been accomplished and paid for by the applicant:
(1) Notification By Mail. The petitioner shall provide notice of the requested action which shall be delivered by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner or occupant of all properties located within two hundred fifty feet (250') excluding rights of way of the subject property.
This notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
(2) Notification Of Commercial Tenants. Where there is nonresidential property within two hundred fifty feet (250') the following notifications
regulations shall apply:
(a) If there are fewer than twelve (12) tenancies or other independent occupants of the nonresidential premises, notification shall be given to each
occupant.
(b) If there are more than twelve (12) tenancies or other independent occupants of the nonresidential premises, notification need only be provided to
the record owner of the premises along with a request that the record owner notify all other occupants of the premises.
(3) Sign Posted. A sign, the text and location of which shall be determined by the department of community development shall be posted on the
subject property for at least fifteen (15) consecutive days prior to the hearing.
(4) Publication. A notice of the application shall be published in at least one newspaper having a general circulation in the village. This notice must
contain the same information as that required in the mailings. This notice must be published within three (3) days of the original mailing. The director
of community development and building shall determine whether to use a common address, intersection designation or legal description in the
newspaper notice.
(5) Affidavit. An affidavit certifying that the above notices have been accomplished must be tendered to the department of community development
and building within fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-37: PUBLIC HEARINGS.
The zoning board of appeals may act on any issue within its jurisdiction, but only after conducting a public hearing to which the following shall apply:
(1) The zoning board of appeals or the director of community development and building shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing and the proper
notice shall be provided as set forth in the notification section of this code and as is required by law. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by an attorney.
(2) The zoning board of appeals may issue subpoenas upon its own motion or when requested by any applicant or other party before the zoning board
of appeals upon the following conditions:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 42/377
(a) Subpoenas shall only be enforceable for or against persons for documents which have a substantial evidentiary connection with:
1. The property for which a zoning variation is requested or appeal is made;
2. Facts which would support or negate the requisite legal standards for granting the relief requested; or
3. Facts which support or negate the conclusion that property within the two hundred fifty foot (250') notice requirement of section 4-36 of this
article will be substantially affected by the outcome of the decision of the board.
Service of such subpoenas shall be made in the same manner as summons in a civil action.
(3) The zoning board of appeals may examine and shall permit cross examination of any witnesses brought before it. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-38: POWERS AND DUTIES.
The zoning board of appeals shall have the following jurisdiction, powers and duties pursuant to a public hearing:
(1) To hear an appeal from any person aggrieved by a decision of any officer, department of community development interpreting any provision of
appendix A of this code. Such appeal shall be taken by serving a written notice of appeal to the director of community development and building
within forty five (45) days of the action disputed. There shall be no appeals to the zoning board of appeals from the decisions of any other village
commission or board.
(a) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board,
after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to persons or property.
(b) At the public hearing, the petitioner shall be required to show adequate evidence of legal or equitable title to the property involved before the
merits of the appeal shall be considered.
(c) The zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made.
(2) To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of that district divides a lot that was held in single ownership at the time that zoning
district boundary line was created.
(3) To permit, by issuance of a permit that may contain conditions governing design, construction, use or operation on the premises so as to adequately
safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the community, the following:
(a) Relief from the strict application of appendix A of this code as set forth in section 4-40.1 of this article.
(b) The reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or public enemy to the extent of more
than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value. Such permission may be issued only if the zoning board of appeals finds a compelling public
necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use.
(4) To hear and advise on all other matters referred to it by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-39: EFFECT OF DECISIONS.
All decisions of the zoning board of appeals shall be final except that, if the decision is from an appeal of an interpretation of the department of community
development and building of the permitted and special use table in section 4.5 of appendix A of this code, then the zoning board of appeals shall tender its
findings of fact and a recommendation to the corporate authorities who shall take final action. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-40: REVIEW OF DECISIONS.
Every decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be accompanied by written findings of fact, based only on the testimony and evidence, specifying the
reason for the decision.
An appeal from any decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be taken pursuant to the Illinois administrative review act. Final decisions of the
corporate authorities with respect to use table interpretations as set forth in section 4-39 of this article shall also be taken pursuant to the Illinois
administrative review act. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 4-40.1: RELIEF FROM THE STRICT APPLICATION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE.
The following types of variations may be sought for relief from the strict application of the zoning ordinance:
(1) Minimal Relief Application (MRA). A request for a variation from the strict application of the zoning ordinance for a single-family use. An MRA may
be used only when the relief sought varies by ten percent (10%) or less from the numerical standards of the zoning ordinance. Like other variations,
an MRA applies only to structures and not to uses. An MRA may not be used for exceptions from the height regulations of appendix A of this code.
An MRA may only be granted for the following regulations:
(a) Front, rear or side yard setback;
(b) Setback between principal and accessory structures;
(c) Accessory structure numerical requirements;
(d) Lot coverage restrictions;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 43/377
(e) FAR restrictions.
(2) Variation. A request for an exception which allows a structure to be erected or expanded on a particular property in a place or manner not
otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance. Variations may only be applied to structures and not to uses. The only regulations, which may be
varied, are those with numerical standards or values. (For example, one may receive a variation from a 10 foot setback requirement, but one may not
receive a variation to operate a gasoline service station in a residential zoning district.) There are two (2) types of variations in the village:
(a) A class I variation provides for relief when more than a ten percent (10%) variance from a standard of appendix A of this code is requested. A
class I variation is applicable when the applicant is able to use his or her property in a manner permitted by appendix A of this code, but not as
intensely as desired by the applicant.
(b) A class II variation is a variation in which the owner claims that he or she cannot use the property at all for any use permitted in the zoning district
unless the variation is granted.
(3) Requirements For Application. An application for any variation or MRA may be filed with the community development and building department by
the legal or equitable owner or a contract purchaser of the subject property. An application for a variation or MRA shall be on a form provided by the
community development and building department and shall contain a detailed statement of the purpose for which the MRA or variation is sought.
Applications must be accompanied by all necessary information, exhibits and escrow and other fees as required by the village for the requested
action.
(4) Notification. Notification is required in conformance with section 4-36 of this article.
(5) Staff Documentation. The village staff shall provide the zoning board of appeals with information and documentation pertinent to the application.
However, the staff shall make no recommendation with respect to the denial or grant of the requested relief except upon the specific request of the
zoning board of appeals.
(6) Conditions On Variations Or MRAs. The zoning board of appeals may impose any condition or limitation concerning use, construction, character,
location, landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this code upon the premises benefited by a variation or
MRA. Such conditions may be as necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize any adverse impact on other properties or improvements in the
area or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the motion to grant the variation or MRA. Violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of appendix A of this code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation or MRA by the
zoning board of appeals.
(7) Occupancy Certificates. Any structure for which a variation or an MRA has been granted shall comply with all conditions imposed on the grant of
variation or MRA before a final occupancy certificate may be issued.
(8) Fee Schedule. The application fees and escrow amounts for variations and MRAs shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code and shall be paid
to the village at the time an application is filed.
(9) Lapse. Any variation or MRA granted for any purpose shall lapse and be of no further force and effect unless a building permit has been issued by
the village for such purpose within one year after the approval date of the variation or MRA. In addition, if the applicant fails to complete the structure
for which a building permit was issued in the time specified in this code for building permits, the variation or MRA shall lapse and be of no further
force or effect.
(10) Matters To Be Considered In Deciding Whether Or Not To Grant An MRA Or A Variation. The applicant must provide actual evidence on each
of the following issues as it pertains to the applicant's request and the village manager or the zoning board of appeals shall consider the following:
(a) With respect to an MRA, class I and class II variation:
1. To what extent is the applicant responsible for the condition that is the subject of the request?
a. Was the regulation from which relief is sought in existence when the applicant either purchased or improved the property?
b. Has the applicant changed the property in some way so as to create the problem condition?
c. Might the applicant have taken some action in the past to prevent or avoid the problem, which is the subject of the request?
2. Will the relief requested adversely affect public health, safety or welfare?
3. Is there a reasonable alternative, which is consistent with the zoning ordinance? (If there is such an alternative, but the applicant believes the
additional cost is prohibitive, then it is the applicant's burden to set forth the cost of each alternative.)
4. Will the relief requested exceed the minimum necessary to accomplish the applicant's stated purpose?
5. Will the relief requested be out of character with the neighborhood?
6. Are there other structures within the same zoning district in the village, which either violate or have received a variation from the same
regulation?
(b) With respect to class I variations only:
1. Will the variation have a negative effect on the value of neighboring properties?
2. In cases where the applicant is claiming that the cost of compliance with the zoning ordinance is extraordinary, what is the ratio of the following
cost differential to the value of the entire property? The differential between: a) the cost of constructing the improvement in compliance with the
zoning ordinance; and b) the cost of constructing the improvement with the variation.
Cost of construction
without variation (minus)
Cost of construction
with variation
Current market value of entire property
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 44/377
(The higher the cost differential in relation to the value of the property, the more positive weight that should be given to this consideration.)
3. Can the property in question yield a reasonable return without the variation if used only under the conditions allowed by code? (A variation may
not be granted based solely upon a desire to extract additional income from the property where a reasonable return is possible without the
variation. This standard, where applicable, contemplates a practical difficulty, which does not rest upon the particular personal financial situation
of the applicant and is applicable only to nonresidential or multi-family rental property.)
(c) Class II variations only:
1. If the strict terms of the zoning ordinance are applied, may any reasonable improvement be erected or continue to be used that is intended for a
use permitted in the zoning district?
2. Does the negative impact on the applicant, in not being able to use the property in the specific manner requested, substantially outweigh any
negative impact on adjacent properties if the variation is granted?
3. Is the relief requested the minimum necessary to use the property in a manner reasonably similar to other uses in the neighborhood?
(11) Procedures When An MRA Is Requested. An application for an MRA shall be submitted to the village on a form provided by the community
development department. The MRA shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) Notice Of Application. The application shall be filed and the notices accomplished pursuant to section 4-36 of this article.
(b) Village Manager's Report. If no written objection to the MRA application is received within fifteen (15) days following the required mailing, the
village manager or his designate shall issue a ruling granting or denying the requested relief. The ruling shall contain specific findings with respect
to the standards set forth in this article and any conditions attached to the variation. A copy of the ruling shall be sent to the following:
1. Village manager;
2. Village board of trustees;
3. Applicant;
4. Zoning board of appeals.
(c) Hearing On An MRA Before The Zoning Board Of Appeals. If the village manager denies the application, or if the applicant disagrees with the
conditions attached by the village manager, or if a written objection is received, then only the zoning board of appeals may approve the request
after conducting a hearing in accordance with the procedures specified in this article.
(12) Dilatory Applications. If an applicant applies for an MRA or variation after the applicant, or the applicant's predecessor, acted in violation of
appendix A of this code or a previously granted MRA or variation, then no other MRA or variation may be granted, unless as a condition of the
requested relief, the applicant pays for all village costs associated with the violation activity, including, but not limited to, staff time, engineering, legal
fees and any other costs associated with the village's enforcement and review efforts. (Ord. 03-1145, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE X. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 4-41: ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established a board of local improvements for the village. This board shall consist of the president and board of trustees of the village. The
president shall be ex officio president of the board of local improvements. (1986 Code)
Sec. 4-42: POWERS AND DUTIES.
The board of local improvements shall have the powers and duties provided in the Illinois municipal code, as amended, the provisions of this code, and
other ordinances of this village. (1986 Code)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/11-13-2.
Footnote 2: 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.
Title Chapter 5
REVENUE, MUNICIPAL TAXES
Chapter 5
REVENUE, MUNICIPAL TAXES
ARTICLE I. MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 5-1: RATE OF TAX.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of one percent
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 45/377
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-
1. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-2: TAX RETURNS.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section three of the "retailers' occupation tax act", approved June 28, 1933, as amended. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-3: PAYMENT OF TAX.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 5-4: RATE OF TAX.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-5: TAX RETURNS.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before the last day
of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10, 1961,
as amended. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-6: PAYMENT OF TAX.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE III. UTILITY TAX
Sec. 5-7: TAX IMPOSED.
A tax at the rate hereinafter specified is hereby established and levied by the village on the following occupations or privileges: (Ord. 94-791, 2-28-1994)
(1) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village
and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 94-791, 2-28-1994; amd. Ord. 00-1018, 3-20-2000)
(2) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption by nonresidential customers
within the corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom until the consumption tax
imposed by subsection 5-7.1A(3)(b) of this article takes effect. (Ord. 98-946, 8-17-1998; amd. Ord. 00-1018, 3-20-2000)
Sec. 5-7.1: CONSUMPTION TAX.
A. Tax Imposed.
(1) Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code1 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(a) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.536 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(b) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.380 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(c) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.340 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(d) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.339 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(e) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.338 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(f) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.334 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(g) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.332 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(h) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.330 cents per kilowatt-hour;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 46/377
(i) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.328 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(j) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.326 cents per kilowatt-hour.
(2) The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state or any other political subdivision of the state.
(3) The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity as follows:
(a) By residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998;
(b) By nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery of services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
public utilities act2 or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
B. Collection Of Tax.
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this section shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
(2) Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit
such tax.
(3) Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village
upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity.
C. Tax Remittance And Return.
(1) Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the village. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected.
(2) If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this section, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month following
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
D. Resales.
(1) Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving
the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to
that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
(2) If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village for a resale
number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
(3) Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
(4) The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
(5) (a) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article
directly to the village pursuant to subsection C of this section on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes.
(b) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village
the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require.
E. Books And Records. Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
F. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions hereof. (Ord. 98-946, 8-17-1998)
Sec. 5-8: EFFECT OF OTHER COMPENSATION.
The taxes enumerated in this article shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles,
wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 47/377
Sec. 5-9: DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, electricity, or
water for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall
be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. The term "gross receipts" shall not
include any charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-221 or 5/9-222 of the Illinois public utilities
act or any other separately stated charge added to customers' bills in respect of any tax or other governmental imposition3.
PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an
office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do
business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use
of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code4, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or
sale of electricity.
PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, (other than an
exempt purchaser).
TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES BY ELECTRICITY. The words "transmitting messages by electricity", in addition to the usual and popular meaning of
person-to-person communication, shall include the furnishing for consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased, or both) to persons in
connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages as are furnished for a
consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 89-588, 4-25-1989; Ord. 98-946, 8-17-1998)
Sec. 5-10: PAYMENT.
Each tax return shall contain the following information:
(1) The taxpayer's name;
(2) The principal place of business of taxpayer;
(3) The gross receipts upon which the tax is imposed;
(4) Amount of tax;
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall file a like return for the preceding month.
The taxpayer shall, at the time of making said return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein imposed. A penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
day shall be assessed for late payment beginning on the day after the payment is due. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-11: PAYMENT BY MISTAKE.
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than one year prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE IV. MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTAL OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 5-12: TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this article IV is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-7. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-13: REQUIRED REPORTS; PAYMENT OF TAX.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by sections two and three of "an act in relation to the tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 48/377
to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue for transmittal to the village of Northfield the amount of tax hereby
imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE V. AUTOMOBILE RENTAL USE TAX
Sec. 5-14: TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled with an
agency of this state's government and registered to an address in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this article is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8. (1986 Code)
Sec. 5-15: COLLECTION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
The tax provided for in this article shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in
Northfield.
The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue for transmittal to the village of Northfield. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE VI. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
Sec. 5-16: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the
village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel mileage
between each channel point within the village, and charges for that portion of interstate interoffice channel provided within the village. However, "gross
charges" shall not include:
(1) Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: a) the fee imposed by this section, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, c) amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17, d) the tax
imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, e) 911 surcharges, or f) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
(2) Charges for any sent collect telecommunications received outside the village;
(3) Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
desegregated and separately identified from other charges;
(5) Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
(6) Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporation and not the generation of profit other than
a profit required by regulation for the corporation rendering such services;
(7) Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
(8) Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
(9) Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term). Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the
state of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any
agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 49/377
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless telecommunications" as
hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provisions and used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of
the federal communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended. "Telecommunications" shall also include the
provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Illinois commerce commission pursuant to section 21-401 of the cable and video competition law of 2007.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. 1) Any telecommunications retailer; and 2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns,
operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER. Means and includes every person engaged in the business of providing retail
telecommunications service as defined in this section, including those maintaining a place of business outside of Illinois. The village may, in its discretion,
require adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee by out of state providers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless service as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997; amd. Ord. 07-1356, 12-3-2007)
Sec. 5-17: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
(1) Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this article shall register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
article or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the village. Provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection 5-19(3) of this article shall be deemed to have registered in accordance
with this section.
(2) Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village pursuant to subsection (1) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit
an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection 5-19(3) of this article, as the case may be, to the village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most
recent return on file with the village. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-18: FEE IMPOSED.
(1) A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1%) of all gross charges charged by the village for telecommunications originating or received in the village.
(2) Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this article does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
(3) The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth
in section 5-19 of this article. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-19: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
(1) A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
(2) Unless otherwise approved by the village, the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the village not
later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to
reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
(3) Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village manager,
which shall contain such information as the village manager may reasonably require.
(4) Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this article shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer
to the village. The charge imposed under subsection (1) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this article shall constitute a
debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same
manner as the original charge for such services.
(5) If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amounts shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this article from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the village may require, and as
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 50/377
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3)
years after the date of the erroneous payment unless: a) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the village within the
applicable statutory period of limitations, and b) the credit derived from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the
applicable statutory period of limitations.
(6) Amounts paid under this article by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
(a) Gross charges for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax act;
(b) Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2;
(c) Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17;
(d) Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
(7) The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this article to determine
whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five
percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an
amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within
twenty one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
(8) The village manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to section 5-17 of this article of such regulations. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-20: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
Nothing in this article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
(1) Generally applicable taxes; and
(2) Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding towers
and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
(3) Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within,
use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
(4) Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, under, or within the right of way. (Ord.
97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-21: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this article
regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived pursuant to subsection 5-17(1) of this article. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-22: PENALTIES.
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine as set forth in appendix D to this code. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-23: ENFORCEMENT.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article. (Ord. 97-
914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-24: SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 5-25: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.
(1) The village hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise, license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this article is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 51/377
(2) The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise.
(3) The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this article shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the village provides written notice by certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during
such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 97-914, 10-27-1997)
ARTICLE VII. MOVIE AND LIVE THEATER ATTENDEE TAX
Sec. 5-26: TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of operating a movie or live attendee basis in an amount of fifty cents ($0.50) per attendee. (Ord. 99-1003, 10-
28-1999)
Sec. 5-27: COLLECTION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
It shall be the duty of the operator of the theater to collect the tax in the required amount as to each person in attendance at theater events within the
village. This per person tax shall be applied irrespective of the manner or place of dispensing tickets and irrespective of whether the persons paid for
attendance. The taxes collected by the operator shall be remitted to the village on a quarterly basis not later than the following dates of each year:
April 14 for (January 1 through March 31 quarter)
July 14 for (April 1 through June 30 quarter)
October 14 for (July 1 through September 30 quarter)
January 14 for (October 1 through December 31 quarter)
The remittance shall be accompanied by an accounting of the number of persons attending the theater, showings or performances for that quarter.
For purposes of this section, theater events shall include each and every event for which the theater is used for any entertainment or amusement purpose.
(Ord. 99-1003, 10-28-1999)
Sec. 5-28: EXCEPTIONS.
This tax shall not apply to events sponsored by houses of worship or schools which are held on the institution's own premises. As used in this section,
schools and houses of worship shall include those not-for-profit associations, committees or agencies which are subsidiary to or associated with a school
or house of worship whose objective is to provide financial and other support for the school or house of worship. (Ord. 99-1003, 10-28-1999)
ARTICLE VIII. MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Sec. 5-29: TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is imposed on any or all of the following acts or privileges:
(1) The purchase at retail by a person within the village of intrastate telecommunication services. The tax is imposed at a rate not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications services.
(2) The purchase at retail by a person within the village of interstate telecommunication services. The tax is imposed at a rate not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunication services. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 5-30: COLLECTION OF TAX.
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by the retailer making or effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by the
retailer to the village. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of purchasing at retail
telecommunication services in the village. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer who provides such
taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such taxable services. If the retailer fails to
collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer and retailer shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax directly to the village in the
manner provided by the village. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 5-31: TAX IN ADDITION TO INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer or
retailer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment
used in the operation of the taxpayer or retailer's business. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 5-32: DEFINITIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 52/377
For the purpose of the taxes authorized by this article:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount charged for the purchase at retail of telecommunication services in the village. This shall be determined without any
deduction for labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount shall be included only as and when charged.
"Gross charge" shall not include:
(1) Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: a) the tax imposed by this article, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the public utilities' act, c) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, or d) the tax
imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
(2) Charges for a sent collect telecommunication service received outside of such municipality;
(3) Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source;
(5) Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
(6) Charges for telecommunication equipment and services occurring between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges
between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; or
(7) Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. If the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made).
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint-stock company, joint venture, corporation, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any
city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunication services for which the Northfield user has agreed to be billed.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunication services.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The actual location of the telecommunications equipment from which telecommunication services are purchased at retail. If this is
not a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall
mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in
Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through agents, employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of purchasing telecommunication
services at retail and who incurs a tax liability under any ordinance authorized by this article.
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services,
cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or twoway
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code or protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall also not include purchase of telecommunication services by a telecommunication service provider for use as a component part
of the service provided to the ultimate consumer who purchases at retail the taxable end-to-end telecommunication services. Carrier access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of inner-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision used as a component of, or
integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 5-33: RESALES.
If a person, who purchases telecommunications in the Village, claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Village
for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the Village why such applicant is not liable for tax under this article on any of such
purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably require.
Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Village may
cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication services tax-free when such
acts are not in fact for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 5-34: PENALTY.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 53/377
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this article, shall be fined as set
forth in appendix D, article III of this Code and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due, plus interest and costs. (Ord. 00-1020, 4-
17-2000)
ARTICLE IX. LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITY
Sec. 5-35: SHORT TITLE.
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-36: SCOPE.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the Village's procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord. 00-
1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-37: DEFINITIONS.
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT. The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village's President and Board of Trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Village's Finance Director is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local Tax Administrator's stead.
The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article to give full effect to this article. The exercise of such authority by
the Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this article or the Act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX. Each tax imposed by the Village that is collected or administered by the Village and not an
agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the Village
other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax
to the Village.
VILLAGE. The Village of Northfield, Illinois. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-38: NOTICES.
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
(1) First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
(2) Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-39: LATE PAYMENT.
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: 1)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or 2) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-40: PAYMENT.
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 1) first to the tax due for the applicable period; 2) second to the
interest due for the applicable period; and 3) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-41: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 54/377
(1) The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. A taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax
voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts that might have formed a basis for protest at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the
taxes under duress.
(2) The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund because of payment in error shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which the payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit against or a refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or
penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
(3) The procedure for claiming a credit or a refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
(a) The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
(b) The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
(c) The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
(d) The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
(e) Whether the request is for a refund or whether it is for a credit to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid. There shall be
no refund, but only a credit given, in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) Grant the claim; or
(b) Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-42: AUDIT PROCEDURE.
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this article.
(1) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
(a) The tax;
(b) The time period of the audit; and
(c) A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
(2) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
(3) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator have agreed to some other convenient
time. In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30)
days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
(4) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
(5) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator's best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
(6) If an audit indicates there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be
given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
(7) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental
entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-43: APPEAL.
(1) The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a determination of tax liability
pursuant to the act. The notice shall include the following information:
(a) The reason for the assessment;
(b) The amount of the tax liability proposed;
(c) The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
(d) The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 55/377
(2) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
(3) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written
notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(4) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
(5) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due
date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day
period. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-44: HEARING.
(1) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 5-43 of this article, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
(2) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(3) At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
(4) At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-45: INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
(1) Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
twelve percent (12%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
(2) Late Filing And Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and the village has issued a notice
of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-46: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-47: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after service of notice of the reviewed tax returns to protest any notice of tax determination or notice of
tax liability.
(1) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
(2) If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village,
and the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
(3) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-48: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 56/377
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless
the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax
and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid
within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-49: LIENS.
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
(1) Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
(2) Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
(3) Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-50: APPLICATION.
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be controlling. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
Sec. 5-51: SEVERABILITY.
If any section, paragraph or provision of this article shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such
section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this article. (Ord. 00-1048, 12-4-2000)
ARTICLE X. CABLE AND VIDEO PROVISIONS
Sec. 5-52: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION. The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service
area within the village.
(1) Gross revenues shall include the following:
(a) Recurring charges for cable or video service;
(b) Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges;
(c) Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment;
(d) Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges;
(e) Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
(f) Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
(g) A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion
or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the
relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;
(h) Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the
holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (1)(i) of this definition;
(i) In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 57/377
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of
business; and
(j) The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
(2) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
(a) Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
(b) Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service;
(c) Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement,
and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the
holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or
orders;
(d) The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted
by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
(e) Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental
entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use
taxes;
(f) Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
(g) Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as
part of the cable service or video service.
(3) Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue
of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG. Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this section and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for
the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE. The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has
received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this section and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information,
electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet.
B. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed.
(1) Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
(2) Amount Of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
(3) Notice To The Village. The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
(4) Holder's Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
(5) Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
(6) Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
(7) Credit For Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B(2) of this section.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 58/377
C. PEG Access Support Fee Imposed.
(1) PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to subsection B(2) of this section.
(2) Amount Of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if
greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
(3) Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection C(4) of this section.
(4) Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
(5) Credit For Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining
term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the
previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection C(2) of this section.
D. Applicable Principles. All determinations and calculations under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
E. No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A State issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A State issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of any validly imposed 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
F. Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider.
(1) Audit Requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to
an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements
of the Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (see article IX of this chapter). No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
(2) Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the Village's submission of an invoice for
the sum.
G. Late Fees/Payments. All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (see article IX of this chapter). (Ord. 07-1357, 12-3-2007)
Sec. 5-53: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION.
A. Adoption. The regulations of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501, are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries.
B. Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be
incorporated into this section by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the Village boundaries. However,
any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
C. Enforcement. The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the
Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the Village.
D. Penalties. The Village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material
breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall
apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall be in the amount set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code for a material breach.
In this regard:
(1) "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
(2) The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
(3) A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice as provided for in subsection D(2) of this section.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 59/377
E. Customer Credits. The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to
request the credit. (Ord. 07-1358, 12-3-2007)
ARTICLE XI. HOME RULE RETAILERS' OCCUPATION AND SERVICE OCCUPATION
TAX
Sec. 5-54: RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
A. Tax Imposed.
(1) Retail Sale. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property (other than an item of tangible
personal property title or registered with an agency of this state's government) at retail in the village of Northfield at the rate of three-fourths of one
percent (0.75%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect.
(2) Transfer Incident To Sale Of Service. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village of Northfield in the business of making
sales of service, at the rate of three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
(3) Exemptions. This "home rule municipal retailers' occupational tax" and this "home rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to
the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin,
urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
B. Illinois Municipal Code. The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5,
respectively, of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 12-1510R, 3-20-2012)
Sec. 5-55: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAX.
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident to such taxes, shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5. The department of revenue shall
have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 12-1510R, 3-20-2012)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, 5/8-11-5.
ARTICLE XII. MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
Sec. 5-56. SHORT TITLE.
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village of
Northfield, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 13-1548, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 5-57. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The public utilities act1 as amended.
PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public utilities act.
RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any
person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. (Ord. 13-1548, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 5-58. TAX.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 60/377
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax on
the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.
C. The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect
the tax pursuant to section 5-59 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the village
finance department on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no
public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 5-59 of this article or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility
so designated.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or
state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the village.
E. A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but
who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the village finance department on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
F. The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after May 1, 2013.
G. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be: 1) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or 2) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3)
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
H. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
I. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the village by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the gross receipts
from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the village's
municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time, article III of this chapter, authorized pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2. (Ord.
13-1548, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 5-59. COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY.
The village manager is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility providing gas service in the
village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions:
(1) The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor;
(2) The public utility will remit collected taxes to the village finance department no more often than once each month;
(3) The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the village finance department;
(4) The public utility shall not be responsible to the village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
(5) Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 13-1548, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 5-60. BOOKS AND RECORDS.
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that
gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be
subject to and available for inspection by the village. (Ord. 13-1548, 3-19-2013)
Footnote 1: 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
Footnote 2: 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
Title Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 61/377
Sec. 6-1: CREATION.
A. Pursuant to the authority of section 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1, which authorizes a
municipality to implement a system of administrative adjudication for code violations, there is hereby created a system of administrative adjudication of
charges of code violations. Automated traffic law violations are provided for in chapter 13, article XIII of this code.
B. The village adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between the statute
and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail.
C. The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the village from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-
2012)
Sec. 6-2: ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
A. There is hereby established within the village manager's office an office of administrative adjudication, which shall be authorized to conduct
administrative adjudication proceedings for departments and agencies of the village.
B. The office shall provide for the prompt disposition of alleged infractions of this code and to afford such other adjudications as provided by law. When a
hearing is set by the adjudication administrator, it must be set no sooner than fifteen (15) days from the date of the issuance of the violation unless an
emergency involving public health and safety or the general welfare of the community is involved in which instance a hearing could be set immediately.
C. The village manager shall appoint an adjudication administrator who is authorized to:
(1) Operate and manage a system of administrative adjudication;
(2) Adopt, distribute and process violation notices;
(3) Establish procedures necessary for the prompt, fair and efficient operation of the administrative adjudication system;
(4) Certify copies of the final determinations of liability and factual reports, verifying that the final determination of violating liability was issued in
accordance with this article and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3; (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
(5) Certify reports to the Illinois secretary of state concerning initiation of driver's license suspensions in accordance with the provisions of this article
and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5; (Ord. 12-1514, 5-15-2012)
(6) Promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing process, the content of forms and procedures, and the daily operation of the
administrative adjudication system;
(7) Compile and maintain complete and accurate records relating to all municipal ordinance violation notices issued pursuant to this article and the
dispositions thereof. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
A. The administrative hearing officer shall be an attorney admitted to the practice of law in the state for at least three (3) years and in good standing with
the attorney registration and disciplinary commission of the supreme court of Illinois and shall have completed the training required by law.
B. The administrative hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings including, but not limited to, the power to:
(1) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues;
(2) Administer oaths and affirmations;
(3) Hear testimony;
(4) Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence;
(5) At the request of any party or on the Administrative Hearing Officer's own motion, subpoena the attendance of relevant witnesses and the
production of relevant books, records or other information;
(6) Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
(7) Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this article, or other applicable law;
(8) Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and conclusions of law; and
(9) Impose penalties and fines as set forth in applicable code provisions, and issue orders that are consistent with applicable code provisions and
assess costs, including, but not limited to, court costs, upon finding a party liable for the charged violation; an order may include the recommendation
for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a business license, pursuant to chapter 11, article I of this Code. However, in no event shall an
Administrative Hearing Officer have the authority to impose a penalty of imprisonment or a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). (Ord.
12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-4: JURISDICTION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 62/377
Those matters subject to the administrative adjudication system provided for by this chapter are charges of violation of any Village ordinance, except the
following: 1) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or this Code governing the movement of vehicles; 2) any reportable offense under section 6-204 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204; 3) violations punishable by a penalty of incarceration; and 4) violations punishable by a
fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per violation, excluding allowable costs; provided, however, that the maximum fine amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) does not apply to cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-
21-2012)
Sec. 6-4.1. PENALTIES.
Any person violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III, "Penalties", of this Code. (Ord. 12-
1514, 5-15-2012)
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURES
Sec. 6-5: INSTITUTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS.
A. Any authorized department or agency of the Village may institute an administrative adjudication proceeding with the Office of Administrative
Adjudication by forwarding a copy of the charging document, which has been properly served, to the Office of Administrative Adjudication, which office
shall coordinate hearing dates from the various departments and agencies.
B. Respondents shall be served with a copy of the charging document, which shall include the date of the hearing, in any manner reasonably calculated to
give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them, including:
(1) Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents;
(2) Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's address;
(3) Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the party's address; or
(4) Service by posting a copy of the charging document upon the property where the violation is found when the party is the owner or manager of the
property.
C. The charging document shall include:
(1) The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated, including a legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to
constitute a violation of each Code section set forth, and the Code section(s) alleged to have been violated;
(2) The date, time and place of the alleged violation;
(3) The name and position of the village employee or agent issuing the charging document, including the identification number of the person, if any, or
the name of the complainant, if the complainant is not a village employee or agent;
(4) The date and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
(5) The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and
(6) The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
The village employee or agent shall certify the correctness of the information required by this section by signing the charging document. Compliance
with this section shall establish a prima facie case. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-6: SUBPOENAS.
A. An administrative hearing officer may issue a subpoena only if he or she determines that the testimony of the witnesses or the documents or items
sought by the subpoena are necessary to present evidence that:
(1) Is relevant to the case; and
(2) Relates to a contested issue in the case.
B. A subpoena issued under this article shall identify:
(1) The person to whom it is directed;
(2) The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any;
(3) The date for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena;
(4) The time for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; and
(5) The place for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 63/377
C. In no event shall the date identified for the appearance of the witnesses or the production of the documents or other items be less than seven (7) days
after service of the subpoena.
D. Within three (3) business days of being served with a subpoena issued in accordance with this article, the recipient of the subpoena may contest the
order authorizing the issuance of the subpoena to the administrative hearing officer, setting forth in detail the recipient's objections to the subpoena.
Upon receipt of the contest to the subpoena, the administrative hearing officer shall review the objections and, upon review, enter the appropriate order.
(Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-7: REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS.
A. The case for the village may be presented by a village employee or by an attorney designated by the village.
B. The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent, any agent of the respondent or an attorney. An agent shall present a written
authorization signed by the respondent giving the agent power to act and to bind the respondent to any orders entered by the administrative hearing
officer. An attorney who appears on behalf of any person shall file with the administrative hearing officer a written appearance on a form provided by
the adjudication administrator for that purpose. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-8: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.
A. The administrative hearing officer shall conduct the hearings in an orderly manner and insist upon proper decorum by all persons present at the
hearings. The intent of the hearings is to provide the village and the respondent with full and fair presentation of the issues.
B. All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, which shall be administered by the administrative hearing officer. Parties may present witnesses
and cross examine opposing witnesses.
C. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
D. No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, that a violation notice, or a copy thereof,
issued in accordance with this article, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified therein. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-9: HEARING TESTIMONY.
The strict laws of evidence shall not apply. Hearsay testimony may be admitted and relied upon by the administrative hearing officer in making his or her
determination. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-10: DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE.
Relevant documents may be received into evidence without formal proof of authenticity. The administrative hearing officer shall determine the weight, if
any, to be afforded documents received into evidence. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-11: TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS.
Either party may request that the proceedings be taken and transcribed by a certified court reporter. The cost of the reporter shall be borne by the party
requesting the reporter. The village may, at its cost, tape record the proceedings. If a tape recording is made, a respondent may obtain a transcript at
respondent's cost. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-12: CONTINUANCES.
All administrative law proceedings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. For good cause shown, a postponement may be granted in the
discretion of the administrative hearing officer. The purpose of administrative law proceedings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged code violations
and, accordingly, the request for and the grant of, continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness permits. Continuances shall not be granted for
more than two (2) months. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-13: HEARING; DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY OR OF NO LIABILITY; PETITION TO SET ASIDE.
A. Upon conclusion of a hearing under this article, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written findings, decision and order and, if he/she finds
the respondent liable, include the amount of the fine for the relevant violation as provided in this code, and the basis therefor.
B. If a person fails to respond to the charging document and fails to appear, a determination of liability due to default shall be entered against the
respondent pursuant to this article. Such determination shall become final for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois administrative review act
upon the denial or, the expiration of the time in which to file a timely petition to set aside the determination as provided in this article.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 64/377
C. Within twenty one (21) days from the issuance of a determination of liability pursuant to this section, the person against whom the determination was
entered may petition by submitting a written request to the adjudication administrator to set aside the determination, provided, however, the grounds for
the petition shall be limited to:
(1) The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited property or vehicle on the date the violation notice was first issued;
(2) The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question;
(3) The person stating he or she never received the notice; or
(4) Excusable failure, based upon criteria established by the administrative hearing officer, to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
D. The adjudication administrator shall set a hearing date on the petition and provide written notice of that date to the petitioner. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-14: FINAL DETERMINATION.
A final determination of liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine and/or penalty after the administrative hearing officer's determination of violation
liability, and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures, including denial of a timely petition to set aside or failing to file
the set aside petition within twenty one (21) days of the determination. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-15: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION.
If any fine or penalty is owing and unpaid after a determination of liability under this code has become final, and the respondent has exhausted or failed to
exhaust judicial procedures for review, the adjudication administrator shall cause a notice of final determination of liability to be sent to the respondent in
accordance with this article. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-16: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review act are a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois administrative review act may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance
violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer may be enforced in
the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that respondent correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or
other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the village to enforce the judgment entered against that respondent,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to
any expenses being fixed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this subsection, the village shall provide a notice to the respondent that
states that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply
with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If
notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
D. Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Illinois code of civil procedure1, or by the uniform commercial code2, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the village under this chapter. The
lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-17: COMPLIANCE BOND.
In order to ensure that code violations are remedied or fines are paid in a timely manner, an administrative hearing officer, upon issuing a final
determination of liability that includes an order of compliance, may require a respondent to post with the village a compliance bond or, as appropriate, to
consent to the granting and recording of a lien against titled property. Bonds and liens shall be approved by the village manager as to form and amount.
Whenever it is necessary for the village to make repairs or otherwise expend funds relating to a code violation for which a bond was posted, or whenever
fines or costs remain unpaid after a code violator has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial review procedures, the administrative hearing officer may,
after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, issue an order permitting the village to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount, or to
foreclose on the lien. The administrative hearing officer shall order the bond or the titled property or proceeds from the titled property, less the costs
incurred by the village, returned to the respondent upon proof of compliance with the applicable code provisions and the payment of applicable fines or
costs. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-18: FINES PAYABLE TO THE FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
All fines and other monies paid to the village in accordance with this article shall be remitted to the finance department. Payments shall be made within ten
(10) calendar days. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-19: ELECTION OF REMEDIES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 65/377
In no case may the office of administrative adjudication conduct an administrative adjudication proceeding for an alleged violation of this code where the
requested remedy is a punishment of imprisonment. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-20: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, neither the authority of the office of administrative adjudication to conduct administrative adjudication
procedures nor the institution of such procedures under this article shall preclude the village from seeking any remedies for code violations through the use
of any other administrative procedure or court proceeding. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Sec. 6-21: JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Any final determination by an administrative hearing officer shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to
review under the Illinois administrative review act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2012)
Footnote 1: 735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.
Footnote 2: 810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
Title Chapter 7
WATER, SEWER AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 7
WATER, SEWER AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I. WATER SERVICE
Sec. 7-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
There is hereby established a division of water and sewerage of the department of public works. The water and sewerage system operated by this division
shall be a combined water and sewerage system pursuant to chapter 24, division 13a of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-
2002)
Sec. 7-2: WATER DEPARTMENT, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The division of water and sewerage shall be administered by the director of public works whose duties are stated in chapter 3 of this code. The director of
public works and the community development and building department is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-
2002)
Sec. 7-3: TAPPING OF WATER MAINS.
No water mains shall be tapped, nor shall any connection be made with any service or supply pipes, including private supply pipes on the village main side
of the meter, except by the division of water and sewerage or as otherwise authorized by the director of public works, and not until an application in writing,
setting forth the legal description of the property, the name and address of the person or concern about to perform the work, the size of tap desired and
kind of building for which service is intended, shall first have been made to the community development and building department accompanied by the
appropriate fees, and until the village has approved said application and issued the permit therefor. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-4: SERVICE PIPES CONNECTIONS.
Each private supply pipe and each service pipe, branch or connecting pipe, drawing water directly or indirectly from any of the water mains in the village of
Northfield, shall be of copper not less than one inch (1") in diameter, of type K, and shall be equipped with corporation cocks, roundway stopcocks, and
buffalo or shutoff box of a type specified by the village of Northfield and located in accordance with the rules, regulations, and ordinances of this village,
and as approved by the village.
Each private supply pipe and each service pipe, branch or connecting pipe, drawing water from the water mains in the village of Northfield shall be
controlled by a meter approved by and obtained from the village of Northfield and located in accordance with the rules, regulations, and ordinances of this
village and with the approval of the village. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the costs of service connection and equipping the same with the
accessories shall be borne by the person or concern making application for a permit and without expense to the village. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-5: PERMITS ISSUED ONLY TO LICENSED PLUMBERS.
Permit(s) to connect to any of the water mains or service pipes, or for the installation or altering of any plumbing fixtures drawing water from any of the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 66/377
supply pipes of this village, shall only be issued to duly licensed and bonded plumbers who have posted a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) bond with the
village of Northfield. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-6: FEES FOR PERMITS FOR WATER CONNECTION.
Each application for a permit for a water connection shall be accompanied by the appropriate connection fee in accordance with appendix D of this code.
(Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-7: MATERIALS RECEIVED UPON PAYMENT OF FEE.
An applicant for a water connection permit shall, upon payment of the required fee, receive for installation under the permit, a water meter of proper size. A
licensed plumber shall be retained by the applicant to properly install the above stated plumbing work. All costs of installing the plumbing parts shall be
borne by the applicant. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-8: MAINTENANCE OF WATER CONNECTIONS AND FIXTURES.
Every person having service from the water mains of this village shall, at his or her own cost and expense, keep and repair all pipes, accessories, and
plumbing fixtures commencing with the tap into the water main to and in said premises. If any such supply pipe be permitted to remain out of repair, the
division of water and sewerage may, after two (2) days' prior notice, posted on the main entrance to the premises, shut off the water to said premises.
When the water is so shut off, it shall not be permitted to be turned on again until such pipe, fixture, meter or accessory shall have been placed in proper
repair. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-8.1: WATER ABANDONMENT.
When a building is demolished, all existing water service connections to that building shall be properly removed and the village water main shall be
repaired. This work shall be accomplished at the expense of the property owner and to the reasonable satisfaction of the village engineer. (Ord. 07-1342,
9-18-2007)
Sec. 7-9: UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH WATER SERVICE CONNECTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any water main, service pipe, valve, buffalo or shutoff box, or any pipe connected with
the village water system, unless permission therefor has been obtained from the division of water and sewerage. Any person found guilty of violating this
section shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition, the village may collect
any actual damages caused by such unlawful interference. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-10: UNLAWFUL USE OF WATER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take water from any fireplug, hydrant, valve, faucet, or pipe, or any other opening connected with the water system of
this village, unless such person shall have made application for the use of water for such purpose and has received permission therefor from said division
of water and sewerage. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one
thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00), in addition to the cost of the water used and any actual damages caused by the unlawful use of water. (Ord. 89-
613, 11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 05-1258, 9-20-2005)
Sec. 7-10.1: WATER SERVICES TO BE IN COMPLIANCE WITH ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE.
It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any water service in the village that is not in compliance with the Illinois state plumbing code. (Ord. 97-910, 7-21-
1997)
Sec. 7-10.2: THREAT TO THE PUBLIC WATER.
It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a nuisance to maintain any plumbing installation or connection that constitutes a threat of contamination to
the public water supply. This shall include, but not be limited to, any connection of whatever kind or nature between the public water supply and any other
water supply. Such a nuisance may be abated in the manner provided in chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 97-910, 7-21-1997)
Sec. 7-10.3: REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE BACKFLOW PREVENTERS.
All reduced pressure zone backflow preventers must be installed in accordance with the Illinois state plumbing code and shall be inspected and tested
annually by a licensed plumber whose certification of proper operation must be provided to the village public works director. (Ord. 97-910, 7-21-1997)
Sec. 7-11: FLUSHING SANITARY SEWERS WITH POTABLE WATER IS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to directly connect potable water to any sanitary sewer within the village. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 67/377
Sec. 7-11.1: RESTRICTIONS ON NONESSENTIAL USES OF WATER.
Between the dates of May 15 and September 15 of each year, sprinkling of lawns shall be permitted only as follows:
(1) Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., unrestricted;
(2) Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.:
(a) Odd numbered street addresses on odd numbered days only.
(b) Even numbered street addresses on even numbered days only.
At such time as the rainfall for any two (2) week period falls below fifty percent (50%) of the average rainfall for the Chicago area as established by the
U.S. weather service for that two (2) week period, the village manager may establish by written order other reasonable restrictions on lawn sprinkling,
including prohibition. Said restrictions may remain in effect until the rainfall from May 15 until any date for which the removal of the restriction is
contemplated has reached ninety percent (90%) of the average for that time period.
These restrictions shall not apply to premises drawing water from wells or other natural aquifers.
The violation of any such section of this article shall be punishable by a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). A violation of any section of this article shall
constitute a separate offense for each violation. (Ord. 90-628, 5-29-1990)
Sec. 7-12: WATER SAVING DEVICES REQUIRED.
In all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of plumbing fixtures or trim, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow rates or water
usage shall be installed (ratings are based on a pressure at the fixture of 40 to 50 pounds per square inch):
Water closets, tank type 3.5 gal. per flush
Water closets, flushometer type 3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, tank type 3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, flushometer type 3.0 gal. per flush
Lavatory, sink faucets 3.0 gal. per minute
Showerheads 3.0 gal. per minute
(Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-13: FAUCETS IN PUBLIC RESTROOMS.
In addition to the requirements in section 7-12 of this article, in all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of fixtures in lavatories intended for
public use, the faucets of such lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use shall be of metering or self-closing type. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-14: RECYCLING OF WATER IN CAR WASHES.
In all new construction or replacement of fixtures in car wash facilities, car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. (Ord. 89-
613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-15: AIR CONDITIONERS.
Air conditioners in all new construction and in all remodeling where water is used shall be of a closed system type. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-16: LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
All lawn sprinkler systems supplied from any water source, potable or nonpotable, must comply with requirements of the Illinois plumbing code. A licensed
pump installer may install the pump and piping to, and including, the pressure tank for the system. However, a licensed plumber is required to install all
piping from the pressure tank up to, and including, the lawn sprinkler.
It shall be illegal to aspirate or pump chemicals (i.e., fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, etc.) onto the lawn through any sprinkler system.
All lawn sprinkler systems, new and existing, shall have a reduced pressure principal backflow assembly, between the sprinkler system and the water
connection. Any connection made to the water supply shall be inspected by the building department. Such principal backflow assemblies shall be installed
and approved for compliance within twelve (12) months from the adoption of this amendment to article I of this chapter. All inspection charges made in
connection with this section shall be in accordance with appendix D to this code. (Ord. 89-615, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-16.1: DUAL WATER SYSTEMS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 68/377
If a premises is currently being served by a well and connects to the municipal water supply system, the owner may retain the existing well for the sole
purpose of use as a lawn sprinkler system. The system must use a reduced pressure principal backflow assembly in accordance with the Illinois plumbing
code and section 7-16 of this article. If however, the owner of a property which is currently being served by municipal water supply system desires to install
a new well for the sole purpose of use as a lawn sprinkler system, then the new well must be placed in a separate pump house, remote from the principal
structure and not be connected in any manner to the municipal water supply system. (Ord. 00-1021, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 7-17: ACCESS TO PREMISES.
Each owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises procuring water from the village water system shall permit the superintendent of water and
sewerage, or a duly authorized representative, access to the premises at any and all reasonable hours for the purpose of examining the water service
pipes, plumbing fixtures and water meter, valves and shut off boxes, and shall permit the division of water and sewerage to remove the water meter at any
time for the purpose of testing it or replacing it if necessary. In the event that repairs must be made on said meter, the cost thereof shall be borne by the
owner, occupant, or person in charge of said premises. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-18: WATER SHORTAGE CRISIS, EMERGENCY POWER OF THE VILLAGE PRESIDENT.
In the event that the secretary of the Illinois department of transportation or corporate authorities declares a water shortage crisis, the village president
may order the following measures to reduce the water demand of the village to the minimum level necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the village:
(1) The reduction or prohibition of external water use, including the sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers,
plants, vines, washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other outdoor services; the washing of the outside of dwellings; the
washing of the inside and outside of office buildings; the washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and machinery; the operation
of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water; the use of swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and
recirculating system.
(2) The curtailment or closing of any commercial car wash and the prohibition of the washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses or any other
type of mobile equipment.
(3) The reduction in consumer per capita consumption of water.
(4) The installation of water saving devices.
(5) Reduction in water pump pressure. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-19: NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ORDERS.
Orders entered by the village president pursuant to section 7-18 of this article, shall be posted and published as in the manner provided by law for the
posting and publication of the village ordinances. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-20: FAILURE TO OBEY ORDERS.
It shall be unlawful not to obey any order promulgated under sections 7-18 and 7-19 of this article and shall subject the offender to penalties as set forth in
section 1-13 of this code unless otherwise specified in this article. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-20.1: WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICES FEES.
The fees for both water and sewerage services shall be as set forth in article I of appendix D of this code. (Ord. 95-840, 4-24-1995)
ARTICLE II. SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Division I - Establishment
Sec. 7-21: DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in articles I, II, and III of this chapter shall be as follows and any
requirements or prohibitions found in these definitions shall be enforceable as though set forth in a separate section:
BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN. That part of a drainage system which receives the waste discharge from interior fixtures within a building or other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or another approved point of discharge.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 69/377
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
Clarification of word usage: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
COMMERCIAL USER. Any user other than single-family or duplex residential.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Shall be as defined in any applicable national pollutant discharge elimination system permit.
FLOATABLE MATERIAL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.
GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
INDUSTRIAL USERS. Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances
into products or the packaging of already manufactured products.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, flowing or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSPECTION MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which wastes from commercial, industrial or multi-family (more than 6 units) are discharged.
Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "inspectional manhole" is to provide access for Village representatives to
sample and/or measure discharges.
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Shall include churches schools and any user associated with federal, state or local government.
LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement costs. Examples would be debt service and
capital improvement costs.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 1) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or
more per average work day; or 2) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or 3) has in its
waste, toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or 4) is found by the permit issuant authority,
in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used and commonly called, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analysis.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE EMISSION SYSTEM PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or
where appropriate by the director, after enactment of the federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the
federal act.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any passage of material or substance into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
ppm. Parts per million by weight.
PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency or other entity.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day containing 0.17 pounds of BOD5 and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids.
PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment system.
PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER. A sanitary sewer that has never been conveyed to the village of Northfield. All connections to the public sewer, including
the Tee, Y, break in connection, lateral, or service shall be considered part of the private sanitary sewer.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village of Northfield. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village of
Northfield boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village of Northfield sanitary system, even though those sewers
may not have been constructed with the village of Northfield's funds.
REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance"
includes replacement.
RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings; provided, that all multi-family
residential structures except duplexes, shall be deemed commercial for purpose of this chapter.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 70/377
SEWAGE. Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
SEWAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues in the operation of the sewerage system.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wasted liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which has a concentration of a given constituent or has a rate of flow either of which exceeds
for any period of longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average concentration of a constituent or five (5) times the flow during normal
operation.
STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water.
STORM WATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which may be levied on those persons whose wastes are
greater in strength than the concentration values established in this chapter.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by
a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated.
USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
USER CLASS. The type of user, "residential, institutional/governmental, commercial", or "industrial" as defined herein.
VILLAGE. The village of Northfield.
WASTEWATER. The used or spent water of a community. From this standpoint it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be necessarily
or inadvertently mixed with the wastewater. Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to mean that storm water may be introduced into the
sanitary system.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be
computed as outlined in this chapter, and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used
as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 01-1092, 12-3-
2001)
Sec. 7-22: ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
There is hereby established a sewerage division of the department of public works. The sewerage system operated by virtue of this division shall be a
combined water and sewerage system pursuant to chapter 24 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-23: SEWERAGE DEPARTMENT, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The sewerage department shall be administered by the director of public works whose duties are stated in chapter 3 of this code. The director of public
works, or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Division II - Use Of Public Sewers Required
Sec. 7-24: DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited on public or private property within the village any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-25: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF WASTE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 71/377
It shall be unlawful to permit or cause to be discharged any waste whatsoever into any storm sewer or any natural outlet within the village, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with all applicable codes.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day said violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-26: AUTHORITY TO INVESTIGATE.
The village shall have the authority to enter upon any property at any reasonable hour to test for and determine the source of any outflow of sewerage.
(Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-27: PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
Any method for the disposal of human excrement other than by depositing it in the public sanitary sewer is hereby designated as hazardous to the public
health. No person shall build or maintain or allow to exist on any premises any private device for the disposal of human excrement which is hazardous to
the public health, as designated herein except upon application to the village. A permit for a private facility may be issued by the corporate authorities only
under the following conditions:
(1) No part of the system, including a leeching bed, shall be within three hundred feet (300') of any watercourse or swale or drainage ditch which at any
time carries water.
(2) No part of the system, including a leeching bed, shall be within one hundred feet (100') of any lot line.
(3) The applicant shall have obtained all applicable federal, state and county permits and provide to the village written certification from an engineer
licensed by the state that all federal, state and county permits that are required have been provided and that the facility as built is in compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(4) No such permit may be granted if a public sanitary sewer is located within five hundred feet (500') of any part of the lot for which the permit is
sought.
(5) At such time as a public sanitary sewer is extended to a point within five hundred feet (500') of any part of the lot for which a permit has been
granted, the owner, whether the applicant or a successor, shall have six (6) months to connect to the public sanitary sewer. A portion of a lot shall be
deemed to be within five hundred feet (500') if a public or private right of way or easements exist that would permit the connection to be made by the
laying of five hundred feet (500') or less of pipe.
(6) The permit shall become null and void at such time as the system becomes a danger to the health of persons as determined by the health authority
when applying standards established by the federal, state or county government or agency thereof. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Division III - Building Sewers And Connections
Sec. 7-28: SEWER PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining
a written permit from the village. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-29: SEWER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
Application for a sanitary sewer permit shall be made on a special form furnished by the department of community development and building. The permit
application shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of construction plans, specifications and any other information reasonably considered pertinent in the
judgment of the department of community development and building. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 7-30: SEWER PERMITS, CONNECTIONS AND FEES.
No connection shall be made to the village's sewerage system until application has been made to the department of community development and building
in the name of the licensed plumber who proposes to do the work, a bond for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) furnished, all fees paid to the village as
required by appendix D of this code and a permit issued.
A sewer pipe connection from a sewer into an applicant's premises shall be made entirely at the applicant's expense. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 7-31: DOWNSTREAM CAPACITY REQUIRED.
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities,
including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 72/377
anticipated waste load. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to provide to the village reasonable satisfaction that such capacity is available. (Ord. 89-
613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-32: COST AND INDEMNIFICATION FOR INSTALLATION.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village
from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the sewer. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-33: NEED FOR NEW SEWERS, USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot,
and no private sewer is available or where a public sewer cannot be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway.
The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the village engineer, to meet
all the requirements of this article. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-33.1: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SANITARY SEWERS.
Every property owner having a sewer service connected to the village's main line public sewer shall, at his or her own expense, keep and repair all pipes,
accessories, and plumbing fixtures including the Tee, Y, break in connection, lateral, or service at the village's main line sewer to any termination point
inside the property. If such a sewer service is in need of repair, the public works department may, after two (2) days' prior notice posted on the main
entrance to the premises, shut off the water to the premises. When the water is shut off, it shall not be permitted to be turned on again until such pipe,
fixture, or accessory shall be placed in proper repair as determined by the director of public works. If no such corrective measures take place and the
situation is deemed an emergency situation or an imminent hazard by the director of public works, the village shall do what is necessary to make the
repair, and directly bill the property owner and/or impose a lien upon the real estate. This bill shall be no less than the contracted price, or in the case of
the village making the repair, the hourly public works rate as well as equipment rate and any administrative costs that would be applicable. The property
owner shall also pay for the cost for public works to turn on and off water. Any liability imposed by this section shall be a joint and several responsibility of
the owner and the occupant of the premises. (Ord. 01-1092, 12-3-2001; amd. Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 7-34: SEWER ABANDONMENT.
When a building is demolished, all existing sanitary sewer service connections shall be abandoned and removed, and the village sewer shall be repaired
at the expense of the property owner to the reasonable satisfaction of the village engineer. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-35: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of all building and plumbing and all other applicable rules and
regulations of the village. Upon approval of the plumbing inspector, the connection shall conform to the procedures set forth in the appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications
For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. In addition, the following regulations shall
apply: (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
(1) Overhead Plumbing. All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below grade level at the building site shall have
overhead plumbing for both storm and sanitary systems.
(2) Footing Drains. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps for further discharge via an overhead system into a storm sewer or a drainage
ditch. No footing drain or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. All sump basins shall be vented. No wastewater from the
building may be connected to a footing drain or footing drain sump basin.
(3) Pipe Bedding. Bedding, other than concrete embedment, shall consist of crushed gravel, or crushed stone, one-fourth inch (1/4") to one inch (1") in
size. As a minimum, the material shall conform to the requirements of article 704.01 of the standard specifications for road and bridge construction,
of the state of Illinois or ASTM C-33. The gradation shall conform to the gradation CA7, CA8, CA11 or CA13 of the Illinois standard specifications or
to ASTM gradation no. 67. The pipe shall be laid so that it will be uniformly supported and the entire length of the pipe barrel will bear on the bedding.
No blocking of any kind shall be used to adjust the pipe to grade except when blocked with embedment concrete and the remainder of the pipe is in
full contact with the bedding. Bedding shall be required for all sewer construction, and shall be of a minimum thickness equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the
outside diameter of the sewer pipe but shall not be less than four inches (4") deep, and shall extend to the spring line and be fully tamped into place.
When PVC, ABS or other flexible or composite sewer pipe or service is utilized, the bedding material shall extend to twelve inches (12") over the top
of the pipe and be fully tamped into place. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
(4) Storm Water Discharge. Downspouts and storm water drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer but shall be discharged onto splash
blocks, into a dry well or as otherwise approved, in writing, by the village engineer. Under no circumstances shall the point of discharge be located
less than ten feet (10') from the building wall or closer than fifteen feet (15') from any lot line of the property. On properties where the distance
between the foundation and the adjoining property line is less than fifteen feet (15'), the downspout discharge must be hard piped to the front or rear
of the property, no closer than fifteen feet (15') from the property line. In no case shall any downspout termination be installed in a manner that will
cause additional drainage onto a neighboring property. (Ord. 04-1212, 8-17-2004)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 73/377
(5) Floor Drains. Floor drains in basements shall be connected to sump pumps and discharged to the sanitary sewers. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
(6) Sump Pumps. A sump pump shall be used for one function only, either the discharge of storm waters or the discharge of sanitary sewage. Subject
to the following exceptions the discharge point from a ground water or other storm water sump pump shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15')
from the lot line of the property on which the sump pump is located:
(a) Sanitary sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.
(b) Storm water or ground water sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other storm water shall be connected to the storm
sewer or shall discharge into a drainage ditch. (Ord. 03-1165, 6-17-2003)
Exceptions: 1) The adjacent property owner has approved the location by written instrument acceptable to the village; provided that the approval of
an adjacent owner shall not be binding on a successor owner; or 2) the village engineer makes a written determination that locating the
discharge point closer than fifteen feet (15') from the property will not increase either the volume or rate of runoff on the adjacent property. In no
case shall any sump pump discharge termination be installed in a manner that will cause additional drainage onto a neighboring property. (Ord.
03-1165, 6-17-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1212, 8-17-2004)
(7) Window Well And Areaway Drains. No window or areaway drains carrying surface runoff or ground water shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer.
(8) Construction Standards. In addition to meeting all other applicable requirements, sanitary sewers shall be SDR26 PVC or CL52DIP. Public
sanitary sewers shall have a minimum internal diameter of eight inches (8"). Sanitary sewer services shall have a minimum internal diameter of six
inches (6"). Joints for sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be of the compression type in conformance with the specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials, designation D3212 (PVC) of (DIP). Sidewalls and bases of manholes on sanitary sewers shall be of
reinforced precast concrete ring construction which shall have a five inch (5") minimum thickness. Manhole frames and covers shall be Neenah R-
1015 with a concealed pick hole, gasket seal and "SANITARY" cast on top. Precast flexible rubber sleeves shall be provided for all manhole
connections. Manhole covers to be used in the floodplain shall be a bolt down type (R-1077-B or R-1916-F).
(a) Current MDSGC requirements shall apply, including, but not limited to, requirements for pipe slope and manhole spacing. All PVC pipe shall be
deflection tested. All pipe shall be tested for infiltration.
(b) In cases where a connection is within twelve inches (12") of the manhole, sanitary services shall connect directly to the manhole. All other
connections shall be by WYE connection and shall attach to the pipe with a gasket or glue and bonding. Maximum infiltration shall be 100 gal./in
dia.,/mile/day, tested after service connections are installed.
(c) All sanitary sewer lines shall be placed in a prepared (shaped and compacted) bed of crushed stone. The ratio of the thickness of the crushed
stone bed to the outside diameter of the pipe shall be not more than one to four (1:4). Under no circumstances shall the bed be less than four
inches (4"). The pipe shall be covered at least to the springline with the bedding material constructed as outlined in subsection (3) of this section.
(Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-36: INSPECTION NOTIFICATION.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building commissioner or his representative. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-37: CONSTRUCTION PROTECTION.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, trees, bushes, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Division IV - Use Of Public Sewers
Sec. 7-38: DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the village engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the village engineer, to a storm sewer or a natural outlet. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-39: PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
For purposes of determining those materials or substances the discharge of which into the public sewer is prohibited or restricted; article III sections 1 and
2 of sewerage waste control ordinance as amended July 7, 1988, published by the water reclamation district of greater Chicago are hereby adopted by
reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 74/377
Sec. 7-40: SPECIAL INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Any restaurant or nonresidential establishment with a kitchen shall be required to have an outside grease trap. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the village engineer they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village engineer and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-41: INDUSTRIAL CONTROL MANHOLE REQUIREMENT.
All commercial, industrial buildings or multi-family buildings, serving more than six (6) units, shall be required to install an inspection manhole together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
shall be accessible and safely located. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-42: INDUSTRIAL LAB TESTS REQUIRED.
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters
and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but shall be no less than once
per year. The industry must supply a complete chemical and biological analysis of the components of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance
with the federal, state, local and the other regulatory standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses
to the director of public works at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements,
analyses, and reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for
analysis by an outside laboratory service. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 7-43: TEST STANDARDS.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA "Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods", and shall be determined at the inspection manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said inspection manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been provided, the inspection manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by scientifically accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
health and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate
or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24)
hour composite of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Division V - Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
Sec. 7-44: ACCESS TO PREMISES.
The Village Engineer, Director of Public Works and Community Development Director or any duly authorized employees of the Village, the State or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, repair, maintenance and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-
1999)
Division VI - Penalties
Sec. 7-45: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
Any person found guilty of a violation of any portion of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-
27-1997)
In addition to any other penalties set forth herein any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in the manner set
forth in chapter 14 of this Code.
The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
ARTICLE III. WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICE CHARGES AND FINANCES
Sec. 7-46: AUDIT AND ADEQUACY OF CHARGES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 75/377
The adequacy of the water and sewerage service charges shall be reviewed not less often than annually by certified public accountants for the Village in
their annual report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital or operation, maintenance and
replacement costs. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-47: ACCOUNTS.
The Village Finance Director shall maintain a proper system of accounts and records. Complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions
relative to the water and sewerage systems. At regular annual intervals an audit by the certified public accountants for the Village will be made of the
books and the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewerage systems. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-48: QUARTERLY BILLING.
The users of the Village water and sewerage systems shall be billed at least quarterly. Each billing will show the current rates and portion of the current bill
attributable to wastewater operation, maintenance and replacement. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-49: CHARGES BASED ON WATER METER READINGS.
All water shall be charged and paid for on the basis of the amount registered by such meter, except in cases where it shall be found that such meter or
meters are registering incorrectly. In such cases, charges and payment shall be made on an estimate by the Division of Water and Sewerage based on the
average of the four (4) preceding readings of such meter, excluding excessive or deficient readings. No deduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any
consumer of water by or on account of any leakage in any service pipe, connecting pipe, meter, tank or plumbing device.
The Divisions of Water and Sewerage shall keep a record of the readings of all meters for each of the separate premises, and shall read said meters at
intervals prescribed by the Village Manager. The rates herein charged shall apply to all water shown by such readings to have been taken from the
waterworks system during the period covered. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-50: RATES FOR WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICE.
A. Users in the Village of both water and sewer shall be charged and shall pay rates in accordance with the schedule in appendix D of this Code.
B. In the case of any residence in the Village having only one water meter occupied by two (2) families, the minimum rate for water service to such
residence shall be double the rates set forth in appendix D of this Code.
C. All users in the Village of sewerage service only, shall be charged and shall pay at the rate as required by appendix D of this Code. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-
1989)
D. Water and sewer services may be provided to consumers residing outside of the Village limits at the Village Board's discretion. The rates for water from
the Village's water system to consumers outside the Village limits shall be twice the rates specified for Northfield residents while the rates for sewer
service shall be three (3) times the rates specified for Northfield residents as set forth in appendix D of this Code. (Ord. 03-1139, 1-21-2003)
Sec. 7-51: UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH THE WATER METER; PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Village to tamper with, alter or damage any water meters or remote reading device. Any person
found guilty of violating this section shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 7-52: MINIMUM CHARGE.
The entire minimum rate applicable to water users and the entire rate applicable to users of sewer service only shall be charged and paid for if a premises
is connected to the sewerage and/or water system for any portion of any billing period. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-53: PAYMENT FOR VILLAGE USE.
The Village shall be considered a user and shall be subject to the rates and charges provided by appendix D of this Code. Payment for all such services
shall be made from the corporate funds of the Village into the "Waterworks and Sewerage Fund" in the same manner as other revenues are required to be
deposited. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Sec. 7-54: WHEN AND BY WHOM WATER AND SEWERAGE CHARGES ARE PAYABLE.
Charges for water and/or sewerage service shall become payable immediately upon receipt of the appropriate bill. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof, and the user of either water or sewerage service, shall jointly and severally be liable to pay for the service to said premises, and the
service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that each of said persons shall be jointly and severally liable therefor. (Ord. 89-
613, 11-28-1989)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 76/377
Sec. 7-55: DELINQUENT CHARGES FOR NONPAYMENT.
In the event charges for water and/or sewerage service are not paid within twenty five (25) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. Such delinquent charges shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which said services are
supplied, and the appropriate officers of the Village are hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook County. The filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such service. (Ord. 89-613,
11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 07-1348, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 7-56: UNPAID WATER AND SEWERAGE BILLS.
(1) If the water and/or sewerage bills are not paid by the due date, the customer will be required to pay an additional ten percent (10%) of the bill.
(2) If the bill remains unpaid for fifty six (56) days, the customer will be notified that if the bill plus the ten percent (10%) penalty is not paid within four
(4) days, the customer's service will be terminated. (Ord. 00-1014, 3-20-2000)
(3) The placing of a notice that the water and/or sewer service is to be terminated within four (4) days at the front entrance to the building shall be
deemed sufficient notice to permit the Village to terminate said service. The owner of the premises, the occupant, thereof, and the user of either
water and/or sewer will be liable for all costs necessary to terminate said service. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 00-1014, 3-20-2000)
(4) A charge for reinstatement of service shall be made in accordance with appendix D of this code. (Ord. 00-1014, 3-20-2000)
Sec. 7-57: BILLING AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
The finance director of the village shall render all bills associated with waterworks or sewerage system services, and shall collect all monies due on these
bills. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 7-58: REVENUES.
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewer service charge account of the sanitary sewer
fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the finance director separate and apart and clearly identifiable from all other monies of the village.
(Ord. 99-959, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 7-59: ACCESS TO RECORDS.
The IEPA, USEPA, or its authorized representatives shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village during normal business
hours. (Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989; amd. Ord. 00-1014, 3-20-2000)
Sec. 7-60: RESERVED.
(Ord. 00-1014, 3-20-2000)
ARTICLE IV. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Sec. 7-61: PURPOSES.
The purposes of this article are as follows:
(1) To provide an improved method of designing and constructing storm water management facilities, using uniform and consistent standards,
throughout the village.
(2) To lessen or avoid hazards to persons or damage to property resulting from the accumulation or flow of storm water runoff by regulating the manner
in which properties within the village are developed or redeveloped.
(3) To minimize the impact of further development or redevelopment of properties within the village by regulating the amount of storm water runoff
discharged into the storm sewer system as a result of rainfall events.
(4) To minimize the expense to property owners and the general public for future improvements and additions to the sewer system by regulating the
development or redevelopment of properties within the village in such a manner as to avoid erosion of existing land surfaces. (1986 Code)
Sec. 7-62: DEFINITIONS.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings hereinbelow ascribed to them:
ALLOWABLE RELEASE RATE. The maximum permitted rate of storm water discharge from a site during a 100-year design storm.
BYPASS. A physical means or method by which water flow is passed from an upstream watershed through a site, whether through or around a detention
system.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 77/377
CHANGE IN GRADE. Any excavation of land, including the moving, addition or removal of soil or other fill. This shall not include tilling of soil for gardening
purposes that involves only minor disturbance of topsoil.
CHANGE TO DRAINAGE PATTERN. Any disturbance of the surface or subsurface of property that obstructs or changes the quantity, rate or direction of
the flow of surface water.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE. The volume of floodplain space available for the storage of storm water during a 100-year flood, as defined by the federal
emergency management agency maps and profiles. Compensatory storage compensates for a like volume of storage removed from the floodplain during
site grading or development.
DETENTION. The temporary ponding of runoff achieved by restricting its release from a basin to a limited flow rate (but not zero).
DETENTION BASIN. A basin for storm water storage having a horizontal area with limits as defined by a zone designated as the "detention basin" on plats
or plans submitted to the village. On a single zoning lot, the detention basin may be defined on the plat or the final engineering plans, without benefit of an
easement. The detention basin may have either grass/landscaped surface or paved surface that is generally dry when not used for storm water storage.
FREEBOARD. The vertical elevation difference between high-water level or the emergency storm water release level, whichever is higher (overflow), and
the top of an earthen bank.
ILLINOIS BEARING RATIO (IBR). A measure of the maximum structural load-bearing capacity of the soil structure, based upon standard laboratory tests.
IMPERVIOUS. Any surface improvement which reduces the absorption capability of the existing soil to less than fifty percent (50%), as determined by the
village engineer.
100-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM. A design storm having an intensity duration relationship that has a probability of being equaled or exceeded, on the
average, once in a period of one hundred (100) years, as defined by the Illinois state water survey.
PIPE STORAGE. Storm water detention system utilizing underground pipes as part or all of the detention system.
PUMPED STORAGE. Detention, retention, or compensatory storage basins which require pumping to discharge their live storage volume.
RATIONAL METHOD. The empirical method that relates storm water runoff to rainfall intensity by the formula "Q=CiA" where "Q" is the peak runoff rate in
cubic feet per second (cfs), "C" is the runoff coefficient, "i" is the average rainfall intensity in inches per hour (in./hr.) and "A" is the area of the site in acres
(ac.).
RELEASE RATE. The rate of discharge in cubic feet per second from a detention or retention facility.
RESTRICTOR. The physical mechanism or means for controlling the rate of storm water discharge from a detention or retention basin. Most restrictors are
in the form of pipes, although other forms are possible.
RETENTION BASIN. A basin for storm water storage that functions in the same manner as a detention basin except that a retention basin has a water
surface when not actively storing storm water.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. The percentage of precipitation that appears as storm water runoff.
SITE DEVELOPMENT. Site development shall include any changes to the topography of property, including construction of buildings, structures,
installation of impermeable surfaces, excavation or other placement or removal of fill.
STORM SEWER. The minor portion of the overall storm water transmission system which carries storm water and surface water, including round or
elliptical pipes, box sections and other enclosed systems.
STORM SEWER CONNECTING STRUCTURE. Precast reinforced concrete manholes, inlets and catch basins connecting a portion of a storm sewer
system.
STORM WATER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM. The physical method of transporting storm water from one location to another, including streams, ditches,
swales and overflow routes (major or overland system), as well as manmade facilities such as storm sewers, tile lines, inlets, catch basins, manholes and
pumped systems (minor or convenience) used to convey storm water and snowmelt to a natural watercourse.
SURCHARGE. A hydraulic condition in a storm sewer which occurs when the height of the water surface in the storm sewer is at an elevation above the
crown (inside top surface) of the sewer pipe.
10-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM. A design storm event having an intensity duration relationship that has a probability of being equaled or exceeded, on
the average, once in a period of ten (10) years, as defined by the Illinois State Water Survey.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION. The time required for the stormwater runoff to flow from the most remote part of a site to the point of its discharge from said
site.
WATERSHED. A physical upstream land area, which contributes stormwater to a single downstream location or area. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-
17-2000)
Sec. 7-63: STORM WATER CONTROL REQUIREMENT.
(1) Subject to this article, no development or series of developments resulting in the cumulative installation of impervious ground coverage having a
surface area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more, shall be performed within the Village unless stormwater detention is provided to
accommodate stormwater runoff in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any development which would result in less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet of impervious ground coverage shall be required to contribute to the Village a monetary amount as set forth in appendix D, article
I of this Code in lieu of the stormwater detention that would otherwise be required by the application of this article or provide the minimum permitted
detention facility. If the property has an existing detention facility and the amount of impervious ground coverage created by the new development
plus the amount of impervious ground coverage for which the existing detention basin was provided results in one thousand (1,000) square feet or
greater of impervious ground coverage then providing additional detention shall be required. If the current owner caused any site development prior
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 78/377
to the adoption hereof and failed to obtain a permit from the Village in circumstances in which a permit was required, then all of the work done
without a permit shall be deemed to be done after the adoption hereof and the impervious surface installed without the permit shall be subject to the
requirements of this article. In no case shall a required stormwater detention facility have a lesser capacity than that required to mitigate one
thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious ground coverage. (Ord. 02-1105, 3-18-2002)
(2) All erosion protection must be installed and functional prior to any building materials being brought on the site and prior to any excavation or grading
of the site.
Unless otherwise approved, all detention required for any work under this ordinance shall be substantially complete before other work on site is
performed. This includes detention capacity in place with outfall requirements complete and any other appurtenant work associated with stormwater
management.
(3) Detention and drainage which is provided pursuant to this article shall not be inconsistent with the Village of Northfield stormwater management
plan, as approved and from time to time amended by the Corporate Authorities. A copy of the plan is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk.
(4) Developers and owners shall be required to apply for a building permit for all new construction. For purposes of this article, construction shall
include, but not be limited to, all buildings and other impervious structures, such as sidewalks, patios and new driveway construction. Construction
shall also include all semiimpervious structures, such as wooden decks if there is to be an impervious barrier such as polyethylene placed beneath
the semiimpervious surface. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 7-64: VARIATIONS; EXCEPTIONS FROM SECTION 7-63.
Exceptions to this article may be granted only subject to the following conditions:
A. Without Zoning Board Of Appeals Approval.
(1) A written request for such an exception is filed with the Building Commissioner prior to the start of actual construction.
(2) The amount of detention from which relief is sought is less than five thousand (5,000) cubic feet.
(3) No subdivision of land is involved.
(4) The applicant pays the direct costs of all Village engineering fees.
(5) The decision as to whether to grant any exception shall be based upon the Village Engineer's written report addressing the following matters with
respect to the property of the petitioner:
(a) Lack of or insufficient receiving storm sewer.
(b) Inability to provide sufficient outflow (the surrounding land is too flat or higher than the subject lot); or
(c) Other generally recognized engineering factor(s) that indicate that the required detention would not achieve its purpose.
(d) Adequate proof that the rate of runoff to adjacent properties will not be increased or if it is increased that it will not be unduly harmful to adjacent
property. Certification by the owner or owners of the adjacent property or properties receiving the runoff that the owner has no objection shall be
prima facie proof that the runoff is not unduly harmful.
(e) If the exception is from a detention requirement, whether the lot size is sufficient to accommodate the required detention.
(6) Within forty five (45) days of receiving the request, the Building Commissioner shall notify the applicant, the Village Manager and adjacent property
owners in writing, of the decision, specifying the reasons for either granting or denying the request. If the applicant, Village Manager or any adjacent
property owner does not agree with the ruling, a written appeal may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be filed within
fourteen (14) days of the mailing of notification of the decision.
B. With Zoning Board Of Appeals Approval. Exceptions to any regulation to this article may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals consistent with
subsection A of this section. In addition, the Zoning Board of Appeals also may grant exceptions in cases involving more than five thousand (5,000)
cubic feet of detention and in cases involving the subdivision of land. (Ord. 95-838, 3-27-1995)
C. Any Exception To The Detention Requirement. In any case where the exception involves not providing the required detention, for adding
impermeable surface over one thousand (1,000) square feet, the owner or developer shall first attempt to provide an equivalent engineering alternative
to the detention that is acceptable to the Village Engineer. If no acceptable alternative can be achieved, then the owner or developer shall be required
to contribute to the Village an amount of money as set forth in appendix D, article I of this Code. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
D. Provision Of Off Site Detention. A potential equivalent engineering alternative shall be the off site provision of detention. Off site detention may be
provided without Zoning Board of Appeals approval. However, no off site detention shall be approved unless there is strict compliance with the
following conditions:
(1) The petitioner shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer that its request will not, either individually or unilaterally, unreasonably
increase the potential for flooding of downstream or upstream properties.
(2) The off site detention shall be located within the same watershed as the petitioner's lot.
(3) Unless otherwise authorized by the Corporate Authorities, the stormwater must be detained on a lot which is adjacent to the petitioner's lot. A lot
shall be considered adjacent for these purposes even if there is an intervening public or private roadway.
(4) The obtaining of any easements, licenses or other interests necessary to achieve off site drainage shall be the responsibility of the petitioner. Such
interests shall run with the land and shall be irrevocable.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 79/377
Nothing contained in this subsection D shall be deemed to create in any person a right to require either the Village or any other public or private entity to
grant any easement, license or other interest in land. (Ord. 96-890, 11-25-1996)
Sec. 7-64.1: CREDIT FOR EXISTING STRUCTURES.
A. Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts. The following credits shall be available for new construction in single-family residential zoning districts
and under the following circumstances:
(1) (a) The structure was in existence prior to January 1, 1992, or
(b) The structure was constructed after January 1, 1992, pursuant to a valid Village building permit, and
(2) The structure being constructed is a single-family residence or accessory to a single-family residence.
If the above criteria are met as to single-family residential zoning districts, the following credits shall be available under the following circumstances:
(1) In cases where existing semi-impervious structures, such as wooden decks, are demolished, the owner or developer shall be allowed to include
fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of ground coverage of the demolished portion of the existing structure as partial credit toward the
stormwater control requirement.
(2) In cases where existing impervious structures, including driveways and patios, are demolished, the owner or developer shall be allowed to
include one hundred percent (100%) of the square feet of impervious coverage of the demolished portion of the existing impervious area of the
structure as a credit toward the stormwater control requirements.
B. Other Zoning Districts. The following credits shall be available in all other zoning districts and under the following circumstances:
(1) The total site area is less than three (3) acres;
(2) There is no existing stormwater detention facility on the site;
(3) There must be a net decrease in the volume and rate of the stormwater runoff from the site;
(4) There must be extenuating circumstances, which limit the ability to provide the required stormwater detention;
(5) There must be some public benefit provided such as enhanced site improvements;
(6) The development must demonstrate the need for the requested level of credit for existing impervious areas; and
(7) The development must be in keeping with the village's comprehensive plan.
If the above criteria are met, the following credits shall be available under the following circumstances:
(1) The stormwater detention volume required shall be adjusted by the following ratio: Vadj = Vr x (Ip/2Ie), where
(a) Vadj is the adjusted detention volume;
(b) Vr is the detention volume required to meet the release rate requirements of section 7-66 of this article;
(c) Ie is the existing impervious area of the site;
(d) Ip is the developed impervious area of the site;
(2) The maximum credit allowed shall be seventy five percent (75%) of the detention volume required to meet the release rate requirements of
section 7-66 of this article.
(3) All impervious areas of the developed site shall discharge to a detention basin irrespective of any detention volume credit applied.
(4) In no case shall the postdevelopment peak release rate exceed the predevelopment peak release rate. (Ord. 16-1659, 6-21-2016)
Sec. 7-65: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA.
The design of all stormwater management facilities within the village shall be based upon an event hydrograph method such as HEC = HMS, HEC-1, TR-
20 or similar method approved by the village engineer and shall comply with all other conditions and requirements of this article. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 7-66: ALLOWABLE RELEASE RATE.
The maximum allowable release rate of stormwater within the village shall be fifteen-hundredths (0.15) cubic feet per second per acre. In cases where a
restrictor design does not permit the exact allowable release rate, the restrictor shall be designed to provide a more restrictive rate than otherwise would
be permitted. All restrictors shall include traps and cleanouts. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 80/377
Sec. 7-67: STORMWATER TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS, MAJOR AND MINOR SYSTEMS.
All stormwater transmission systems shall provide both a major and a minor transmission system as described below: (1986 Code)
(1) Major System, Overland Flow. Emergency overland flow routes shall be provided across every site having an upstream watershed draining
across it, and shall be located in maintenance easements not less than twenty feet (20') in width on terms acceptable to the village, granting the
village the right to undertake maintenance, and lien rights for the cost of such maintenance, in the event the owner fails to maintain said routes.
Bypass routes, as approved by the village engineer, from upstream areas, shall be provided based upon a 100-year frequency rainfall event. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Bypass from upstream areas which are presently undeveloped shall be provided based upon a 100-year frequency storm with a runoff coefficient of
thirty five hundredths (0.35) or greater.
(2) Minor System, Storm Sewer. The minor system shall consist of storm sewers unless a specific waiver is granted by the village for the use of an
open drainage system.
All storm sewers shall be designed to drain dry during dry weather. The village engineer may waive this requirement and permit a surcharged sewer
in cases where said sewer is installed below frost protection depth.
Storm manholes, inlets, catch basins and lids shall be of a type approved by the village.
All storm sewer connecting structures shall be either type "C" catch basins (2 foot diameter structures with a 2 foot minimum sump) or type "A" catch
basins (4 foot diameter structures with a 2 foot minimum sump). Two foot (2') diameter inlets without sumps shall be permitted only with the prior
written approval of the village. All such connecting structures shall be precast reinforced concrete, except with the prior written approval of the
village.
Upstream times of concentration may be utilized for purposes of storm sewer design in areas where a major watershed flow is bypassed through the
site.
Storm sewer lines which receive surface flow shall be equipped with a catch basin at each alternate structure.
Except in cases of written waiver by the village, all storm lines, except restrictor discharge pipes, shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter.
Each storm sewer connecting structure shall receive runoff from a maximum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of impervious surface.
PVC storm sewer is permitted if the pipe is covered by an amount of material at least one and five-tenths (1.5) pipe diameters from finished surface
to the top of the pipe. (1986 Code)
The following materials are acceptable for use in storm sewers:
Material Pipe Joint
RCP, CLIV C-76 C-361 (O-Ring)
Reinforced concrete pipe
Class IV
PVC, SDR35 3034 D-1869 (Gasket)
Polyvinyl chloride pipe
Standard dimension ratio 35
DIP, CL50-52 A21.51 A21.11
Ductile iron pipe
Class 50-52
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
(3) Pavement Base Drainage. All pavement within the village shall be installed with an adequate drainage system. Such a system may include storm
sewers, roadside ditches, subbase drains, etc., or a combination of them as approved by the village engineer. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
(4) Open Drainage Systems. Roadways and roadside ditches shall be provided with inlets to storm sewers, each inlet to be at a maximum interval of
three hundred feet (300') from each other inlet.
Ditches which function as the minor system shall have a minimum gradient of one percent (1%); provided, however, that emergency overflow swales
may be flatter than one percent (1%) if written analysis, satisfactory to the village engineer, is submitted verifying 100-year storm capacity and
adequate protection of public and private areas. (1986 Code)
(5) Rainfall Frequency Data. The latest rainfall frequency information as published by the Illinois state water survey and as approved for use by the
village engineer shall be utilized in the design of storm water detention facilities, storm sewer systems and any other storm water management or
storm water conveyance system required by this article. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 81/377
Sec. 7-68: DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN DESIGN.
The design criteria for detention and retention basins contained in this section also applies to basins provided for the purpose of compensatory storage
under the village zoning ordinance applicable to special uses.
All detention or retention basins which benefit more than one lot of record in a subdivision shall be located in a "drainage and detention" easement in favor
of the Village shown on the final recorded plat of subdivision. Said easement shall include a zone at least five feet (5') wide above high-water level around
the perimeter of the basin, together with access rights at least ten feet (10') from the public right of way for purposes of inspection and maintenance.
Pipe storage requires permission of the village.
Use of pumped storage requires specific permission of the village.
(1) Restrictors/Release Structures. All restrictors shall be sized at or below the allowable release rate permitted for the subject site. (1986 Code)
When combined with compensatory storage, a restrictor shall be sized for the detention only. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
In calculating restrictor release rates, when combined with compensatory storage volumes, it shall be assumed that the detention occupies the
bottom of the basin.
All basins shall have a defined emergency overflow reasonably protected from erosion. Depressed curbs, riprap, gabions or other structural methods
are preferred.
(2) Detention Basin, Vegetative Cover. Detention basins with vegetative cover shall have a side slope ratio not steeper than four to one (4:1), except
in those areas protected by retaining walls. (1986 Code)
Except as otherwise authorized by the village, in order to maximize the size of the release and minimize the number of restrictors, only one detention
basin and one restrictor shall be provided per watershed within any property under a single ownership. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Where practical all detention and compensatory storage basins shall have an underdrain system. (Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Freeboard is required to be a minimum of twelve inches (12") when earth banks are utilized for a detention basin. If a concrete curb or solid concrete
retaining wall is utilized, freeboard of two inches (2") above the storm water release level (emergency overflow) is required.
(3) Detention Basin, Parking Lot. Pavement in detention zones shall have a structural number of at least 2.50 based upon the current Illinois
department of transportation coefficients. All pavement designs shall incorporate provisions for subbase drainage, have a surface slope between one
percent (1%) and three percent (3%) and be constructed pursuant to Illinois department of transportation standards. If the Illinois bearing ratio for the
existing soil is less than three (3.0), the structural section shall be increased in accordance with the standards of the Illinois department of
transportation. The subbase shall be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor. (1986 Code)
All parking lots used for detention shall be surrounded by a six inch (6") barrier vertical curb. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Provision shall be made for emergency overflow at any point in a parking lot where water attains a depth of twelve inches (12") or more.
(4) Basin Design, Retention. All retention ponds shall be provided with a minimum slope ratio, below water, of three to one (3:1). At a depth of
approximately three feet (3') below normal water level, a safety shelf shall be provided which is approximately four feet (4') in width. Below the safety
shelf, a slope ratio of two to one (2:1) may be used.
Shore stabilization shall be provided, at a minimum slope ratio of three to one (3:1), from a point at least one foot (1') below normal water level to
high-water level. Said stabilization shall take the form of riprap, retaining walls, turf-stone, or other permanent methods of stabilization.
All retention basins shall have at least twelve inches (12") freeboard, except at the location of the emergency overflow.
A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the basin shall be at least ten feet (10') deep at normal water level.
Aeration systems shall be provided, which may be either surface aerators or diffused air systems when deemed reasonably necessary by the village
in the interests of public health and safety to maintain proper oxygen levels. (1986 Code)
(5) Detention Basin Capacity. The latest Illinois state water survey rainfall data for a twenty four (24) hour 100-year recurrence interval that is
applicable to a region that includes the village, shall be used, in combination with the allowable release rate to determine minimum basin capacity.
(Ord. 00-1024, 4-17-2000)
Sec. 7-69: BYPASS.
In providing a bypass system for flow from upstream areas across any site, a bypass conduit which is separate from the on site detention system is
preferred; however, bypass may be provided across the site and released through the system restrictor with prior approval by the village engineer. Any
such restrictor shall be sized for the on site allowable release only. (1986 Code)
Sec. 7-70: SITE GRADING AND/OR DRIVEWAY IMPROVEMENTS.
A. Site Grading Permit Required. A site grading permit shall be required for all site development, and all changes in grade or drainage patterns. Each
application for a site grading permit shall require the applicant to furnish, at the applicant's own expense a topographical survey of the areas which will
be topographically altered and a plan illustrating the nature of the construction proposed. The required topographic survey shall be prepared by an
Illinois registered professional engineer or an Illinois registered land surveyor, showing existing ground surface elevations representative of the area,
existing locations and elevations for all structures, sewers, trees over six inches (6") in diameter (or tree masses in dense areas as determined by the
village engineer), drainageways and other structural improvements. The survey shall extend for at least fifty feet (50') off site in every direction or to
such further point or points as determined to be advisable by the village engineer.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 82/377
All surveys shall be based on the village bench mark system and shall show spot elevations and one foot (1') contours.
All applications for subdivision approval or building permits involving modifications to site grading shall include a grading plan containing topographic
data for existing and proposed grades required in this section and shall define final grade, drainage, top of foundation and finished floor elevation.
Tolerances shall be as follows:
(1) Foundations: + or - 0.1 foot, but above flood protection elevations.
(2) Critical grading areas: = or - 0.1 foot, but with positive drainage.
(3) Noncritical grading areas: = or - 0.5 foot, but with positive drainage.
Storm sump pump discharge lines for all sump pumps installed after 1986, or for existing sump pumps altered to serve a building, parking lot or other
improvement covered by this article shall discharge only into an existing or proposed storm sewer within two hundred feet (200') of the property where
the sump pump is located.
If no such storm sewer exists or is proposed, or none is available, the discharge line shall extend to the downstream end of the adjacent street frontage
ditch line, or to a point designated by the village engineer.
Grades shall slope away from or around all buildings.
All yards must slope at one percent (1%) minimum grade.
Emergency overflow shall be directed around all structures and avoid closing emergency access whenever possible.
B. Driveway Permit Required. A driveway permit shall be required for all driveway improvements, except patching repairs, seal coating or regrading of an
existing permeable driveway surface that results in a net gain of one inch (1") or less in height. Each application for a driveway permit shall require the
applicant to furnish, at the applicant's own expense a topographical survey of the areas which will be topographically altered and a plan illustrating the
nature of the construction proposed, and a plat of survey which includes recent improvements. The required topographic survey and plat of survey shall
be prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer or an Illinois registered land surveyor. The topographical survey must show existing ground
surface elevations representative of the area, existing locations and elevations for all structures, sewers, trees over six inches (6") in diameter (or tree
masses in dense areas as determined by the village engineer), drainageways and other structural improvements. The survey shall extend for at least
fifty feet (50') off site in every direction or to such further point or points as determined to be advisable by the village engineer.
C. Existing Buildings Or Sites. The roof leaders, downspouts and sump pump discharge lines of all existing buildings or structures shall be located and
directed so that the contents thereof will be released into existing drainage routes or into new drainage routes created for the specific purpose of
retaining the water on the subject property or carrying the water to a watercourse or other approved storm water collection system. All such discharge
shall be directed away from existing buildings and except where there is no other reasonable alternative shall not increase the discharge onto adjoining
properties. Under no circumstances shall water be discharged into adjacent properties in such a manner as to damage the adjacent property or cause
pooling on the adjacent property. All existing structures must comply with this subsection within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this section. (Ord.
00-1047, 10-16-2000)
Sec. 7-71: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
(1) In areas where upstream development has the potential to significantly impact existing downstream development in the opinion of the village
engineer, the village may require that owners of the upstream development property participate in the construction of a storm water transmission
system downstream of the site, which participation may be implemented through a recapture ordinance when appropriate.
(2) "As-constructed" reproducible plans on Mylar, or its generic equivalent, shall be submitted to the village engineer upon completion of all
development projects within the village. "As-constructed" plans shall identify utility locations and elevations, high water level, normal water level,
water main fittings, easements, trench backfill, grading, and deviations from the design plans. Said plans shall be signed and sealed by the design
engineer and shall be accepted by the village engineer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or acceptance or approval of the project by
the village.
(3) On the face of all construction plans, there shall be inscribed a notice to the contractor to request inspections at specified stages. The village
engineer shall advise the design engineer concerning the timing of and procedures for such inspections. (1986 Code)
Sec. 7-72: MAINTENANCE.
The owner of any detention, retention or compensatory storage basin shall maintain that basin in its original design cross section, surface conditions, and
hydraulic system as noted on the original accepted plans.
If, in the reasonable opinion of the village, the owner has failed to maintain the basin properly, including all of such a basin with vegetative cover areas cut
to a maximum height of six inches (6"), in accordance with generally accepted maintenance, erosion control and structural standards, the village may
perform any required maintenance upon said basin and charge the cost thereof to the current owners of the basin, which costs shall be a lien on the entire
property served by said basin, enforceable in the manner provided by law for enforcement and foreclosure of liens. (1986 Code)
Sec. 7-73: OTHER PERMITS.
As a condition of the acceptance of any storm water improvements by the Village, the owner shall obtain all required companion permits from other
agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the metropolitan sanitary district of Greater Chicago, the Illinois environmental protection agency,
the Illinois division of water resources and the U.S. army corps of engineers. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 83/377
Sec. 7-74: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
A condition constituting a violation of sections 7-61 through 7-70 shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to chapter 14 of this
code. (Ord. 497, 4-28-1987)
ARTICLE V. REGULATION OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Sec. 7-75: PURPOSE.
This article is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
This article is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
(1) To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding.
(2) To assure that new development does not increase flood or drainage hazards to others or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion by new
development.
(3) To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage.
(4) To facilitate the appropriate development of vacant real estate and to protect the continued use and economic value of existing improved property.
(5) To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19g, "an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of
Illinois", approved June 10, 1911, as amended.
(6) To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program.
(7) To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.
(8) To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and relief
operations.
(9) To assist in the protection, conservation and promotion of the orderly development of land and water resources.
(10) To assist in the preservation of the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and the protection of water quality
and aquatic habitats.
(11) To assist in: a) the preservation of the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts; b)
improvement of water quality; c) reduction of soil erosion; d) protection of aquatic and riparian habitat; e) provision of recreational opportunities and
aesthetic benefit and the enhancement of community and economic development. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-76: DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application for development.
APPROPRIATE USE. Uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in section 7-81 of this article.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Determination of the base flood elevation at any location shall be done pursuant to section 7-79 of this article.
BUILDING. A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes, but is not limited to, a gas or liquid storage
tank, a manufactured home and a prefabricated building.
CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
constantly or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant installation or removal of bottom or woody
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe
form of channel modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the special flood hazard area used to balance
the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within a special flood hazard area.
DWR. Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources.
DAM. Any obstruction, wall embankment or barrier, together with abutments and appurtenant structures, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included. The term "dam" may include a weir, restrictive culvert or other control
structure which causes the upstream water surface elevation to be different from the downstream elevation.
DEVELOPMENT. Manmade changes to real estate which shall include:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 84/377
(1) Construction, reconstruction or replacement of a building or any addition to a building.
(2) Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects.
(3) Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
(4) Clearing of land as an adjunct of or prefatory to construction.
(5) Construction or erection of leaves, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dreading, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
(6) Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal or
planting.
Development does not include:
(1) Gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
(2) Maintenance of existing buildings and facilities.
(3) Resurfacing of roads or driveways when there is not cumulative increase in elevation.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has
been elevated.
EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from this article per the Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local units of
government such as the metropolitan water reclamation district.
FEMA. Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include
any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland waterways or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. This is a statistical likelihood expressed in a period of years that a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the special flood hazard area outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given
location in the special flood hazard area.
FLOODPLAIN. Land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. A floodplain may also include ponding areas that are not adjacent to a watercourse. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA). Stated another way, the floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. The floodplain of the village is generally identified as a special flood hazard area on map #17031C and panels 0231J, 0232J,
0233J, and 0234J of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency dated August 19,
2008. The SFHAs of those parts of Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village are generally identified as such on the flood
insurance rate map prepared for Cook County by FEMA as dated August 19, 2008, identified on the same map and panels set forth above with the
addition of panel #0253J.
FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a building has been
designed and constructed to be structurally floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the national register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the Illinois historic preservation agency;
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
MITIGATION. Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, obstruction removal, deflection minimization, soil erosion and
sedimentation control and channel restoration.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 85/377
NGVD. National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to substantial changes
made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been
cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross
section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and
vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man though regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS. All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYORS. A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering act2.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse designated by
DWR as regulatory floodway. Generally, but not necessarily, the floodway is that portion of the floodplain needed to store and convey the existing and
anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no
more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for the north branch of the Chicago River, Middle Fork and
the Skokie River on map number 17031C and panels 0231F, 0232F, 0233F, and 0234F dated November 6, 2000, of the countywide flood insurance rate
map for Cook County. The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
that may be annexed into the village are designated for the north branch of the Chicago River, Middle Fork and Skokie River on map number 17031C and
panel 0253F dated November 6, 2000, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County. In the case of conflicting floodway locations, the most
restrictive floodway limit shall be used. To locate the regulatory flooding boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled off the
regulatory floodway map and located on the site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the
exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the division should be contacted for the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE. Construction activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility is a "wet-bottom" storage facility which retains a normal pool of inactive storage not ordinarily
released by gravity. A detention facility is a normally "dry-bottom" storm water storage facility which also provides for the storage of storm water and runoff
and the controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to periodic flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other
identified channel or pond and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE, V,
M or E.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA REVISION.
(1) Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR). A preconstruction letter which indicates that the federal emergency management agency will revise
base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map once as built plans are submitted and approved.
(2) Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
(3) Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a specific existing structure is not in a 100-year flood zone, thus amending
the effective flood hazard boundary map or FIRM.
STRUCTURE. The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground. A structure will result from the construction,
reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either: 1) before the improvement or repair is started, or 2) if the structure has been damaged from any
source, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. This term includes the restoration of a structure to its predamaged condition when the cost
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value at the time immediately before the damage occurred, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural parts of a building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either: 1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with any existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 2) any alteration of an "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an "historic structure".
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 86/377
TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (Ord.
96-869, 1-22-1996; amd. Ord. 00-1043, 9-18-2000; Ord. 00-1045, 10-16-2000; Ord. 08-1386, 7-15-2008)
Sec. 7-77: USE OF THIS ARTICLE.
The village manager shall have the authority set forth in section 7-78 of this article. He may delegate that authority to the building and zoning
commissioner.
The following steps shall be taken by the building and zoning commissioner when an application for development is made:
(1) Determine whether the development site or any portion of it is within a floodplain using the criteria set forth in section 7-79 of this article.
(2) If it is within a floodplain, the requirements of section 7-82 of this article shall apply.
(3) If it is within a floodplain, determine whether the subdivision requirements of section 7-83 of this article shall apply.
(4) If it is within a floodplain, determine whether it is within the flood fringe or a regulatory floodway.
(a) If within the flood fringe, all requirements of section 7-80 of this article shall apply.
(b) If within the regulatory floodway, all requirements of section 7-81 of this article shall apply.
(5) If a variance is being requested, section 7-84 of this article shall apply and all required notifications shall be completed.
(6) In order to assure that property owners obtain the required permits, the village manager or his designee may take any and all actions that are set
forth in section 7-86 of this article. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-78: AUTHORITY OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S).
The village manager, or his designee, and the building and zoning commissioner shall have the following powers and responsibilities in the administration
and enforcement of this article:
(1) Determining The Floodplain Designation. At such time as permits are requested, check all development sites to determine whether they are in
the floodplain. If they are in the floodplain, determine if they are in the floodway or flood fringe. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
(2) Professional Engineering Review. If the development site is within a special flood hazard area to require that the developer provide certification
from a registered professional engineer (PE) that the development meets the requirements of this article. If the development site is located in a
floodway, then the certification of the developer's professional engineer shall be reviewed by a second registered professional engineer (PE),
designated by the village, to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 7-81 of this article. The costs and expenses associated
with the second engineer's review shall be borne by the petitioner as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996; amd. Ord. 05-
1234, 3-15-2005)
(3) Flow Restrictors Including Any Dams. Require that the developer obtain from DWR either a dam safety permit or a letter indicating no dam
safety permit is required if the proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 7-76 of this article.
(4) Other Permit Requirements. Assure that all required federal, state or local permits are received prior to the issuance of a permit for development
within a floodplain.
(5) Plan Review And Permit Issuance. Require that all development activities within the floodplain of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this article and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with its provisions and other regulations of this community.
(6) Inspection Review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
that a project complies with the provisions of this article.
(7) Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates. Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the lowest flood elevation (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for
all buildings subject to section 7-82 of this article for public inspection and copying.
(8) Records For Public Inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, special flood hazard area and regulatory
floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter
of map amendment and "as built" elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
article.
(9) State Permits. Require that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois division of water resources, for all development projects
subject to section 7-81 of this article, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. However, the following review approvals
shall not be delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from DWR under any circumstances:
(a) Development by organizations which are exempt by law from this article;
(b) Department of transportation projects, "dams" or impoundment structures as defined in section 7-76 of this article and all other federal, state or
county, village, or unit of local government projects;
(c) An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed
flood profile, pursuant to section 7-81 of this article;
(d) An engineer's analysis of any flood profile or proposed flood profile for new bridge or culvert crossings, pursuant to section 7-81 of this article;
(e) Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage, pursuant to section 7-81 of this article;
(f) Permit issuance for structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 87/377
(g) Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations;
(h) Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
(10) Cooperation With Other Agencies. Cooperate with state and federal flood management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this article. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. Submit
data to DWR and FEMA for any proposed revisions to the regulatory floodway map. Notify the federal emergency management agency of any
proposed amendments to this article.
(11) Promulgate Regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, subject however
to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any changes to this article. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-79: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
This article's protection standard is based on the FEMA flood insurance study for the village. When a party disagrees with this data, that party may finance
a detailed engineering study and submit it to FEMA, DWR and the village manager or his delegate for review. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
(1) The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the north branch of the Chicago River (Middle Fork and Skokie River) shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the village prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such
amendments to such studies as may be prepared from time to time. In the case of conflicting base flood elevations between the two (2) profiles, the
higher base flood elevation shall be used.
(2) The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time. (Ord. 00-1043, 9-18-2000; amd. Ord. 08-1386, 7-15-2008)
(3) The base flood elevation for any special flood hazard areas delineated as an "A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the village shall be
according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996; amd. Ord.
08-1386, 7-15-2008)
Sec. 7-80: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
Development in the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood by proper elevation of the structures and provision of
compensatory storage along with compliance with other provisions of this article. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet all of the
requirements of this section and section 7-82 of this article.
(1) Development Permit Required. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by the Illinois Compiled Statutes shall
commence any development in the special flood hazard area without first obtaining a development permit from the village of Northfield.
(2) Application. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building and zoning commissioner. The application shall
be accompanied by scaled drawings of the site showing property line dimensions and a legal description of the property sealed by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in MSL 1929 adjusted datum or NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans. The development will be subject to the requirements of section 7-82 of
this article. Upon receipt of the permit application the community development director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article. The community
development director shall maintain the documentation of the existing ground elevations at the development site and certification that the ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
(3) Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall
include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to
ensure postconstruction maintenance. This plan shall be in conformity with the "NIPC Planning Aid No. 11; Suggested Soil Erosion And
Sedimentation Control Ordinance: A Guide For Local Officials, January 1980".
(4) Other Permits. The community development director shall require and the applicant shall provide copies of all other local, state and federal
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. No village of Northfield permit shall be issued until all
other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
(5) Preventing Increased Damages. No development in the flood fringe shall be permitted to create a threat to public health and safety. If all other
requirements of this article are met and written certification is provided by a registered engineer that the development does not create a threat to
public health and safety, then the burden of proving such a threat shall shift to the village.
(6) LOMR. If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood elevation, the applicant shall obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA
for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. Such development must still comply with all other requirements of this article. (Ord. 96-869,
1-22-1996)
(7) Compensatory Storage. Whenever any portion of the flood fringe is permitted to be developed, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be one hundred twelve percent (112%) of the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. When the property is in the flood fringe of a stream or watercourse, the excavation shall be made
opposite or adjacent to the areas to be filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below
the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the 10-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. No development permit shall be issued unless the
property owner grants to the village an easement of access for maintenance of the compensatory storage area in a form acceptable to the village
attorney. (Ord. 98-938, 4-27-1998)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 88/377
Sec. 7-81: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. No person, firm,
corporation, or governmental body not exempt by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a permit from DWR. All
development shall also meet the requirements of section 7-83 of this article.
No development of any kind or nature shall be permitted within the regulatory floodway except as follows: (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the regulatory floodway are prohibited
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. All
new construction and substantial improvements in zones V1-30 and VE, and also zone V if base flood elevation data is available, on the community's
FIRM, must be elevated on pilings and columns so that: a) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the lowest floor (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level; and b) the pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. The
elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to
the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall
be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or village building standards. (Ord. 05-
1234, 3-15-2005)
(2) Rebuilding of existing structures damaged by fire, flood, wind, casualty or acts of God. Such a structure may be repaired only if it was originally built
pursuant to a valid building permit (in cases where a building permit was required) and not originally constructed in violation of any flood control
ordinance. The structure may be repaired only if the perimeter area of the structure is not increased, the total fill brought into the floodway is not
increased, the total amount of impermeable surface is not increased and the repairs are in total conformity to current village regulations and in
compliance in all respects with section 7-80 of this article for development within a flood fringe. If the damage is greater than fifty percent (50%) of
the building's market value before it was damaged, it must also conform to all requirements of subsection 7-82(4)(b)3 of this article. Whether the
damage is greater than fifty percent (50%) of market value shall be determined as follows:
Certified estimate of cost, including labor and materials of restoring the building to its precasualty condition divided by appraised value of building
prior to damage without cost of land as approved by the village equals percent of damage.
If permitted by FEMA regulations in existence at the times that repairs are sought, any reconstruction that requires demolition of all perimeter walls
shall also require that the structure be rebuilt above the base flood elevation while complying with all compensatory storage and detention
requirements. Any reconstruction done pursuant to this subsection must be commenced within one year of the damage.
(3) Construction of the following:
(a) Public flood control projects;
(b) Storm drainage outfalls;
(c) Underground and overhead utilities;
(d) Playing fields and trail systems;
(e) Slope regrading;
(f) Floodproofing of existing structures;
(g) Other structures permitted in 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g(d)(3) provided that such construction may be accomplished only in absolute
conformity to all federal, state and local regulations with respect to such construction in addition to being in compliance with any regulations
approved by IDOT/DWR in existence at the time application is made. No permit shall be granted unless a registered professional engineer verifies
that there has been compliance with all rules regulating, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in the department of natural
resources model floodplain ordinance as it may hereafter be amended.
(4) Whenever any portion of a floodway is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
(5) If any development within the floodway involves the installation of a flood control structure, the developer shall apply to IDOT/DWR for a conditional
approval of a regulatory floodway map change.
(6) To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, DWR shall be contacted for the interpretation and its interpretation shall be final. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996; amd. Ord. 05-1234, 3-
15-2005)
Sec. 7-82: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL SPECIAL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
In addition to the requirements found in sections 7-80 and 7-81 of this article for development in flood fringes and regulatory floodways, the following
requirements shall be met. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
(1) Public Health Standards.
(a) The locating or storing of chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or
toxic material below the FPE is prohibited, provided, however, that underground storage tanks (USTs) containing such substances may be installed
provided they meet the requirements of the appropriate state agency. (Ord. 17-1670, 1-17-2017)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 89/377
(b) New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are lockable and watertight.
(2) Carrying Capacity And Notification. For all projects involving channel modification, channel fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. The developer shall provide written proof to the Building and Zoning Commissioner that
written notification has been given to Northbrook, Glenview, Wilmette, Winnetka and Cook County of the alteration or relocation. Such notification shall
be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Village of Northfield.
(3) Protecting Buildings. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain or a special flood hazard area, shall be protected from flood damage below the
flood protection elevation in the following situations:
(a) Construction or placement of a new building. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
(b) A substantial improvement or structural alteration to an existing building that increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), or the
building market value by more than fifty percent (50%). The value of improvements and alterations shall be calculated cumulatively over the most
recent ten (10) year period. (Ord 17-1682, 7-18-2017)
(4) Methods For Protecting Buildings. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
(a) Construction On Permanent Land Fill. A residential or nonresidential building when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
1. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
2. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') area before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
(b) Floodproofing Of Residential Buildings. A residential building may be floodproofed only in accordance with the following:
1. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. There shall be a minimum of two (2) permanent openings which shall be no
more than one foot (1') above grade. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area below the base flood elevation.
2. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
3. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation.
4. The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement.
(5) Floodproofing On Nonresidential Buildings. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed as in subsection (4)(b) of this section, or structurally dry
floodproofed provided that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood
protection elevation and the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from
debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
(6) Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged and may be
restored only in accordance with this section and sections 7-81 and 7-83 of this article.
(7) Appropriate Use Standards. Any construction in the regulatory floodway shall meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards as specified by
FEMA or DWR regulations as referred to in section 7-81 of this article. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-83: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
The corporate authorities shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
(1) New subdivisions, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the special flood hazard area shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with this section and sections 7-80, 7-81, and 7-82 of this article and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered professional
engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act1, this article and article IV of this
chapter.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 90/377
(2) Proposals for new subdivisions, planned unit developments (PUDs), and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year flood elevation
data and floodway delineation. Where this information is not available from existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 7-79(3) of this article and the floodway
delineation per the definition in section 7-76 of this article and submitting it to the state water survey and DWR for review and approvals.
(3) Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the special flood hazard areas shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
(4) The corporate authorities shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
development or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-84: VARIANCES.
Any request for a variance to the regulations contained in this article shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth herein:
(1) Variances Prohibited. No variances from this article shall be granted to any development located in a "regulatory floodway", as defined in section 7-76
of this article. Further, no variance may be granted which would reduce compensatory storage requirements for any portion of the floodplain to less
than one hundred percent (100%) as defined in subsection 7-80(7) of this article.
(2) Procedure. Requests for variations from the strict application of this article that are not otherwise prohibited herein shall be made to the plan and
zoning commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 4-29 of this code.
(3) Standards For Variance. In making a recommendation for the granting of any variance, the plan and zoning commission shall consider the following:
(a) Whether the requested variance will not be detrimental to public health and safety;
(b) Whether strict application of the provisions of this article would be unduly burdensome on the petitioner;
(c) Whether the requested variance would have a detrimental effect on surrounding properties; and
(d) Whether the requested variance is only a minor deviation of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 17-1670, 1-17-2017)
Sec. 7-85: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does
not imply that development, either inside or outside of the special flood hazard area, will be free from flooding or damage. This article does not create
liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee for any flood damage that results from reliance of this article or any administrative decision
made pursuant to it. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-86: PENALTY.
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. Upon due
investigation, the building and zoning commissioner may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this article exist. The building and zoning
commissioner shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
(1) If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
(a) The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this article.
(b) Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
(c) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(d) The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
(2) The building and zoning commissioner shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood hazards and, therefore,
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
(3) Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-87: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this article and other ordinances,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This article is intended to
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 91/377
repeal the original ordinance and subsequent revisions which were adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended
to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-88: OTHER PROVISIONS.
(1) It is recognized that property owners may inquire of village officials from time to time with respect to flood elevations, buildability or floodplain
regulations. The village official may respond to such inquiries from property owners only, but shall require a written acknowledgment from the
property owner that the response is informal in nature, nonbinding on the village and subjects the village to no liability for information which may later
prove incorrect. Once a bona fide application for a building permit has been filed, village officials shall perform all appropriate duties pursuant to this
article.
(2) If any questions or ambiguities arise under this article, such questions or ambiguities as to interpretation will be resolved by an opinion letter issued
by the village manager as approved by the corporate authorities of the village. Such opinion letter shall be final and shall be subject to review only
under article III of the Illinois code of civil procedure.
(3) Any engineering or other professional evaluations obtained by an applicant shall be subject to the review and approval of the village.
(4) All data from any source which is adopted by or referred to in this article is hereby recognized to be tentative and subject to error. For this reason,
when any application is made for any development within the floodplain, the village shall be permitted to receive from any party, including the village
itself, any data which tends to indicate that the data sources set forth in this article are in error. Upon submission by the village engineer or any other
engineering consultant, the corporate authorities may, applying appropriate engineering standards and complying with any FEMA or department of
natural resources approval process, substitute the alternative data for data set forth in the sources in this article. The filing of an application for a
building permit pursuant to this article shall not automatically entitle the applicant to the use of the data set forth in this article.
(5) No person who is the owner of property which has already been issued a certificate of occupancy for occupation of a structure in a special flood
hazard area, shall be permitted, on account of this article to remove or reduce the capacity of an already installed flood control structure or measure.
(6) Unless specific action is taken to the contrary by the corporate authorities, any documents incorporated by reference into this article shall include
subsequent amendment to those documents by the respective government agencies. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-89: SEPARABILITY.
The provisions and sections of this article shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 7-90: EFFECTIVE DATE.
This article shall be in full force and effect, from and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 96-869, 1-22-1996)
Footnote 1: 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
Footnote 3: 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.
ARTICLE VI. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
Sec. 7-91: DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGENCY. The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices, methods or installations approved by the Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control of the University
Of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the
water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such
as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable and constitute a water source
or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices
used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois state plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONSUMER AND CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.
CONSUMER'S OR CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's or consumer's premises. A building plumbing system is
considered a customer's or consumer's water system.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 92/377
CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION. Any connection through which a supply of potable water could be contaminated or polluted. "Direct cross connection" means a
cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. "Indirect cross connection" means a cross
connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness
of each check valve.
FIXED AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being
of consumers. The term "severe", as used to qualify the term "health hazard", means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to carefully and critically examine all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a
plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal use or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 601
et seq.
PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Such term includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the water main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any building or buildings where a person
or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from the discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply
systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of
any building where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 601 et seq., for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with a threaded hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as
would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system, including, but not limited to:
(1) Polluted or contaminated waters;
(2) Process waters;
(3) Used waters originating from the public water supply system, which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
(4) Cooling waters;
(5) Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
(6) Chemicals in solution or suspension;
(7) Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. All mains, pipes and structures owned and/or maintained by the village of Northfield through which water is obtained
and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances,
collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing potable water.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE (RPZ). A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting
check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under
ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two (2) check valves shall be less than the supply
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure
between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION. The physical connection to the water main, including all fittings and appurtenances, through which water is supplied to the
consumer.
SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system
and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within the
customer's piping system. The survey shall be completed on a form supplied by the village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 93/377
SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which aesthetically objectionable or degrading materials not dangerous to health may enter the public water
supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-92: GENERAL POLICY.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the rules and regulations set forth in this article are to:
(1) Protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants
which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system.
(2) Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable quality.
(3) Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and
consumer's potable water systems.
B. Application. The rules and regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the village.
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. The water
customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all
applicable regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing
code and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-93: WATER SYSTEM.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the director of public works up to the point where the consumer's or customer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply
distribution system.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-94: PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
A. No person shall establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply, other than the regular public water supply of the village, may enter the supply or distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved, in writing, by the director of public works
and/or plumbing inspectors and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
B. No connection shall be permitted between the public water supply system and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical
quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency and/or the village.
C. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-95: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
A. It shall be the duty of the director of public works, or his or her designee, to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other
properties and premises served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such
surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated as often as the director of public works, or his or her
designee, shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
B. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the certified cross connection control device inspector or his or her duly authorized
agent (CCCDI) for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises and testing, repair and maintenance
of cross connection control devices within the consumer's premises.
C. On request by the director of public works or his or her authorized representatives, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system
for water use within the consumer's premises and cross connection inspection results. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times
to the director of public works and/or his or her duly authorized agent(s) for the verification of information submitted by the consumer regarding the
piping system for water use and cross connection inspection results.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on the consumer's premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water system through which contamination or pollution could backflow into the
consumer's or the public potable water system. All cross connection controls or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
E. It is the responsibility and financial obligation of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water supply system by ensuring that:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 94/377
(1) All cross connections are removed, or approved cross connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
(2) Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
(3) Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a CCCDI. The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
(4) Testing and recording is accomplished as follows:
(a) Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer or director of
public works.
(b) Records submitted to the director of public works shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4.
(c) Each device shall have a tag attached, listing the date of the most recent test, name of the CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
(5) A maintenance log is maintained, which shall include the following:
(a) Date of each test;
(b) Name and approval number of the person performing the inspection or test;
(c) Test results/inspection;
(d) Repairs or servicing required;
(e) Repairs and dates completed; and
(f) Services performed and dates completed. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-96: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water service line to a consumer's water system when, in the judgment of the
director of public works or his or her authorized representative, based upon Illinois environmental protection agency regulations, an actual or potential
hazard to the public water supply system may exist. In addition, an approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water
supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations, 35 Illinois administrative code 680.
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35 Illinois administrative code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research
Foundation For Cross Connection Control of the University Of Southern California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended
by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water service line to a consumer's water system where the following conditions
exist:
(1) A premises having an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary water system is accepted as an additional source by the director of public works
and the source is approved by the agency.
(2) A premises where any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under
the sanitary control of the director of public works.
(3) A premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the director of public works and the CCCDI, are not correctable or intricate
plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
(4) A premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross
connection survey.
(5) A premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
D. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the director of public works determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 95/377
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics or nursing homes.
(2) Laboratories.
(3) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations.
(4) Food or beverage processing plants.
(5) Chemical plants.
(6) Metal plating industries.
(7) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(8) Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
(9) Car washes.
(10) All commercial, retail and industrial accounts, all water services larger than two inches (2"), all irrigation lines and all fire sprinkler lines.
(11) Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
E. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) pounds per square
inch (psi) or less.
F. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the director of public works
at least once a year that the device is operable. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-97: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
A. The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:
(1) An approved fixed air gap shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated.
(2) An approved fixed air gap or an approved reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be contaminated.
(3) An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
B. The type of protection required under subsection 7-96C(4) of this article shall be an approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device.
C. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply system, when:
(1) The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, and/or other chemicals;
(2) Water may be pumped into the system from another source;
(3) Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
(4) There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to the sprinkler system.
D. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a
double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. (Ord. 12-
1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-98: APPROVAL REQUIRED.
All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this article shall be approved by Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control of the
University Of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society Of Sanitary Engineering or American National Standards
Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 96/377
Sec. 7-99: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
A. It shall be the duty and financial obligation of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this article are installed
to have inspections, tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need
or are specified in the manufacturer's instructions:
(1) Fixed air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service
line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed air gaps
shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required
service performed within fifteen (15) days.
(3) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of such approval shall be in
writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log is maintained, which shall include the following:
(1) Date of each test or visual inspection;
(2) Name and approval number of the person performing the inspection or test;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs or servicing required;
(5) Repairs and dates completed; and
(6) Services performed and dates completed.
E. Any required repairs, maintenance or replacements shall be made at the expense of the consumer.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
director of public works.
G. Copies of all test results shall be forwarded to the director of public works at the time of each inspection as described in section 7-95 of this article.
(Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-100: CORRECTIVE ACTIONS.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the village from taking such other action as it deems necessary to prevent or remedy a violation of this article. (Ord. 12-
1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-101: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
A. The director of public works may deny or discontinue, after ten (10) business days' prior written notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any
premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
director of public works, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection
exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by this article is not installed and maintained in working order.
B. In the case of an identified cross connection, the director of public works or his or her duly authorized representative shall take immediate action to
terminate the potable supply of water to the premises, without notice; provided, however, that written notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of
the premises as soon as practicable under the circumstances as exist at the time such water service to the premises is terminated.
C. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
article and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
D. Neither the village, the director of public works or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers for any injury, damages or lost revenue which
may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this article, whether or not said termination of the water
supply was with or without notice.
E. The customer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost
of clean up of the potable water supply system.
F. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 97/377
violations.
G. In addition to any other remedies available to the village, any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
section 1-13 of this code. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Sec. 7-102: SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this end the provisions of this article enacted after
the effective date of this article are severable, unless otherwise provided by this article. (Ord. 12-1528, 7-17-2012)
Title Chapter 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I. CONTROL OF DISEASES
Sec. 8-1: PROCEDURE FOR CONTROL.
The "Rules And Regulations For The Control Of Communicable Diseases" issued by the state department of public health, as they may be revised from
time to time, shall be the minimum requirements to be observed and enforced in this village. The health officer is hereby empowered to adopt and enforce
such reasonable regulations as may be necessary which may supplement and amplify these rules, but must not be in conflict with or minimize the
regulations of the state department of public health. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-2: EDUCATION AND OTHER PROGRAMS.
Whenever it may be demonstrated that an increase in the sickness or mortality rate in the village is caused by any single illness or set of circumstances,
the health officer may adopt such measures as will alert the citizens to the facts and to the actions which may reasonably be expected to exert an effect in
postponing death, limiting the extent of illness and facilitating rehabilitation of persons sustaining such illness or experiencing such circumstances.
Within the limits of medical knowledge about the cause or such numerically important conditions, the health officer may develop programs which may be
expected to reduce the number of residents who may ultimately sustain such illness or be exposed to such risk. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-3: DISEASES TRANSMISSIBLE TO MAN FROM ANIMALS.
It shall be the duty of any owner or custodian of any animals to report to the health officer the occurrence among such animals of any disease which is
transmissible to human beings. The owner or custodian shall care for or dispose of such animal as provided by law. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-4: REPORTING.
It shall be the duty of every physician, dentist, other practitioner, hospital attendant, nurse, laboratory, parent, householder, school authority, or any other
person having knowledge of a known or suspected case or carrier of communicable disease or death, to report promptly such case, suspected case,
carrier or death in writing or by telephone to the village health officer. If the identity of the health officer is not known to the person reporting, the report is to
be made to the village president or to the village manager. Report of venereal diseases, however, shall be reported directly to the health officer of the
county department of public health.
Upon receipt of reports of communicable diseases, the health officer shall promptly forward a written copy of the same to the county department of public
health and shall include such information as may be required by the county department and by the state department of public health. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. ENVIRONMENTAL SANITATION
Division I - Air Pollution
Sec. 8-5. DEFINITIONS.
Terms use in this section and the two (2) following sections shall have the following meanings:
NONSTATIONARY SOURCE. Any and all nonstationary sources of smoke emissions, whether privately or publicly owned or operated. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, this term includes automobiles, trucks, tractors, buses, and other motor vehicles, railroad locomotives, and all portable fuel
burning equipment.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 98/377
RINGLEMANN CHART. The chart published and described in the "U.S. Bureau Of Mines Information Circular 8333" and on which are illustrated the
graduated shades of gray and black for use in estimating the density of smoke.
SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion consisting predominantly of carbon and other combustible materials and present
in sufficient quantity to be observed independently of the presence of other solids.
STATIONARY SOURCE. Any and all stationary sources of smoke emissions, whether privately or publicly owned or operated. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, this term includes all types of business, commercial and industrial plants, works, shops and stores, and heating power plants
and stations, buildings and structures of all types, including single and multiple-family residences, apartment houses, hospitals, churches, and other
industrial or institutional buildings, incinerators of all types both indoor and outdoor, and all stacks and other chimney outlets from any of the foregoing.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 8-6. DETERMINATION OF STATUS.
The village manager is hereby authorized to make any reports and such requests for services to the state environmental protection agency as are deemed
necessary for the welfare of the community. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-7. POLLUTANTS OF NATURAL ORIGIN.
The health officer may, in his discretion, make rules and regulations to ensure the elimination or control of such air pollutants of natural origin. Such rules
and regulations shall become effective when approved by the corporate authorities. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-8. PROHIBITED WHERE TOXIC OR ANNOYING, ETC., TO PERSONS.
No person shall produce and release into the air any fumes, gases, aerosols, dusts, mists and odors which are apparent to persons upon properties other
than that one from which such fumes, gases, aerosols, dusts, mists and odors originate. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance dangerous to the public
health when any of these emanations are found to be annoying, distasteful or causing discomfort. Additionally, when such air pollutants can be shown to
contain toxic substances for which safe concentration standards have been determined by an authoritative source, the production of such emanations in
excess of standards set for human safety is prohibited. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-9. EMISSION OF SMOKE.
(1) Stationary Source. It shall be unlawful within the village of Northfield for any person to permit or cause the emission of any smoke, which
smoke exceeds the following permissible limitations, from any stationary source except from fireplaces in residential units and outdoor cooking
facilities accessory to residential units. The emission limitations are as follows:
(a) Smoke of a density, shade or opacity equal to but not greater than no. 1 on the Ringelmann chart may be emitted for a maximum period of
four (4) minutes out of every two (2) hours.
(b) Smoke of density, shade or opacity equal to but not greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart may be emitted for a maximum period of four
(4) minutes out of every two (2) hours.
(2) Nonstationary Source. It shall be unlawful within the village of Northfield for any person to permit or cause the emission of any smoke from a
nonstationary source of a density, shade or opacity greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart, with the exception of diesel-powered vehicles
during the first fifteen (15) seconds after accelerating from a stationary position, when they shall be permitted not greater than no. 3 on the
Ringelmann chart. Outdoor cooking facilities to a residential use are hereby excepted. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-10. EMISSION OF SMOKE, ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of the village officials to enforce the provisions of the preceding section and to investigate all complaints made with reference to any
violations thereof. Upon receipt of a complaint of violation, the village officials shall take observations of the stationary source of all smoke emissions
complained of, testing and grading the density of the smoke by the Ringelmann smoke chart; and shall maintain a record of all such observations, which
records shall be open to public inspections at all reasonable hours. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-11. EMERGENCY MEASURES.
At any time when the meteorological conditions cause an excessive concentration of polluted air in the village, the health officer is authorized to order the
cessation of operation of any or all combustion devices in the village, except those essential to life, health and safety and excepting further, those other
devices which can be shown to eliminate the hydrocarbons content of the exhaust of the device before entering the air. (1986 Code)
Division II - Water Supply
Sec. 8-12. DEFINITION, WATER POLLUTION.
Water pollution is such alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of any waters of the Village, or such discharge of
any contaminant into any waters of the Village, as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to public
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 99/377
health, safety or welfare, or the domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish,
or other aquatic life. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-13. POLLUTERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute any watercourse or water supply in the Village.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cross-connection between the public water system of the Village and any other water system or well. (Ord.
92-738, 9-21-1992)
Sec. 8-14. DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; PENALTY.
All violations of this and the preceding division are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to chapter 14 of this Code, and
the violator fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. In addition, all such persons found to be violating the provisions of this article shall
be subject to prosecution in the name of the Village. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
Division III - Disposal Of Human Excrement
Sec. 8-15. DISPOSAL IN PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED, PERMIT FOR EXCEPTIONS, RESCISSION OF PERMIT.
(Rep. by Ord. 89-613, 11-28-1989)
Division IV - Insects Dangerous To Public Health
Sec. 8-16. PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the Village to become a breeding site for insects or to become infested with insects in such a way as to
endanger health or permit the spread of such insects to other premises. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-17. FLIES.
It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the Village to become a breeding site for flies or to become infested with flies in such a way as to endanger
health or permit the spread of flies to other premises. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-18. MOSQUITO BREEDING WATER, DEFINED.
"Mosquito breeding water" is defined as a collection of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, which shall include collections of water
contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels,
troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-19. MOSQUITO BREEDING WATER, PROHIBITED, TREATMENT BY OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES.
No person shall have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the Village, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely
to breed unless such collection of water is treated so as to effectively prevent such breeding. Any person owning or occupying any premises on which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, who fails or refuses to take measures necessary to prevent the breeding of such mosquitoes within ten (10) days
after the health authority has given notice to him by mail to take measures necessary to prevent such breeding, shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 8-20. MOSQUITO BREEDING WATER, PROOF OF MOSQUITO BREEDING.
The presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding in such water. (1986 Code)
Division V - Rodents
Sec. 8-21. INFESTED PREMISES AND BREEDING SITES.
It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the Village to become a breeding site for rodents or to become infested with rodents in such a way as to
endanger health or permit the spread of such rodents to other premises. (1986 Code)
Division VI - Penalty
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 100/377
Sec. 8-22. PENALTY.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-
1997)
ARTICLE III. FOOD REGULATIONS
Division I - Food Processing And Handling Generally
Sec. 8-23. AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
The provisions of the relevant sections of 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended and as hereafter amended, shall serve as the minimum
requirements for the manufacture, processing, preparation, handling, labeling, storage and dispensing of all items of food and drink sold for human
consumption in this Village. The Corporate Authorities of the Village are hereby empowered to adopt such reasonable regulations as may be necessary to
supplement the aforesaid Statutes of the State of Illinois and the Health Department and Health Officer of the Village are hereby empowered to enforce
such regulations.
Any reference to "as required by law" in any Food Sanitation Code adopted by the Village of Northfield shall mean as required by State and local statutes,
ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to, the State Plumbing Code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-24. ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions set forth in model codes adopted in this article, the following regulations shall apply to this division:
ADULTERATED. The condition of a food: 1) if it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity which may render it injurious to
health; 2) if it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established; 3) if it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise
unfit for human consumption; 4) if it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary conditions, whereby it may have become
contaminated with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; 5) if it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or an animal
which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or 6) if its container is composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may
render the contents injurious to health.
APPROVED. Acceptable to the health authority based on his determination as to conformance with appropriate standards and good public health practice.
CLOSED. Fitted together snugly leaving no openings large enough to permit the entrance of vermin.
FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the storage or carrying of any food or drink which is intended for human consumption in the Village, and
whose purpose is the delivery of such food or beverage to any residence or to any other place in the Village for such use or consumption, or for resale for
the same purposes.
FOOD STORE. A grocery store, butcher store, delicatessen store, confectionery store, bakery store, butter and egg store, fruit and vegetable store, fish
store, ice cream store, or any combination of the foregoing, or any place where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored, offered for sale or sold at
wholesale or retail.
HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer of the Village or his designated representative.
MISBRANDED. The presence of any written, printed or graphic matter upon or accompanying food or containers of food which is false or misleading or
which violates any applicable State or local labeling requirements.
PERISHABLE FOOD. Any food of such type or in such condition as may spoil.
RESTAURANT. An eating place open to the public or accessible to dues paying members of such eating place.
SAFE TEMPERATURES. As applied to potentially hazardous food, shall mean temperatures of forty five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F) or below, one hundred
forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or above.
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR FOOD STORE. Any food service establishment or food store which operates at a fixed location for
a temporary period of time, not to exceed two (2) weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration and otherwise suitable for use as human food. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-
2018)
Sec. 8-25. APPLICATION OF SUCCEEDING SECTIONS.
Sections 8-26 through 8-43 of this division shall be applicable to all food stores, food service establishments, premises having food vending machines,
food delivery vehicles, and owners or operators thereof. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-26. PERMIT REQUIRED, COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ARTICLE PREREQUISITE TO RECEIPT, ETC.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment, food store, food vending machine or temporary (including tents) food service
establishment within the Village who does not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health authority. Only a person who complies with the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 101/377
requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for tent permit fee. (Ord. 01-
1093, 12-3-2001)
Sec. 8-27. PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION.
Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment, food store, food delivery vehicle or food vending machine shall make written application for a
permit on forms provided by the health authority. Such application shall include:
(1) The applicant's full name and Post Office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and, if a partnership, the names
of the partners, together with their addresses shall be included.
(2) The location and type of proposed food service establishment, food store, food delivery vehicle or food vending machines.
(3) The signature of the applicant or applicants.
If the application is for a temporary food service establishment or food store, it shall also include the dates of the proposed operation. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-28. PERMIT REQUIRED, INSPECTION TO BE MADE PRIOR TO ISSUANCE, ISSUANCE GENERALLY.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit as required by this division, the health authority shall make an inspection of the premises to determine
compliance with the provisions of this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-29. PERMIT REQUIRED, TRANSFERABILITY, POSTING, MAXIMUM TIME ALLOWED FOR PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY
ESTABLISHMENTS.
Permits required by this article shall not be transferable from one person to another person or place. A valid permit shall be posted in every food service
establishment or food store. Permits for temporary food service establishments or food stores shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen
(14) days. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-30. HOUSEKEEPING GENERALLY.
In all food service establishments, food stores and premises housing food used in machines, all parts of the establishment and its premises shall be kept
neat, clean and free of litter and rubbish. Cleaning operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize contamination of food and food contact
surfaces. None of the operations connected with a food service establishment or food store including storage shall be conducted in any room used as
living or sleeping quarters. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in suitable closed containers until removed for laundering. No live birds or animals
shall be allowed in any area used for the conduct of food service establishments or food store operations; provided, that guide dogs accompanying blind
persons may be permitted in dining areas. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-31. VERMIN CONTROL.
In all food service establishments, food stores and any premises housing food vending machines, effective measures shall be taken to protect against the
entry into the establishment and the breeding or presence on the premises of vermin. If the Health Officer determines upon credible evidence that vermin
are present on a premises, the owner of the premises must, within forty eight (48) hours of being notified by Health Officers, contract with an approved,
licensed pest exterminator for the removal of the vermin. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-32. INSPECTIONS GENERALLY.
At least once every six (6) months, the health authority shall inspect food service establishments and food stores located in the Village or its police
jurisdiction and shall make as many additional inspections and reinspections as are necessary for the enforcement of this division. Health inspections shall
also be required and conducted at all nonresidential special events with temporary food service that require a permit. A permit shall be required for
temporary food service when potentially hazardous foods requiring limited preparation such as hamburgers and frankfurters, which require seasoning and
cooking, are prepared or served for public consumption. A permit is not required for the service of any potentially hazardous food that has been prepared
and packaged under the Public Health Code, is obtained in individual servings, is stored at forty one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F) or below, or at a
temperature of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or above and which are served directly in the unopened container in which it was packaged.
See appendix D of this Code for the inspection fee. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002; amd. Ord. 04-1224, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 8-33. RIGHT OF ENTRY, ETC., OF HEALTH AUTHORITY.
The health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable time, any food service establishment, food store or premises
housing food vending machines within the Village for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this division. He shall be permitted
to examine the records of the establishment to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used and persons
employed. Failure of an owner, operator or an agent of either to permit inspections pursuant to this section shall be cause for immediate suspension of
operating privileges by the Village Manager. A copy of this section shall be given to each licensee at the time the annual license is granted. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-34. RIGHT OF ENTRY, SERVICE.
Notices provided for under this division shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other notice has
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 102/377
been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the health authority. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-35. EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
Food may be examined or sampled by the health authority at any time. The health authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge,
place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated, or misbranded. Under
a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice or tag placed on food
by the health authority, and neither such food nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed
without permission of the health authority, except on order by a court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing as
provided for in section 8-43 of this division, and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of his examination in the event a
written request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days, the health authority may vacate the hold order, or may by written order direct the owner or
person in charge of the food which was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of
this division. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-36. PROCEDURE WHEN EMPLOYEE SUSPECTED OF TRANSMITTING INFECTION.
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any employee, the health authority is authorized to require any or all of the
following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all commissaries and vending machine operations.
(2) The immediate closing of the commissaries and operations concerned until, in the opinion of the health authority, no further danger of disease
outbreak exists.
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and his associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-37. SALE OF FOOD FROM OUTSIDE JURISDICTION.
Food from food service establishments or food stores outside the jurisdiction of the health authority of the Village may be sold within the Village if such
food service establishments or food stores conform to the provisions of this division or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service
establishments or food stores are located. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-38. REVIEW OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
When a food service establishment, food store or premises housing food vending machines is hereafter constructed or extensively remodeled or when an
existing structure is converted for use as a food service establishment or food store, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction,
remodeling or alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials of work areas, and the locations, size and type of fixed equipment and
facilities shall be submitted to the health authority for approval before such work is begun. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-39. ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to sell, offer or expose for sale, or to have in his possession with intent to sell therefrom any food,
beverage or ingredient which is adulterated or misbranded. Samples of food, beverages, or ingredients may be taken and examined by the health authority
as often as may be necessary to determine the freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The health authority may, on written notice to the operator,
impound and forbid the sale of any food or beverage which is adulterated or misbranded or which he has probable cause to believe to be adulterated or
misbranded. After the permittee has been given an opportunity for a hearing, the health authority may cause to be removed or destroyed any food or
beverage which is adulterated or misbranded; provided, that in the case of misbranding which can be corrected by proper labeling, such food or beverage
may be released to the operator for correct labeling under the supervision of the health authority. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-40. ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING, SUSPENSION GENERALLY, NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any orders issued pursuant to the authority granted in this article III, the permit holder or
operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be
provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health authority by the permit holder.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the health authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food service
establishment, food store or food vending machines which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he may, without warning,
notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying
the time period within which such action shall be taken and, if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended, and all
food service operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon
written petition to the health authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-41. ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING, REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED PERMITS.
Any person whose permit, as required by this article, has been suspended may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the permit. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 103/377
conditions causing the suspension of the permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is in compliance with
the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-42. ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING, REVOCATION.
For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the health authority in the performance of his duties, any
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health
authority. Prior to such action, the health authority shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons advising that the permit shall be permanently
revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the health authority by the permit holder,
within such five (5) day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-43. ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING, HEARINGS.
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the health authority at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the record of such
hearing, the health authority shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report
of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the health authority. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-44. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon a plea or finding of guilty thereof, be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of
this Code. In addition, the Village may pursue any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
Division II - Food Stores And Food Service Establishments Specifically
Sec. 8-45. ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH FOOD SERVICE SANITATION CODE.
The Village hereby adopts by reference, as though fully set forth herein, the following:
(1) The Illinois Department of Public Health publication entitled, "Food Service Sanitation Code, October 1993", as they may be revised from time to
time, with the following exceptions: section 750.10500, General - Sewage Disposal and section 750.1160, General - Insects, Rodent Control.
(2) The Illinois Department of Public Health publication entitled, "Retail Food Store Sanitation Code, October 1992", as they may be revised from time
to time, with the following exceptions: section 760.940, General - Sewage and section 760.1120, General - Insects, Rodent Control. (Ord. 94-805, 6-
27-1994)
Sec. 8-46. SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
All sewage from food service establishments and food stores shall be disposed of in a public sewerage system. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-47. INSPECTION RECORDS.
Whenever the health authority makes an inspection of a food service establishment or food store, he shall record his findings on an inspection report form
provided for this purpose, and shall furnish the original of such inspection report form to the permit holder or operator. Such form shall summarize the
requirements of this article and shall set forth demerit point values for each such requirement, in accordance with the Illinois department of public health
form FCC01. Upon completion of an inspection, the health authority shall total the demerit point values for all requirements in violation, such total
becoming the demerit score for the establishment. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-48. NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
(1) Report Of Inspections. Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on an
inspection form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by item number, the item violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating
score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection
report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
(2) Correction Of Violations.
(a) The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
1. If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food service operation. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority.
2. All violations of four (4) or five (5) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten (10) days following
inspection. Within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, the holder of the permit, license or certificate shall submit a written report to the regulatory
authority stating that the four (4) or five (5) point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow up inspection shall be conducted to confirm
correction.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 104/377
3. All one or two (2) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
4. When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60), the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within
forty eight (48) hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
5. In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within twenty four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected
within twenty four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory
authority.
(b) The inspection report shall state that the failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for a hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days
of receipt of the request.
(c) Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this subsection (2) to cease operations, it shall not resume operations
until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be
offered within a reasonable time. (Ord. 518, 8-25-1987)
Division III - Food Vending Machines
Sec. 8-49. ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH FOOD VENDING MACHINE REGULATIONS.
The village of Northfield hereby adopts by reference the Illinois department of public health publication entitled, "The Vending Of Foods And Beverages -
U.S. Department Of Health, Education And Welfare (1978)". (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-50. DISPLAY OF PERMIT NUMBER.
The operator's permit number, of a size and style approved by the health authority, shall be conspicuously displayed on each vending machine operated
by him. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-51. INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR RETENTION.
In order to hold and retain an operator's permit, the operator shall maintain within the jurisdiction of the health authority a list of all vending machines
operated by him and their locations and of all commissaries or other establishments from which his machines are serviced. This information shall be
available to the health authority upon request. (1986 Code)
Sec. 8-52. OTHER ORDINANCES.
Food vending machines shall be subject to any other ordinances of the village of Northfield regulating vending machines in general. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE IV. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
Division I - Generally
Sec. 8-53. DEFINITIONS.
ADDITIONAL SERVICES. Shall include, but is not limited to, the service levels of once a week backdoor, twice a week roadside and twice a week
backdoor, the collection of landscape waste, miscellaneous waste, the rent of toters and roll-off containers.
BASIC RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. The once a week collection of garbage, rubbish and recycling at the roadside.
BIODEGRADABLE PAPER BAGS. Paper bags that, in the determination of the village manager, are capable of being broken down by the action of
microorganisms.
COMPOSTING. The biological process by which microorganisms decompose the organic fraction of waste under aerobic conditions, producing a humus
like product that may be use as a soil conditioner.
COMPOSTING MATERIALS. Shall include, grass trimmings, leaves, weeds, sawdust, brush not more than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter, garden waste
and vegetable waste. No animal product or byproduct shall be considered compostable for purposes of this article.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. From residential households resulting from interior and exterior remodeling projects (including
drywall, plywood, lumber, bathroom and kitchen fixtures and small amounts of sand, concrete, rocks, etc.) and requiring a special pick up.
CONTAINERS. The term "approved container" for residential units shall include metal or plastic garbage containers that are watertight and equipped with
tightfitting covers, not to exceed thirty (30) gallons in capacity, plastic toters up to ninety (90) gallons which are provided by the contractor, plastic bags and
paper bags or sacks specially manufactured for outdoor use as waste containers, and such other containers as may be specifically authorized from time to
time by the village manager. Multi-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial containers shall be of durable metal or plastic material and equipped with
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 105/377
tightfitting covers. The size of the container shall be determined by the contractor and the individual user.
CONTRACTOR. Any reference herein to contractor shall include all officers, directors and five percent (5%) shareholder of the contract.
CUSTOMER. Any single-family (attached or detached), multi-family, institutional, commercial and industrial units receiving service from a solid waste
collection firm.
GARBAGE. Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which is subject to decay.
LANDSCAPE OR YARD WASTE. Yard trimmings, grass, leaves, bushes, brush and branch clippings and other landscape waste as defined by the state of
Illinois. Also includes organic holiday evergreen trees and greenery from wreaths and garlands. Sod shall not be considered landscape waste but picked
up with household refuse.
MISCELLANEOUS WASTE. All waste materials of a size which renders them unsuitable for deposit in a rubbish or landscape waste container, including,
but not limited to, furniture and household items.
PREMISES. Any house, residence building, flat, apartment, dwelling place or place of abode, commercial or industrial establishment, hotel, motel, church,
school, hospital, club building or meeting hall. The term shall include the lot upon which the building or structure exists.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Materials which can be removed from rubbish and recycled. Includes newsprint, corrugated cardboard, magazines, aluminum
and other types of cans, glass bottles and jars (colored and clear), plastic (PET), polystyrene (PSG) and HDPE containers (milk jugs, soda and water
bottles, etc.) and other items mutually agreed to by the village and the waste contractor.
REFUSE. All discarded garbage, rubbish and trash, household and kitchen wastes including food and food residues. The terms "garbage", "refuse",
"rubbish", "solid waste", "trash" and "waste" are synonymous unless otherwise specified (yard waste, recyclables, etc.).
RUBBISH. All combustible trash including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, magazines, suitable for deposit in an approved container, and
noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metal, articles of clothing and other mineral and similar waste products suitable for deposit in an
approved container. Rubbish shall also include ashes and cinders.
SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, landscape waste, miscellaneous waste, and recyclables.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FIRM. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collection and disposal of "solid waste" as defined herein.
SOLID WASTE CONTRACTOR. The exclusive contractor with whom the village of Northfield has contracted for the collection and disposal of solid waste
from within the village.
WHITE GOODS OR APPLIANCES. Appliances or white goods include washers, dryers, stoves, freezers, refrigerators, dishwashers, hot water heaters,
furnaces, dehumidifiers and air conditioners which are prohibited by state law from disposal in landfills. White goods are picked up separate from other
refuse. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
Sec. 8-54. ADMINISTRATION.
Regulation of the collection and disposal of refuse in the village of Northfield under the provisions of this code shall be under the supervision of the building
commissioner. His power and duties shall include, but not be limited to: 1) conducting periodic inspections to ensure full compliance with the terms and
provisions of this article, and 2) suspending the license of any solid waste collection firm licensed hereunder. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-55. LICENSE FOR PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
As suits the current best interest of the village, and to better enable the village to regulate and control the services provided to the users of solid waste
services, the board may provide for one exclusive solid waste hauler providing the collection and disposal of solid waste for residential, multi-family,
institutional, commercial, and industrial users. The village may provide for such exceptions to the exclusive franchise as it determines to be in the users'
and the village's mutual best interests.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collection and disposal of solid waste within the village of Northfield without first
obtaining a license therefor. This section shall not apply to persons collecting grass clippings and other lawn debris in connection with lawn care
or landscaping service. (Ord. 95-841, 4-24-1995)
(2) Application for issuance of such license shall be made in accordance with the general licensing provisions of the pertinent ordinances of the
village of Northfield. The annual license fee shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code, payable at the beginning of each year. The license
shall expire on December 31 following its issuance.
(3) No license shall be issued to a refuse collection firm which has an owner, officer, director or five percent (5%) shareholder who has been
convicted of a felony or is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. The names and addresses of all
employees shall be kept on file with the village of Northfield. Application for a license shall be deemed to give consent to the village of Northfield
to conduct a background check on such owner, officer, director, or five percent (5%) shareholder.
(4) Any employee who has previously been or during the term of the exclusive contract found guilty of any felony, drunk or "on drugs" driving, or
crime of moral turpitude shall not perform any work within the village of Northfield. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
(5) The contractor must submit, as requested by the village, complete financial statements and references as to financial responsibility, together
with complete verified list of its officers, stockholders and/or partners, debt holders, if any, and if a subsidiary, the name of the parent company
and promptly advise the village, in a form satisfactory to the village in writing, of any changes. Any officer, director or five percent (5%)
shareholder may also be required to submit such personal financial information as required by the village. (Ord. 95-841, 4-24-1995)
(6) The contractor must have adequate and sufficient equipment, personnel and financial responsibility to render service to any customer
requesting it in accordance with the provisions of this article.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 106/377
(7) The contractor must provide all of the services identified in the exclusive solid waste contract with the village of Northfield.
(8) The contractor must perform all of the services identified in the exclusive solid waste contract with the village of Northfield at the established
rates as defined herein.
(9) The contractor must maintain an open and staffed telephone service Monday through Friday during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. to respond to inquiries, requests and complaints as to services rendered pursuant to the exclusive solid waste contract. (Ord.
91-662, 1-28-1991)
(10) The contractor shall agree to indemnify, save and keep harmless the village from any and all loss, cost, damage, expense or liability of any
kind whatsoever, which the village may suffer or which may be recovered against the village from or on account of the issuance of the license or
from or on account of any activity advocated or permitted by the license in the village of Northfield. The contractor shall furnish the village a
certificate of insurance for the insurance amounts as indicated in the current contract, but at not less than:
(a) Workers' compensation and occupational diseases insurance: Statutory amount for Illinois and employers' liability insurance of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident.
(b) General Liability Insurance:
1. Bodily injury with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate;
2. Property damage, with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate;
3. Contractual insurance - broad form, with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
aggregate.
(c) Automotive liability insurance:
1. Bodily injury, with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate;
2. Property damage with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. (Ord.
95-841, 4-24-1995)
(11) The contractor shall ensure that all garbage, rubbish and landscape waste is removed from the village at the close of each day of collection
and shall be disposed of at lawfully operated sanitary landfill sites and composting facilities located outside of the village or at an approved
transfer site. All recyclable materials collected shall be removed from the village at the close of each day of collection and transported to a
suitable processing center or market.
(12) The contractor shall not store equipment and material, including solid waste, within the village of Northfield.
(13) In the event the duly licensed solid waste collection firm violates any provisions of this article, the village shall have the right, in addition to
enforcing against such firm the penalties provided in section 1-13 of this code, to immediately revoke the license of such solid waste collection
firm and terminate the exclusive solid waste contract.
(14) No license shall be issued to any applicant who is unable to comply with foregoing subsections (3) through (12), inclusive, of this section.
(Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-56. EXCLUSIVE SOLID WASTE CONTRACTOR.
The village of Northfield may enter into an exclusive solid waste contract for the purposes of providing the collection and disposal of solid waste for
residential, multi-family, institutional, commercial and industrial users. It shall be the purpose of such a contract to provide for the highest quality and
quantity of service at the lowest economic cost. This contract will enable the village to regulate and control the services provided to the users of solid
waste services. All users (residential, multi-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial) may subscribe individually for specific service requirements.
The contractor shall provide among other things the following: (Ord. 95-841, 4-24-1995)
(1) Allow the village the right to conduct periodic examinations of books and records at reasonable times and the right to receive and/or have
prepared annual audits of the contractor's books of account at his expense for the purpose of establishing financial ability to perform the
contract;
(2) Have available for use throughout the contract term: a) an environmental protection agency permitted sanitary landfill and compost site or an
incinerator, located beyond the corporate limits of the village and b) a list of markets or sources to which recyclable material will be sold;
(3) Have a sufficient number of enclosed leakproof, modern packer trucks for garbage, rubbish, and landscape pick up, open body trucks or dump
trucks for large items, and recycling trucks to provide collection and disposal services required under the terms of the contract;
(4) Reserve to the village the right to establish rates and service standards for solid waste collection and such regulations as are necessary to
implement this article; (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
(5) Require the posting of a minimum five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit with adequate surety to
carry out the purposes of the contract entered into with the solid waste collection firm. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
Sec. 8-57. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
A. Solid waste within the village of Northfield may be collected and disposed of only by a solid waste contractor specifically licensed and designated by the
village to perform such a function. (Ord. 95-841, 4-24-1995)
B. No garbage, rubbish, miscellaneous waste or recyclable material shall be burned, dumped, left, placed, scattered or buried within the village of
Northfield.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 107/377
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the village any garbage or rubbish, or to permit to be deposited on any premises under his or
her control any solid waste, except in approved containers in accordance with the provisions of this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste in any container owned or lawfully controlled by another person without the consent of
such other person.
E. Rubbish and other combustible refuse may be disposed of by incineration within the building where it is produced and accumulated or within a closed
building accessory thereto situated on the same premises, in such manner as to render the smoke odorless beyond the lot lines and nontoxic to
humans, animals or plants; food waste may be disposed of by grinding or by shredding finely and disposing of it through pipes leading to a public
sanitary sewer, provided that all matter so disposed of shall have been ground or shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which the same is deposited.
F. No solid waste collection firm or any person other than a firm specifically designated by the village to perform such a function shall remove any item
including, but not limited to, newspapers, aluminum or bimetal cans; or glass bottles, plastic containers placed in or immediately adjacent to village
recycling containers.
G. Collection times:
(1) The following hours of operation shall be observed: Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except that
commercial service in the O/R and M-1 districts along Waukegan and Northfield Roads shall be between the hours of six thirty o'clock (6:30)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
(2) Collection service will not be conducted on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day. If any of these holidays falls on a regular collection day, the schedule will be adjusted to complete the missed collection
day within two (2) days. Schedule adjustments shall be made so that collection will occur on the regular schedule within one week. (Ord. 91-662,
1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-58. SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall transport solid waste, or cause to be transported over the streets or other public ways in the village of Northfield
unless such solid waste being transported is entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the village of
Northfield or other public property thereof except in a leakproof, covered truck body specifically manufactured for the transportation of garbage. Solid
waste collection equipment shall not be stored or kept within the village limits of the village of Northfield in any manner at any time or for any reason.
B. It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the village any garbage, or other material subject to decay, other than properly tended
compostable material, except in a tightly covered metal or plastic container.
C. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or garbage or any material anywhere in the village except in a covered container
so that it cannot be blown away by the wind.
D. The solid waste collection firm or contractor shall immediately clean up in a neat and workmanlike manner any refuse he may have spilled or permitted
to be spilled in the village of Northfield, and shall replace, at his expense, refuse containers which may have been damaged by his employees. (Ord.
91-662, 1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-59. ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE, DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
The occupancy of any premises shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being produced and accumulated on such premises. No person shall
permit any solid waste to accumulate on his premises except in covered refuse containers of the type and size previously specified herein. The occupant
of any premises shall cause the solid waste to be disposed of within seven (7) days after such is accumulated. Every premises in the village of Northfield
which houses, serves or is used by persons shall have solid waste collection service at least weekly unless otherwise provided herein.
The building commissioner is hereby authorized to investigate any premises on which he has good cause to suspect that solid waste is accumulating. In
recognition of the danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the village that such accumulation represents, it is hereby declared a nuisance and
the nuisance abatement sections of this code shall apply. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Division II - Containers
Sec. 8-60. CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
A. All garbage and rubbish for residential collection by the contractor shall be placed in an approved container equipped with a cover and with handles so
they may be lifted and carried by one person. No such container shall have a capacity of less than ten (10) gallons or more than thirty (30) gallons.
Larger containers (96 gallon toters) may be used only if appropriate to the collection methods used by the collection service. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991;
amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
B. The occupant, owner or user of every premises in the village shall provide for, and at all times maintain in good order and repair, a sufficient number of
garbage containers and recycling toters to accommodate a weekly accumulation of normal solid waste and recyclable materials. (Ord. 16-1658, 6-21-
2016)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 108/377
C. It shall be unlawful for customers to have garbage, rubbish, recyclables and other material outside of the approved container. Containers must have
tightly secured lids to ensure that a nuisance does not develop. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
D. All garbage containers shall meet the requirements defined in this division, and no other type of containers shall be acceptable. Unsanitary, leaking or
defective receptacles shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by and at the expense of the person in possession of the premises served. All containers
shall be disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary to maintain them in an odor free and sanitary condition.
E. No one garbage can or container shall exceed sixty (60) pounds' gross weight when filled. Customers with weights or quantities of solid waste in excess
of those allowable under the terms of this article shall make arrangements with the contractor, for a special pick up at an additional charge to the
customer. Commercial containers shall vary in size and weight depending upon the service level required by the user. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
F. Landscape waste shall be placed in specially marked "Landscape Waste" containers, toters or in biodegradable paper bags paid for by the resident or in
tightly tied bundles bound with string, cord or twine made of natural fibers. No such bag or bundle shall exceed sixty (60) pounds in gross weight.
Landscape waste placed in plastic bags is unacceptable for pick up and a violation of this article. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-
2005)
G. For recyclables, residents are required to use special toters (35 or 64 gallon) which are provided by the waste contractor for rent or purchase. Approved
recyclable materials may be intermingled in the toters; however, no wet garbage can be disposed of with recyclables. (Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
Sec. 8-61. CONTENTS OF CONTAINERS.
It shall be the duty of every customer in possession of any premises to cause all garbage produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of surplus
liquid, securely wrapped or bagged in paper or plastic bags, or packed in a covered box or carton of such dimensions as will permit its free removal from a
solid waste container. After such wrapping or bagging, the garbage shall be deposited in a solid waste container as soon as practicable. All other garbage
materials shall be securely wrapped or bound as may be necessary to prevent the scattering of same and shall be deposited in a refuse container or as
otherwise prescribed herein. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-62. PLACEMENT.
Every customer, occupant, owner or user of any premises in the village shall place their solid waste containers as follows:
(1) Residential.
(a) Roadside.
1. Roads with curbs - containers shall be placed behind the curb.
2. Roads without conventional curbs - containers shall be placed within a reasonable distance of the edge of the road. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
3. All garbage, rubbish, and landscape waste containers shall be securely closed and placed for collection, along with the recyclable materials, at
roadside not earlier than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection from such residence. The containers shall be
removed from the roadside by eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the day following collection. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 03-1178, 10-9-2003)
4. Such containers shall not be placed within an alley, street, or walkway of the village, but shall be entirely inside the lot line of such premises.
(b) Backdoor. All solid waste containers shall be placed outside of any building, garage or porch, at ground level, unless a sunken type of garbage
can is used.
(2) Multi-Family, Institutional, Commercial, And Industrial. Approved rodentproof containers shall be placed in the rear yard of said property. All
solid waste containers shall be placed in an enclosed area. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-63. INSPECTION OF CONTAINERS.
All solid waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval by the community development director or his/her designee. (Ord. 99-959, 1-25-
1999)
Division III - Fee Structure
Sec. 8-64. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FEES.
The monthly charge to customers for the solid waste collection and disposal services shall be as set forth in the exclusive solid waste collection contract
which shall be available for inspection and copying by any resident of the village. All other services are to be paid directly by the customer. (Ord. 91-662, 1-
28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005; Ord. 09-1400, 1-20-2009)
Sec. 8-65. SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
All premises whether single-family (attached and detached) residential, multi-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial shall be served exclusively by
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 109/377
a single contractor licensed by the village pursuant to section 8-55 of this article to provide such service. All owners, occupants or users of single-family
(attached and detached) residential, multi-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial premises are prohibited from hiring any private solid waste
collection and disposal service in lieu of the licensed village contractor and are required to take service from the licensed village contractor. (Ord. 91-662,
1-28-1991)
Sec. 8-66. BILLING.
The contractor shall bill all single-family residences (attached and detached) directly for all services including basic service of once a week pick up at the
curb of garbage, rubbish and recycling and any additional elective services selected. (Ord. 09-1400, 1-20-2009)
The contractor shall directly bill all multi-family, institutional, commercial and industrial premises. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
Division IV - Landscape Waste
Sec. 8-67. LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL.
Landscape waste may be disposed of in the village only as set forth in this section.
(1) Compost Piles. Compostable materials may be placed in a compost pile. Said compost pile shall be located away from a neighbor's property
line not less than ten feet (10') so as not to cause a "nuisance" as defined in this code and shall be located only in the rear yard of the home and
not interfere with drainage, flood retention or utilities in any way.
Any compost pile shall be maintained in accordance with Illinois department of energy and natural resources guide entitled "A Homeowners
Guide To Recycling Yard Wastes" (reference numbers ILENR/RR-89/03 and X04628-650M-3-90), as hereafter may be amended from time to
time, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Failure to maintain said compost pile as specified by the department of energy and natural resources shall constitute a nuisance. The health
department is authorized to cause the nuisance to be summarily abated at the expense of the party permitting or maintaining the nuisance.
(2) Landscape Waste Pick Up. No landscape waste shall be taken from the premises on which it was generated unless the following conditions
are met: (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
(a) All grass clippings, leaves, garden material, prunings of two inches (2") diameter, and green stemmed shrub and plant materials shall be
placed in biodegradable paper bags and/or containers or toters clearly marked "Landscape Waste". Bundles of brush less than four feet (4') in
length and two feet (2') in height, containing branches not over three inches (3") in diameter, that are tied with biodegradable materials and can
be easily handled by one person will also be collected. All other disposal containers, including plastic bags, are prohibited for use in landscape
waste collection service. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
(b) These bags or bundles shall be placed at the curb or edge of the road, on the specified collection day, according to the same regulations as
solid waste containers.
(c) Landscape wastes may be placed for collection and disposal only from April 1 to November 30 of each year.
(d) The village shall provide for exclusive landscape waste collection service for any and all premises within the village provided that residents
who are served by a landscaping service may continue to have the landscapers properly dispose of their landscape waste.
(e) No person may place landscape waste material for collection and disposal at a premises or address other than that on which it has grown.
(Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991)
(3) Separation Of Landscape Waste From Other Materials. Landscape waste shall not be mixed or combined with garbage, rubbish, recycling
or any other kind of material. (Ord. 91-662, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 05-1254, 8-16-2005)
Sec. 8-68. PENALTY.
Persons violating any provisions of this article shall be fined, for each offense, in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. Additionally, a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 03-1144, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE V. MEDICAL WASTE
Sec. 8-69: MEDICAL WASTE REGULATIONS.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(1) INFECTIOUS WASTES. Waste that is capable of transmitting a communicable disease. Infectious waste includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
(a) Pathological wastes (human tissues, blood, excreta, and secretions).
(b) Infectious agent stock and associated biologicals.
(c) Human blood and blood products.
(d) Human body parts and contaminated disposable bedding, bandages and dressings.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 110/377
(e) Wastes from surgery and autopsy.
(f) Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and bedding.
Examples of establishments generating infectious waste include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Doctors' and dentists' offices.
(c) Medical and diagnostic laboratories.
(d) Blood banks and plasma centers.
(e) Ambulatory surgical faculties.
(f) Long term healthcare faculties.
(g) Research laboratories.
(h) Pharmaceutical facilities.
(i) Veterinary offices and hospitals.
(j) Clinics.
(k) Mortuaries.
(l) Animal quarantine faculties.
(2) COMMUNICABLE DISEASE. An illness due to an infectious agent or its toxic products which is transmitted directly or indirectly to a well person
from an infected person, animal, or arthropod, or through the agency of an intermediate host, vector, or inanimate environment.
(3) SHARPS. Hypodermic and suture needles, syringes, scalpel blades, pipettes, lancets, guidewires, or other objects that could cut or penetrate the
skin.
(4) LIQUID INFECTIOUS WASTE. Liquid waste that is included with solid infectious waste for treatment and disposal. It does not include urine, wash
water, and other liquids most properly disposed of via the sanitary sewer.
(5) EFFECTIVE TREATMENT. Treatment that reduces the pathogenic qualities of the waste to a point where it is safe to handle. To be effective, the
treatment must be designed for the waste in question and can be carried out in a manner acceptable to the Health Officer. The treatment may
include, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) Incineration.
(b) Steam sterilization (autoclaving).
(c) Chemical disinfection.
(d) Thermal inactivation.
(e) Irradiation.
(6) SECURE AREA. An area which may be indoors or outdoors. If indoors, it must not be accessible to the general public. If outdoors, the area must be
locked.
(7) HEALTH OFFICER. The health liaison to the Cook County Department of Public Health for Village of Northfield or the authorized representative.
B. Treatment Of Infectious Waste. All infectious waste shall be effectively treated before it is placed in an unsecured area.
C. Secure Storing Of Infectious Waste. Infectious waste being stored prior to treatment or collection for subsequent treatment shall be kept in a secure
area and properly identified as containing infectious waste.
D. Storage Times. Storage times for infectious waste shall be short enough to prevent decomposition or production of noxious odors.
E. Packaging. Prior to being placed in a nonsecure area for transportation and disposal in an approved sanitary landfill or incinerator approved for
infectious or medical hazardous waste, treated infectious waste shall be packaged in the following manner:
(1) If liquid, be in a leakproof container before being bagged.
(2) If it is sharp, be in a puncture resistant container which is nonopenable except by use of tools before being bagged.
(3) Be placed in sealed, tear resistant plastic bags identified by the universal biohazard symbol. The bags shall be thick enough to contain any spilled
liquid infectious waste.
(4) Be placed within a second properly identified bag or box if the treatment process destroyed the biohazard marking or reduced the structural integrity
of the bag. (Ord. 90-650, 10-22-1990)
ARTICLE VI. CLEAN INDOOR AIR/SMOKING REGULATIONS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 111/377
Sec. 8-70: SMOKING REGULATIONS.
For the purposes of regulating clean indoor air and smoking in the Village of Northfield, the provisions of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 82/1 et seq., as amended, and the regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health, as amended, along with any applicable regulations
under Federal law, shall be controlling. (Ord. 08-1366, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 8-71: PENALTY.
Persons, corporations, partnerships, associations or other entities violating the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be fined pursuant to appendix D, article III of
this Code. Additionally, each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. (Ord. 08-1366, 2-19-2008)
Title Chapter 9
HOUSING
Chapter 9
HOUSING
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1: PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village of Northfield and the purpose of this chapter, in the exercise by the village of its police and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals, safety, and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry, and to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the village a fair opportunity to purchase, lease,
rent, or occupy housing without discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital
status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status, or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-2: SEVERABILITY.
If any provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application
of the provisions to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-3: DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter:
COMMITTEE/COMMISSION. A special group or panel to be appointed by the board of trustees as needed to handle discriminatory issues.
DWELLING. Shall have the meaning set forth in the village of Northfield zoning ordinance in appendix A of this code.
HOUSING. Includes any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the village of Northfield, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or living quarters of one or more individuals, groups or families, and includes any vacant land
within the village of Northfield which is zoned and intended to be used for the construction of any such building or structure.
LEASE. Includes sublease, assignment, or rental, and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying
or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real estate, but shall not include any religious
institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization.
NATIONAL ORIGIN. Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
OWNER. Any person who holds a legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any dwelling or housing, or who holds legal or equitable title
to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing.
PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, labor organizations, unions, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE AGENT. Any real estate broker, any real estate salesman, and any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the
management or operation of any dwelling or housing.
REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person licensed as a real estate broker in accordance with the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required
thereby to be so licensed.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 112/377
REAL ESTATE SALESMAN. Any person licensed as a real estate salesman in accordance with the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or
required thereby to be so licensed.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange, rental, or lease of any dwelling or housing, and an option to do any of the foregoing.
SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or beneficial interest in real estate. (1986 Code;
amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
ARTICLE II. DISCRIMINATION BY OWNERS
Sec. 9-4: DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to sell or lease a dwelling or housing on terms,
conditions, or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental
status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-5: REFUSALS TO DEAL.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform any
sale or lease of any dwelling or housing, because of the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital
status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income of any party to such sale or lease, or of any member of the family
of any such party, or of any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy such dwelling or housing, or of any person using or occupying any
dwelling or housing in the area in which such dwelling or housing is located. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-6: WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
It shall be an unlawful practice and violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to represent to any person that any dwelling or housing is not
available for inspection, purchase, sale, lease or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold housing from any person because of
race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status,
housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-7: ADVERTISEMENTS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or
notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-8: ADVERTISING, CAUSING OR PERMITTING.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to cause any person to circulate or publish a
statement, advertisement or notice that such owner or other person intends to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this
article or to consent thereto. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-9: SIGNS AND NOTICES.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any owner or other person to post or erect, or cause any person to post or erect,
any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this article.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 9-10: EXEMPTIONS.
This article shall not apply to the rental, lease or sale of any room or dwelling unit in any owner occupied dwelling which consists of more than one but less
than five (5) dwelling units.
As used herein, the term "owner" includes the spouse or any lineal descendant or ancestor of the owner. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-11: LIMITATIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer property publicly before selling or renting it to a person the owner may choose, providing he complies
with all other provisions of this chapter. Nor shall this chapter be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to, or to discriminate among
prospective tenants or buyers for any reason other than race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital
status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income. Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer property for
sale or lease or to show his property to any person if such person is not negotiating for the purchase or lease of such property in good faith. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as creating a right of recovery either of property or damages or a right to set aside a contract to rent, lease, or purchase in an
action against a bona fide purchaser who rented, leased or purchased housing or contracted to do so in good faith without knowledge of an alleged
violation of this chapter. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 113/377
ARTICLE III. DISCRIMINATION BY REAL ESTATE AGENT AND LENDING
INSTITUTIONS
Sec. 9-12: WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent or other person to represent to any person that any dwelling
or housing is not available for inspection, sale, lease or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold housing from any person
because of the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military
discharge status, housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-13: REFUSALS OF OFFERS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a
bona fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age,
ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord.
05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-14: ADVERTISEMENTS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent or other person to publish or circulate a statement,
advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under article II of this chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-15: SIGNS AND NOTICES.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent or other person to post or erect, or cause or permit any
person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing, managed by or in the custody, care or control of such real estate agent or other
person, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing, in a manner that is unlawful under article II of this chapter or this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-16: DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any lending institution, in making, agreeing to make, arranging, or negotiating any
loan or guarantee of funds for the purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any
dwelling or housing, to offer, seek or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion, national
origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of
income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-17: REFUSALS TO DEAL IN LENDING.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any
agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds for the purchase, sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any
dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual
orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income of any party to such agreement or of any member of the family of any such party,
or of the residents of the area in which such dwelling or housing is located. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-18: COVERAGE.
This article shall apply, respectively, to every real estate agent who, within the village of Northfield, performs any function as such real estate agent but
does not maintain an office or place of doing business within the village of Northfield; and this article applies to every real estate agent and lending
institution who maintains an office or place of doing business within the village of Northfield; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not
be so construed as to prohibit a real estate broker or real estate agent, on behalf of the owner, from inquiring into and reporting upon qualifications of any
prospective buyer or tenant with respect to limitations or exclusions other than those of race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry,
disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262,
12-5-2005)
ARTICLE IV. OTHER PROHIBITED CONDUCT
Sec. 9-19: REPRESENTATIONS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent, for the purpose of inducing any person to enter into or
refuse to enter into a real estate transaction: (1986 Code)
(1) To represent that a change has occurred, will occur or may occur with respect to the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age,
ancestry, disability, parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income in the composition
of the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in which the dwelling or housing (which is the subject of the real estate transaction) is
located, or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 114/377
(2) To represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status, marital
status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income in the composition of the owners or occupants in any block,
neighborhood or area will result in lowering of property values, or in an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or in a decline in the quality of
schools in such block, neighborhood or area. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
Sec. 9-20: OTHER VIOLATIONS.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any person:
(1) To aid, abet, incite, or coerce a person to engage in unlawful housing practice; (1986 Code)
(2) To interfere wilfully with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the committee/commission or one of its members or
representatives; or (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(3) To wilfully obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this chapter or an order issued thereunder. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE V. PROSECUTING VIOLATIONS
Sec. 9-21: COMMITTEE/COMMISSION POWERS.
The special committee/commission formed by consent of the corporate authorities shall have and exercise, with respect to all dwellings and housing and,
with respect to all persons subject to this chapter, the power: (Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(1) To act to eliminate unlawful housing practices. (1986 Code)
(2) To act to assure to persons living or desiring to live in the village of Northfield, or in any particular dwelling or housing, an opportunity to purchase,
lease, or occupy without discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender or sex, age, ancestry, disability, parental status,
marital status, sexual orientation, military discharge status, housing status or source of income. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005)
(3) To receive, initiate and investigate complaints alleging unlawful housing practices. Any complaint initiated by the committee/commission shall be in
writing, shall be signed by the chairman of the committee/commission and shall fully set forth the circumstances of the alleged violation and the
source of all information upon which the complaint is based, including the names and addresses of all complainants. Such written complaint shall be
served upon the party alleged to be in violation of this chapter. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(4) To seek conciliation of, hold hearings on, and make findings of fact with respect to any such complaint.
(5) To report its findings of fact and recommend actions to the corporate authorities.
(6) To render as may be requested by the corporate authorities, a written report of its activities and recommendations with respect to fair housing
practices, which written reports shall be made public after submission to the corporate authorities.
(7) To adopt, after approval of the corporate authorities, such rules and regulations as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 9-22: COMPLAINTS, CONCILIATION.
(1) Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation or alleged violation of any provision of this chapter may file with the committee/commission a
written verified complaint setting forth his grievance. The complaint shall state: a) the name and address of the complainant, b) the name and
address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant, and c) the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation
of this chapter; and such complaint shall state the name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts. The
committee/commission shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of aggrieved persons.
(2) After the filing of any complaint, the committee/commission shall serve a copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged and the chairman of
the committee/commission shall designate a panel to make a prompt investigation in connection therewith.
(3) If such panel shall determine after such investigation that probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint, the panel shall interview the
complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper
methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. If, after such investigation, the committee/commission determines that no probable cause exists
for the allegations of the complaints, no further action shall be taken by the committee/commission under this section and sections 9-23 and 9-24 of
this article. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(4) The conferences, interviews and other proceedings under this section shall be closed and confidential and shall not form a part of the record in any
subsequent proceedings under this chapter without the express written consent of all parties thereto. (1986 Code)
(5) If, at any time, such panel shall determine that such attempts at conciliation would not be in furtherance of the objectives of this chapter or are not
reasonably calculated to resolve the complaint, and in no event more than thirty (30) days after the date of the complaint, the committee/commission
shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing of the complaint, in accordance with section 9-23 of this article unless a suit is filed in accordance
with section 9-26 of this chapter prior to the commencement of such hearing. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
Sec. 9-23: HEARINGS.
(1) Such hearing shall be a public hearing conducted by the committee/commission, or a panel thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties,
provided that any member of the committee/commission who serves on a panel as provided in section 9-22 of this article with respect to a particular
grievance shall be disqualified from participation as a committee/commission member in the hearing on the grievance under this section.
(2) At the conclusion of such hearing, the committee/commission shall render to the corporate authorities a written recommendation, which shall also
be served by mail upon the complainant and the party or parties charged. No report shall be delayed more than sixty (60) days after the date of the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 115/377
first issuance of notice for commencement of a hearing. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
Sec. 9-24: ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The committee/commission shall be empowered, at the conclusion of proceedings held under section 9-23 of this article to recommend to the
corporate authorities of the village of Northfield, that the corporate authorities order any person found to be engaging in an unfair housing practice to
cease and desist from such practice, upon such terms as shall be necessary and proper for the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) The committee/commission shall be empowered at the conclusion of proceedings held under section 9-23 of this article as part of its report, to
recommend to the corporate authorities of the village of Northfield, one or more of the following: (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord.
06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(a) To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce against any person found in violation of this chapter, the fine provided for in section 9-27 of this
chapter.
(b) To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for such relief as may seem appropriate to the court for the enforcement of this chapter, and the
elimination of violations hereof.
(c) Upon the approval of the corporate authorities to petition or institute proceedings with the department of registration and education of the state of
Illinois for the purpose of causing the department to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such department to any real estate
broker or real estate salesman found to have violated any provision of this chapter.
(d) In the case of any unlawful housing practice or violation of this chapter by any person in the course of performing under a contract or subcontract
with the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to
petition or institute proceedings with such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such contract or any portion thereof, either
absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provision of this chapter. (1986 Code)
(3) After receipt of the recommendation of the committee/commission, the corporate authorities may take such actions as are deemed appropriate,
including the procedures as in subsection (2)(b) of this section, as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-
1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
Sec. 9-25: LIMITATION ON TIME TO FILE COMPLAINTS.
Any complaint filed hereunder with the committee/commission must be filed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the alleged discriminatory practice
occurred or it shall be barred. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
ARTICLE VI. REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
Sec. 9-26: REMEDIES.
Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation or alleged violation of any provision of this chapter who has exhausted the remedies provided in
section 9-22 of this chapter, provided no public hearing has been commenced pursuant to section 9-23 of this chapter or who has exhausted the remedies
provided in sections 9-22 and 9-23 of this chapter and thirty (30) days have elapsed following the rendering by the committee/commission of its report and
recommendations to the corporate authorities; may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violations of alleged
violation, including: (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 05-1262, 12-5-2005; Ord. 06-1275, 2-21-2006)
(1) An order compelling compliance with this chapter;
(2) An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated any provision of this chapter from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing which is the subject of such violation;
(3) An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or
housing, by any person who, in violation of this chapter, refuses or fails to perform such contract;
(4) Compensatory damages; and
(5) Such other further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of violations hereof. (1986
Code)
Sec. 9-27: FINES.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-
1997)
Title Chapter 10
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND TREE PRESERVATION
Chapter 10
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND TREE PRESERVATION
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 116/377
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1: DEFINITIONS.
ANSI A300 STANDARDS. Voluntary industry standards written by the Accredited Standards Committee, whose mission is to develop consensus
performance standards based on current research and sound practice for writing specifications to manage trees, shrubs, and other woody plants. ANSI
A300 Standards are the generally accepted industry standards for tree care practices.
BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA. The area on the lot specified for the proposed construction activity. This shall include the entire area needed for building,
storage and grading activities.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PLAN. The construction activity plan is part of the tree inventory plan and indicates the building activity area and the area of
tree preservation. The plan also indicates methods used to prevent the destruction of or damage to trees.
DECIDUOUS. A plant with foliage that is shed at the end of the growing season.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh). Tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. Trees over eight inch (8")
caliper shall be measured at dbh.
FORESTER. The Village Forester shall be a person suitably trained or experienced in arboriculture or a similar field as appointed by the Village Manager.
INFECTED. The presence of a disease deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the presence of
circumstances that make it reasonable to believe that such a disease is present or the presence of any plant disease that is liable to spread to other
plants, trees or shrubs to the injury of such plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of humans or property. Examples of such nuisances include, but are not
limited to, Dutch elm disease, verticillium wilt and oak wilt. This definition does not apply to common native pests such as powdery mildew or apple scab.
INFESTED. The presence of a pest deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the presence of
circumstances that make it reasonable to believe that such a pest is present or the presence of any injurious insect or pest that is liable to spread to other
plants, trees or shrubs to the injury of such plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of humans or property. Examples of such nuisances include, but are not
limited to, Asian longhorn beetle and emerald ash borer. This definition does not apply to common native pests such as box elder bugs and carpenter ants.
MULTI-STEMMED TREES. Trees with two (2) or more main stems arising from or near ground level, growing from one root system. All stems of a multistemmed
tree shall be measured by adding all the stems dbh together.
MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Northfield, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
NATURALIZED LAND. Vegetative growth which was not expressly planted but rather established itself naturally.
ORNAMENTAL TREE. A tree less than thirty feet (30') tall at maturity, which is planted, for its ornamental or screening value.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area of minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance and developed as a unit under single ownership or
unified control, which includes one or more principal buildings or uses the development of which is controlled by the provisions in appendix A of this Code.
PREVIOUSLY LANDSCAPED AREA. Vegetative growth which was expressly planted.
PROTECTED TREE. Any tree specified in section 10-14 of this chapter.
PUBLIC/PARKWAY TREES. Includes all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street, parkway or Village property, regardless of
whether or not the tree was planted as part of the Village's resident tree planting program.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. See appendix A of this Code.
QUALITY TREE. A hardwood species of tree that is in good condition, form and health.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES. Any activity specified in section 10-14 of this chapter.
ROOT ZONE. A circular region measured outward from the tree trunk representing the essential area of the roots necessary for a tree's survival. The root
zone is one foot (1') of radial distance for every inch of tree dbh. The minimum root zone is eight feet (8').
SITE VISIBILITY TRIANGLES. A triangular area on the near and far side of nonresidential drives and intersections where plant material over thirty inches
(30") is not allowed so visibility is not impaired. (See illustration in section 10-25 of this chapter.)
TRANSITIONAL YARDS. The minimum land area established in appendix A of this Code used to buffer residential districts from nonresidential uses.
Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open spaces, free of buildings or other site improvements.
TREE INVENTORY PLAN. A plan illustrating protected trees and other landscape materials on the lot, a listing of the species, size and condition of each
tree, index of trees to be removed, tree preservation area, specifications for tree maintenance during construction, construction activity plan, specifications
for tree transplanting, and the tree replacement plan and schedule.
TREE PERMIT. A permit required for any regulated activity as listed in section 10-14 of this chapter.
TREE PRESERVATION AREA. The area of a development parcel that is not included in the building activity area that retains the maximum existing
protected trees on site during construction. In single-family residential uses, the protected area is the required front and side yard setbacks of each lot. For
nonresidential uses and multi-family, the protected area is the whole site.
TREE TOPPING. Is the practice of removing whole tops of trees or large branches and/or trunks from the tops of trees, leaving stubs or lateral branches
that are too small to assume the role of a terminal leader.
VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD SPECIFICATIONS FOR LANDSCAPE MATERIALS AND MAINTENANCE. A separate reference manual for all landscape
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 117/377
work done in the Village of Northfield and performed to specifications written in accordance with the most current version of the ANSI A300 Standards.
This manual is available in the Community Development/Building and Public Works Departments.
VOLUNTEER TREE. A tree which was not planted expressly but rather self-established itself naturally from a foreign area. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003;
amd. Ord. 09-1432, 10-20-2009; Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
Sec. 10-2: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE FORESTER.
Whenever this chapter refers to the Village Forester those duties shall be completed by the Village Forester or by an individual at the direction of the
Village Forester. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-2.1: MEASUREMENT AT DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT.
Whenever, in this chapter, measurement or caliper of a tree is referenced, whether for an existing tree or nursery stock, it shall mean diameter at breast
height (dbh). (Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE II. PRUNING AND/OR DAMAGE TO PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 10-3: DUTY TO PRUNE; TOPPING OF TREES PROHIBITED.
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property adjacent to any street containing trees and shrubs to prune them in such a
manner so that they do not obstruct or shade streetlights, passage of pedestrians, traffic signs, intersections or create a public safety hazard. Topping of
trees is prohibited. (Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
Sec. 10-4: NOTICE TO PRUNE.
Should any person(s) owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune any trees and/or shrubs as provided in section 10-3 of this chapter, the
Village Forester or designee may order such person or persons to do so. The pruning must be completed within seven (7) days of receipt of written notice
to do so. Any pruning order shall be sent to the current property owner by certified mail. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-5: NUISANCE DECLARED.
Vegetation growing or maintained in violation of this article shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with chapter 14 of this Code.
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-6: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC TREES.
Unless specifically authorized by the Village Forester, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, top, transplant, or remove any tree, stockpile soil,
attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other device to any public tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such
trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. (Ord. 03-1182,
12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
Sec. 10-7: ENFORCEMENT.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village Forester or designee while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this
chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the Municipality. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
ARTICLE III. PROTECTION OF PUBLIC TREES
Sec. 10-8: PROTECTION OF THE ROOT ZONE OF PUBLIC TREES.
Public trees near any construction activity shall be guarded with a fence, frame, or box not less than four feet (4') high and all building materials, dirt, or
other debris shall be kept outside the zone.
No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet (10') from any public tree without first obtaining a
written permit from the Village Forester. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-9: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR REMOVAL OF A PUBLIC TREE.
It shall be unlawful to remove any public tree without first obtaining a permit from the Village. Fees shall be as set forth in appendix D, article I of this Code.
(Ord. 04-1194, 3-16-2004)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 118/377
Sec. 10-10: REPLACEMENT OF PUBLIC TREES; PENALTY.
A. As a condition of obtaining a permit to remove a public tree, the permittee shall be required to replace the tree with a tree or trees equal to inches
measured dbh to the tree removed or in the alternative and in the Village's sole discretion pay a fee as set forth in appendix D of this Code. Any
replacement tree shall be a minimum of four inches (4") dbh. Replacement trees may be installed at the same location of the removed tree or an
alternate location within the Village as deemed acceptable by the Village Forester.
B. If any person removes, or damages a public tree per subsection 10-14B of this chapter, without a permit from the Village, that person shall be required
to replace the tree with a tree or trees equal to inches measured dbh to the tree removed or pay a fee as set forth in subsection A of this section. In
addition, the person shall be subject to a fine as set forth in appendix D of this Code. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE IV. DISEASED TREES
Sec. 10-11: DEAD/DISEASED TREES.
Any dead tree over eight feet (8') in height may be declared a nuisance and any tree over eight feet (8') in height contaminated with an infectious disease
or infested may be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with chapter 14 of this Code. (Ord. 09-1432, 10-20-2009)
Sec. 10-12: INSPECTIONS.
The Village Forester will conduct inspections of dead or diseased trees. Inspections will be done after giving notice of intent and purpose, to enter in or
upon any premises in the Village, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspecting such premises if the Village Forester has reasonable cause to
believe that the premises may contain infectious or infested trees. Prompt inspection and removal is necessary to protect against the rapid spread of
disease or insects. Specimens from any such tree may be collected for the purpose of determining whether such tree may serve as a breeding place for
infectious disease or infestations. If upon determination that such tree is infected, is dead or is substantially dead, the Village Forester shall declare such
tree to be a nuisance and shall proceed to abate said nuisance. Inspections may be done without notice in the event of an emergency such as when a tree
has become an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of any tornado, windstorm, flood or other natural disaster, or as a result of
interference with or possible hazard to power lines or other utilities. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 09-1432, 10-20-2009)
ARTICLE V. TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION
Sec. 10-13: PURPOSE.
It has been determined that trees and woodlands are an integral part of community life and an important public resource that enhances the quality of life
and the general welfare of the Village. Also, the Village of Northfield and its residents benefit by the protection of these community assets, which contribute
distinctive environmental, economic and aesthetic benefits such as:
(1) Environmental. Enhancement of air quality, mitigation of sound and noise pollution, improvement of water quality, groundwater retention and
reduction of soil erosion, reduction of stormwater runoff, and, providing for a nesting area for birds and other wildlife, which, in turn, assists in the
control of mosquitoes and other insects.
(2) Economic. Natural reduction in energy costs and the protection and enhancement of property values.
(3) Aesthetic. Screening and buffer treatments between land uses, provision of barriers between pedestrian and vehicular traffic, maintenance of the
natural and rural qualities established throughout the community, and building and maintaining a positive community image.
Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the trees in the Village and to ensure appropriate replacement or transplantation of trees.
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-14: SCOPE.
A. Regulated Activities. A regulated activity is one in which a tree permit is required and/or the activity could cause damage to trees:
(1) Subdivision of land.
(2) Removal or damage of any tree(s) on any multi-family residential property.
(3) Removal or damage of any tree(s) in the required front or side yard setback of any single-family residential district.
(4) Removal or damage of any tree on any nonresidential property.
(5) The removal or damage of any tree(s) on a single-family residential property where the use is nonresidential. (Ord. 04-1221, 10-19-2004)
B. Protected Trees. Trees located in areas listed below shall be protected during a regulated activity if they meet the size requirements (trees greater than
6 inch dbh on naturalized land and trees greater than 3 inch dbh in previously landscaped areas): (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-
2018)
(1) Trees in the public right-of-way.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 119/377
(2) All trees on a lot proposed for subdivision.
(3) All trees on a multi-family residential property.
(4) Tree(s) in the required front or side yard setback on any single-family residential property.
(5) All trees on any nonresidential property.
(6) All tree(s) on a single-family residential property where the use is nonresidential. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-15: TREE PERMIT PROCESS.
A. Application. Anyone engaging in a regulated activity shall submit a tree permit application to the Community Development and Building Department
accompanied by all the necessary information and exhibits, as set forth on the application. Fees shall be as set forth in appendix D, article I of this
Code. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1194, 3-16-2004)
B. Tree Inventory Plan.
(1) Any project involving a tree permit will require a tree inventory plan according to the following unless the Village Forester determines a survey is not
necessary:
(a) Single-family residential property shall be surveyed to determine the location and number of protected trees located in a required front and side
yard, and single-family residential with a nonsingle-family use shall be surveyed to determine the location and number of all protected trees on site.
(b) Multi-family residential and nonresidential property shall be surveyed to determine the location and number of protected trees on site.
(2) The Village encourages all petitioners to protect or transplant plant materials in existing landscape beds.
(3) The tree inventory plan shall contain the following information for single-family residential property:
(a) All existing and proposed structures, additions, drives, parking lots, walks, accessory structures and utilities.
(b) All setbacks and easements.
(c) Existing and proposed grades.
(d) The protected tree's (or groups of trees') location, size, condition and reason for proposed removal.
(e) Specifications for maintenance of trees to be preserved shall include: limb and root pruning, watering of trees, installation of retaining wall or
fence and augering of utility lines.
(f) Construction activity plan.
(g) Replacement plan and list.
(h) Specifications for tree transplanting. On site tree transplant locations and/or off site tree transplant locations.
(4) The tree inventory plan for multi-family residential property and nonresidential property, and single-family residential with a nonresidential use shall
be at the same scale as the site plan for the project and contain all the above information plus the following:
(a) Tree's identification number, which corresponds to the tree's number in the field, species, size and action to be taken.
(b) A data table listing the tree's tag number, species, size, height, and condition, proposed action to be taken and maintenance of trees during
construction. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(c) The tree's condition shall be provided in the data table according to the following hierarchy:
Excellent = 1, vigorous, no insect or disease damage, excellent form.
Good = 2, good form, little or no insect or disease damage.
Fair = 3, average condition and vigor, may have some injury, and may lack desirable form.
Poor = 4, state of decline, may require major repair.
Declining/diseased = 5, declining or has infectious disease or infestations, poor form.
Dead = 6. (Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
(d) Individually protected trees and/or groups of trees.
C. Construction Activity Plan.
(1) A construction activity plan shall be part of the tree inventory plan. This plan will consist of the building activity area and the area of tree
preservation as follows:
(a) Building Activity Area. The building activity area shall be the area of the subject property that is the smallest area reasonably needed to
undertake the proposed construction activity and shall include the entire area needed for building and grading activities. All buildings, structures,
storage areas and driveways shall be designated to result in the least amount of damage or removal of protected trees.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 120/377
(b) Tree Preservation Area. All land outside the building activity area and the root zone of individual trees to be preserved within the building activity
area, shall be protected with a four foot (4') highly visible fence secured to metal posts every six feet (6'). The fence shall be in place prior to the
issuance of construction permits and shall remain in place until fence removal is approved.
(2) During construction, all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the destruction or damage of trees (other than those specified to be removed) shall
be taken, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) The building activity area shall be separated from the tree preservation area as described above;
(b) No construction activity, movement and/or placement of equipment or material or spoils storage shall be permitted within the tree preservation
area. No soil, additional fill, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the root zone of any tree that is required to be preserved;
(c) No attachments, fences or wires, other than those approved for guying or wrapping, shall be attached to trees during construction.
(d) All utilities, including service lines, shall be staked on site with the utility color coded ribbons identifying the utility path. Augering of utilities under
trees will be required where the installation has the potential to damage protected trees. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
D. Tree Transplanting. Trees affected during construction may be transplanted elsewhere on the site or to an approved off site location. Transplant ability
shall be determined based on tree size, health, structure and species. The staging of the transplants and specifications will be required. Quality trees in
good condition under six inch (6") dbh will be required to be moved if they cannot be preserved in place. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718,
6-19-2018)
E. Tree Replacement Plan. All existing protected trees, tree replacements and transplants will be integrated into the landscape plan for the site. The tree
replacement formula will be the following:
(1) In areas where trees have been approved for removal the tree replacement shall be one inch (1") of new tree for every one inch (1") quality tree to
be removed. Nonquality trees will not be required to be replaced.
(2) The replacement formula for trees which have not been approved for removal will be two inches (2") of new tree for every one inch (1") damaged or
removed. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(3) In event there is not sufficient space within the site to accommodate the required replacement trees, the petitioner shall be required to provide a
cash contribution to the Village's tree planting program at the rate per inch dbh for replacement trees as set forth in appendix D of this Code. (Ord.
18-1718, 6-19-2018)
(4) Newly planted trees shall be guaranteed for a period of one year. If trees die during this time, the petitioner will be responsible for replacement.
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(5) All tree replacements shall be a minimum of three inches (3") dbh and the Village shall approve the species, location, and written time schedule for
installation. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
(6) All tree replacements shall be planted in accordance with the Village of Northfield Specifications for Landscape Materials and Maintenance Manual.
(7) The petitioner will be responsible for the care of newly planted trees for a period of one year. If the trees die during this time, the petitioner shall
replace the trees. (Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
Sec. 10-16: TREE REPLACEMENT EXEMPTIONS.
Removal or damage of protected trees shall not require tree replacement if the Village determines that any of the following circumstances exist:
(1) When a tree is categorized as an unhealthy or nonquality tree and appropriate for removal.
(2) When a tree, at the time of the inventory, due to natural causes, is dead or irreversibly declining, is in danger of falling, or interferes with any existing
or proposed public improvements, is in dangerous proximity to any structure, public utility lines or related facilities, creates unsafe vision clearance,
or constitutes a health hazard to persons, property or other trees when removal is necessary to observe good forestry practices. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-
2003)
Sec. 10-17: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE.
A. Approval. A tree permit shall be issued when the Village has determined the petitioner has complied with all the terms, conditions and obligations of
this chapter.
B. Denial. If the petitioner has not complied with all the terms, conditions and obligations of this chapter, the application will be denied.
C. Appeals. The property owner may appeal in writing to the Architectural Commission any decision made by the Village with respect to this chapter within
thirty (30) days.
D. Stop Work Order. If the petitioner is not in compliance with the terms, conditions and obligations of this chapter, a stop work order may be issued by
the Village until such time as the petitioner complies with this chapter and/or takes corrective action to mitigate any damage done to protected trees.
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-18: PENALTY FEES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 121/377
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with appendix D of this Code. Additionally, should the Village
incur costs to abate a violation, the costs shall be assessed against the property owner. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
ARTICLE VI. LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW
Sec. 10-19: PURPOSE.
These landscaping and screening requirements are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing development which will protect and enhance property values
and preserve the appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the community. Specifically, these regulations are intended to increase the
compatibility of adjacent uses by requiring a buffer or screen between uses to minimize the harmful impact of noise, dust and other debris, motor vehicle
headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by adjoining or nearby uses. (Ord. 03-
1182, 12-2-2003)
The Village of Northfield Specifications for Landscape Materials and Maintenance Manual is the reference for all landscape work, including tree planting
and care, done in the Village of Northfield and performed to specifications written in accordance with the most current version of the ANSI A300
Standards. (Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
Sec. 10-20: APPLICABILITY.
Parkway, perimeter, foundation, parking lot, signage, landscaping and refuse area screening shall be required as provided in this article, or as otherwise
specified and approved in the required landscape plan.
(1) Landscape plans are required on public and private land whenever an application is submitted for Architectural Commission review, tree permit with
tree replacements, special use permit, planned unit development, or development activity involving a change to the building footprint, parking lot,
ground signage, refuse area or the amount of trees on the property.
(2) Landscape plans are not required for single-family residential property unless the plan is part of a tree permit application with tree replacements, or
the plan is for a residential planned unit development or subdivision. Plans for individual single-family homes are not subject to Architectural
Commission review. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-21: PLANT MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
A. All nursery stock shall be locally grown in a licensed nursery. Plants shall meet all requirements of Federal, State and local law with respect to plant
type, labeling, nursery or plant inspection, disease, insect and other pest infestation. Plants shall be high quality nursery grown stock.
B. All nursery stock shall comply with the provisions set forth by the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60 or most current.
C. The selection of plants to be used in the design of landscape plans; including parkway trees shall be approved by the Village.
D. Plants shall be in a healthy, vigorous condition, free of dead or broken branches, scars, frost cracks, abraded bark, rubbing branches, two (2) leaders or
any other aberrations of any kind.
E. Plantings shall be installed in accord with the practices and procedures recommended by the American Nurserymen's Association. All trees will be
balled and burlapped. Shrubs may be balled and burlapped or container grown.
F. Landscaping and screening shall be completely installed prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
G. Minimum planting sizes shall be as follows:
Shade trees 3 inch dbh
Ornamental trees 6 foot height unless true dwarf species
Evergreen trees 6 foot height
Deciduous shrubs 2 foot height
Evergreen shrubs 2 foot height
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
H. The Village may approve plant material substitutions if there is no reduction in the quality or quantity of plant material. All other changes to the plans are
subject to Architectural Commission approval. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-22: REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 122/377
A. Parkway Landscaping. Parkway landscaping shall be required for all developments in accordance with the provisions of this section (see illustration in
section 10-25 of this chapter). (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(1) Trees. Parkway trees shall have a minimum trunk size of three inch (3") dbh. The minimum branch height shall be six feet (6'). Parkway tree
species shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
(2) Number And Spacing. The number of parkway trees required shall be one tree for each thirty feet (30') of property frontage along a public street.
Parkway trees shall be evenly spaced at not more than thirty feet (30') apart and not less than four feet (4') from the established sidewalk line of the
street, exclusive of widths of curb cuts.
(3) Location. For purposes of safe transportation and in order to protect new parkway trees, the trees must be planted no closer than the following
distances from street intersections, walks, drives and other structures in the parkway unless otherwise approved by the Village (see illustration in
section 10-25 of this chapter):
Structure Distance
Street intersection near side 50 feet
Street intersection far side 20 feet
Commercial drive/alley intersection near side 20 feet
Commercial drive/alley intersection far side 10 feet
Residential driveway 10 feet
Curb 4 feet
Building exits 5 feet
Fire hydrants 5 feet
Manholes/catch basins 5 feet
Streetlights 12 feet
B. Parking Lot Landscaping. All parking lots designed for ten (10) parking spaces or more shall provide landscaping in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(1) Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.
(a) A concrete curbed landscape island equal or greater in size than one parking stall, shall be located at the end of each row of parking, and
dispersed throughout the lot at a frequency of not less than one island for every fifteen (15) parking spaces in a row.
(b) Landscape islands shall be a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet in area and a minimum of eight feet (8') in width, as measured
from back of curb to back of curb. Corner islands may be counted toward internal planting requirements. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(c) One shade tree of a minimum of three inch (3") dbh shall be provided in each landscape island. In addition, every landscape island shall be
planted with shrubs, ornamental trees, ground cover or turf grass to a maximum height of thirty inches (30") at maturity. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003;
amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
(d) For visibility landscape island shrubs shall be no greater than thirty inches (30") in height and the branches of trees shall start no less than six
feet (6') above the pavement unless located in areas that do not affect driver visibility. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
(2) Parking Lots Abutting Public Right-Of-Way.
(a) Across From Residential Property. Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from property zoned for residential
use, a minimum seven foot (7') wide continuous landscape strip shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the dedicated right-ofway,
exclusive of driveways and be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3'). Such screening shall consist of shrubs, ornamental trees or
berming, which through their arrangement along with any landforms or walls create the desired screen. In addition, a three inch (3") dbh shade
tree shall be provided every thirty feet (30') unless there are conflicts with existing parkway trees. The trees may be clustered or spaced linearly.
(b) Across From Nonresidential Property. Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from property zoned for
nonresidential use, a minimum seven foot (7') wide continuous landscape strip shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the
dedicated right-of-way, exclusive of driveways and fifty percent (50%) of the landscape strip shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet
(3'). Such landscaping shall consist of shrubs or ornamental trees, which through their arrangement along with any landforms create the desired
screen. A three inch (3") dbh shade tree shall be provided for every thirty feet (30') unless there are conflicts with existing parkway trees. These
trees may be clustered or spaced linearly.
(3) Parking Lots Abutting Rear And Interior Side Yards.
(a) Abutting Residential Property. Where a parking lot abuts a property zoned for residential use, a solid wood fence, wall, or comparable screen
shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the property line to a minimum height of six feet (6'). Adjacent to this fence, a seven foot
(7') wide continuous landscape strip shall be provided and screened to a minimum height of three feet (3'). Such screening shall consist of shrubs,
ornamental trees or berming, which through their arrangement along with any landforms or walls create the desired screen. A three inch (3") dbh
shade tree shall be provided every thirty feet (30').
(b) Abutting Nonresidential Property. Where a parking lot abuts a property zoned for nonresidential use, a seven foot (7') wide landscape strip
shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the dedicated right-of-way, exclusive of driveways and fifty percent (50%) of the
landscape strip shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3'). In addition, a three inch (3") dbh shade tree shall be provided every fifty
feet (50'). (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1718, 6-19-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 123/377
C. Transitional Yard Landscaping. These yards are landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvement. Transitional yards shall be
provided by all nonresidential uses, along all property lines adjacent residentially zoned parcels. The following chart lists the transitional yard width and
vegetation required for each zoning district including nonresidential uses in residential districts:
Use Width Proposed Vegetation
VC 20 feet 1 shade tree per 20 linear feet and 4 foot continuous hedge or fence
NC 10 feet 1 shade tree per 20 linear feet and 4 foot continuous hedge or fence
B-1 20 feet 1 shade tree per 20 linear feet and 5 foot continuous hedge or fence
O/R 20 feet 1 shade tree per 15 linear feet and 5 foot continuous hedge or fence
M-1 25 feet 1 shade tree per 10 linear feet and 8 foot fence
Nonresidential use in a residential district 10 feet 1 shade tree per 30 linear feet and 4 foot continuous hedge or fence
Existing vegetation may be used to meet all or some of the transitional yard requirements. The landscape design may include areas where trees and
shrubs are clustered or spaced linearly as long as the desired screen is achieved and the minimum quantity of required plant material is provided.
Evergreen and ornamental trees may be substituted for shade trees.
If there are differences in the required amount of proposed vegetation and/or the required transition/buffer width within this chapter, the stricter
requirements shall apply.
D. Additional Screening.
(1) Service Drives. All service drives, not used for parking, shall be screened by a six foot (6') board on board fence when they are adjacent to a
residential area.
(2) Refuse Areas. All refuse disposal and grease storage containers shall be screened on all sides by a solid commercial grade wood fence, masonry
wall, or equivalent material to a height of six feet (6'). The enclosure shall be used strictly for the confinement of refuse and grease containers and
shall not be used for outside storage of any other materials or equipment. Single-family homes are exempt from screening requirements.
(3) Sport Courts. A sport court shall be screened with shrubs along all sides facing adjacent properties. The shrubs need not provide a complete
visual barrier but shall provide at least a fifty percent (50%) screening for adjacent lots. A sport court that is enclosed with a solid wood or equivalent
screen shall not be required to provide additional landscaping.
(4) Gas/Service Stations. Gas stations shall be screened in accordance with chapter 11, "Businesses, Trades And Occupations", of this Code.
(5) Recreational Equipment Storage. Recreational equipment parked or stored shall be screened in accordance with chapter 13, "Motor Vehicles,
Trailers And Traffic Control", of this Code.
(6) Tennis Courts. Tennis courts shall be screened in accordance with chapter 18, "Appurtenant Structures", of this Code. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 10-23: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
All landscape plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Community Development and Building Department. Submittals shall be made in
accordance with the forms provided by the department and must be accompanied by all necessary information and exhibits. Fees shall be as set forth in
appendix D, article I of this Code. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1194, 3-16-2004)
ARTICLE VII. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
Sec. 10-24: PENALTY.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with appendix D of this Code. Additionally,
should the Village incur costs to abate a violation, the costs shall be assessed against the property owner. (Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
ARTICLE VIII. ILLUSTRATIONS AND FIGURES
Sec. 10-25: ILLUSTRATIONS.
A. Site Visibility Triangle Illustration.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 124/377
B. Parking Lot Landscaping Illustration.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 125/377
C. Minimum Planting Distance Illustration.
(Ord. 03-1182, 12-2-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 126/377
Title Chapter 11
BUSINESSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 11
BUSINESSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS
Sec. 11-1: APPLICATIONS.
Unless otherwise provided in this code, applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made in writing to the village clerk or his
designate. Any reference to the village clerk hereunder shall be deemed to apply also to his designate. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid. Each application shall contain such
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials in issuing of the permit or license. No permit or license shall be
issued until the applicant shall have furnished all information requested by any village official and until there is compliance with all other provisions of this
code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-2: FORMS.
Forms for all licenses and permits, and all applications therefor, may be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-3: SIGNATURES.
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the village president. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-4: INVESTIGATIONS.
Where this code or other ordinance of the village necessitates an inspection or investigation before a permit or license is issued, the person to whom an
application is made shall refer such application to the proper officer who shall commence such investigation or inspection within ninety six (96) hours of the
time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, in writing, within twenty one
(21) days after receiving the application. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-5: FEES.
In the absence of a provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance to the village clerk at the time of
application. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 01-1094, 12-3-2001)
Sec. 11-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSES.
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 of each year unless otherwise provided by this code or other regulations. The village clerk shall send
to all licensees of the village a notice of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual one, on the first day of the month during
which it expires. The fees for such renewal license shall be paid before the expiration of the existing license. However, a failure to send out such notice, or
the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from obtaining a new license; nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating
without a license. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES.
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, nor shall any permit be issued if the premises and building to be used do not fully comply with
the requirements of this code and other ordinances of the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR OWNERSHIP.
The license for any business or occupation or other licensable act may not be transferred to another location without the approval of the village manager or
other appropriate authority unless there is a provision in this code to the contrary. (1986 Code)
All business licenses are personal and limited to the applicant. Upon change in or transfer of ownership the business license shall terminate. The new
owner shall be responsible to secure a new license as set forth in this code. For purposes of this section, change in ownership shall be deemed to have
occurred when the business license applicant holds less than a fifty one percent (51%) ownership interest in the business. (Ord. 03-1170, 9-16-2003)
Sec. 11-9: NUISANCES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 127/377
No business, whether licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance pursuant to any other provisions of this code or any
state law. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-10: INSPECTION.
Whenever inspection is required for a premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation, or is reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any code or ordinance provision, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be
inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making such inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is authorized or directed to make such
inspections at any reasonable time.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any code or ordinance provision, it shall be the
duty of the licensee whose business is governed by such provision, to give any authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same, sufficient
samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
Every keeper of a shop, store, or place, who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles, or things of value which may have been lost or stolen
or alleged to have been lost or stolen shall, upon demand, produce such goods, articles, or things to any policeman for examination. Every such licensee
shall keep a complete inventory of all goods, including the dates on which the goods were bought and sold and the person from whom the goods were
obtained. This shall be available for inspection by the village at any time and shall be kept for a minimum of five (5) years. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-11: REVOCATION.
In addition to any fine or other penalty which may be provided, the village president, after receiving a written report from the village manager, may, after
written notice to the licensee, revoke the license of any person: 1) where such person or employee refuses to permit any officer or employee of the village
to inspect or to take samples for inspection purposes or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
inspection or taking such sample; or 2) for any other violation of this or any other ordinance of the village of Northfield or any law of the state of Illinois. The
licensee may then request a hearing before the village president or his designate to show cause why the license should not be suspended. The hearing
shall be conducted within seventy two (72) hours of said request. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-12: POSTING LICENSE.
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep the license posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the
premises used for such business. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. SPECIFIC AREAS OF REGULATION
Division I - Amusements
Sec. 11-13: GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Definition. "Amusement" as used in this section shall mean and include all public shows, theatricals, musicals, dances, concerts, movies, circuses,
carnivals, exhibitions, arcades, pool or billiard halls, bowling alleys, video establishments, and similar places offering public entertainment for which an
admission or use fee is charged. (Ord. 500, 4-28-1987)
(2) Licenses. It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement without having first secured a license. No such license shall be issued to any
person who has been convicted of a felony or is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. No license shall be issued
to any corporation of which an officer or person owning more than five percent (5%) of the total stock in the corporation has been convicted of a felony
or other offense involving moral turpitude or is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. Application for such licenses
shall be made to the village clerk on forms provided by the village clerk. The application shall set forth the names and addresses of the applicant or if a
corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers and registered agents thereof and their addresses and the address of the premises where
the amusement is to be held or maintained.
(3) Applications.
(a) An applicant for a permit for a billiard or pool hall, bowling alley, circus, carnival, movie theater or arcade shall state the following in writing, signed
by the applicant, if an individual, or if a corporation by a duly authorized agent thereof, verified by oath or affidavit:
1. The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof; and, in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the state of incorporation, if a foreign corporation, whether
or not it is authorized to do business in Illinois under the Illinois business corporation act, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if the majority and interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees,
the name and address of such person;
2. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 128/377
3. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued;
4. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such permit;
5. A statement whether applicant has ever made similar application for a similar other permit on the same or other premises and the disposition of
such application;
6. A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a permit by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state or the ordinances of this village;
7. Whether a previous permit by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has ever been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
(b) Further, no such permit shall be issued to:
1. A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
2. A person who has previously had a permit issued by the village or the state revoked for cause;
3. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any permit issued under this division, would not be eligible for such permit upon a first
application;
4. A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a permit;
5. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a permit under this division for any reason other than citizenship and residence
within the political subdivision;
6. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation act
to transact business in the state;
7. A person whose amusement place is to be conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent would also qualify for a license;
8. A person who does not own the premises for which a permit is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the permit is
to be issued;
9. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3, the "criminal code of 1961",
approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or is prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
10. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;
11. A copartnership to which a federal gaming device or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period;
12. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the
stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period;
13. Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current
tax period.
(c) In the case of an arcade, both the person owning or leasing the premises and the owner of the machines must qualify for a permit.
(4) Special Use Permit. Unless excepted by article XII, section 4 of the village of Northfield zoning ordinance (appendix A to this code) or by subsection
(5) of this section, no license for an establishment specified in section 11-13, subsection (1) of this article shall be issued by the village clerk without the
applicant first having obtained a special use permit.
(5) Temporary Amusements. If any amusement is to be of a temporary nature, that is of a duration of less than fourteen (14) days, no special use permit
shall be required. Application for such temporary amusement shall be made to the village manager who shall have the right to approve or disapprove
the application. The village manager may require such information as is necessary to determine whether the applicant is of good character and
reputation and whether the proposed temporary amusement would endanger in any manner the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
village. The village manager shall consider, among other things, the extent to which vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be disrupted on account of the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 129/377
proposed temporary amusement. The applicant shall have a right to appeal the decision of the village manager to the corporate authorities of the
village, provided that the application was made at least forty five (45) days in advance of the first date for which the license is sought. (1986 Code)
(6) Fee. The fee to be charged for a license to present or operate an amusement under this article shall be as prescribed in appendix D to this code. This
fee shall not be applicable to a not-for-profit organization meeting the following requirements:
(a) The organization or a chapter of the organization has a bona fide physical presence at a street address within the corporate limits of the village; and
(b) The organization is qualified pursuant to section 501(C)3 or 501(C)4 of the U.S. internal revenue code. (Ord. 96-874, 4-22-1996)
(7) Breaches Of The Peace. It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote
any riot, breach of the peace, or public disturbance. The police department of the village shall have the authority to disband the audience for any
amusement or the users of any amusement devices if a breach of the peace is threatened.
(8) Inspections. The chief of police and the chief of the fire prevention bureau or other designees of the village manager shall have the right to inspect
every amusement to ensure compliance with all codes and regulations of the village.
(9) Trespass. Any person who is told to leave a licensed premises by the management and fails to do so shall be deemed to be trespassing on private
property which is hereby prohibited and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-13 of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-14: BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS AND BOWLING ALLEYS, HOURS OF OPERATION.
No person shall keep such a billiard hall, pool hall or bowling alley open for business between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any day. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-15: CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS.
(1) Who May Obtain A License. No person shall conduct or operate a carnival or circus in the village unless proof is first provided that the circus or
carnival is being held for the benefit of a school, charity, religious, civic or municipal organization. Approval of a license for a circus or carnival may be
granted by the corporate authorities pursuant to this code and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-54.1-3.
(2) Sideshows And Concessions. Sideshows and concessions shall be separately licensed and the fee shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this
code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-16: ARCADES.
(1) Definition. An arcade shall include, but not be limited to, any place in which one or more coin operated or noncoin operated amusement devices are
maintained for use by the public and shall also include any premises whose use as an arcade is secondary to another primary use.
(2) Definition Of Coin Operated Amusement Device. The term "coin operated amusement device" as used in this division means any amusement
machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of
which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines which have no gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include
jukeboxes or similar musical devices.
(3) Premises Where Permitted. No license shall be issued for arcades or for coin operated amusement devices except for the following establishments:
(a) Bowling alleys with special use permit for arcades. (1986 Code)
(b) Establishments holding an F classification liquor license with a special use permit for arcades. (Ord. 11-1496, 9-20-2011)
(4) Number Of Devices. The number of devices permitted in any arcade shall be as specified in the special use permit. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-16.1: VIDEO ESTABLISHMENTS.
(1) Definitions.
COIN OPERATED VIDEO DEVICE. As used in this division means any machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, credit card,
token or similar object for the purpose of purchasing or renting a videocassette or videotape.
VIDEO ESTABLISHMENT. Shall include premises in which the primary business is the retail sale or rental of videocassettes or videotapes.
VIDEOCASSETTE OR VIDEOTAPE. A recording of a television program, motion picture or other show or performance on a magnetic tape intended
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 130/377
for public or private viewing. (Ord. 500, 4-28-1987; amd. Ord. 98-949, 10-26-1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
(2) Special Use Permit. No license for an establishment specified in subsection (1) of this section shall be issued by the village clerk without the applicant
first having obtained a special use permit pursuant to the requirements of appendix A, article XVI of this code. (Ord. 500, 4-28-1987; amd. Ord. 98-949,
10-26-1998, eff. 1-1-1999; Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003)
Division II - Dog Kennels, Catteries And Pet Shops
(Rep. by Ord. 03-1183, 12-2-2003)
Division III - Mercantile Establishments
Sec. 11-21: CIGARS, TOBACCO AND CIGARETTE DEALERS.
A. License Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the retail sale of cigars, tobacco or cigarettes without having first obtained a license therefor.
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk. The requirements of subsections 11-13(2) and (3) of this article are applicable to all
applications for licenses required herein. The chief of police shall investigate each application required herein. (Ord. 02-1117, 6-17-2002)
B. Fee. The annual fee for such a license shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code.
C. Sanitation. The premises or building or vending machine used for the purpose of the sale of cigars, tobacco or cigarettes must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. The village manager may designate a person to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section.
D. Sale To Minors. It shall be unlawful to sell or give cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or for the owner of any premises on which
such vending machines are located to permit such person to operate such vending machine.
E. Drugs. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any cigar or cigarette containing any harmful drugs or controlled substance as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes other than tobacco. (1986 Code)
Division IV - Food Establishment Licenses
Sec. 11-22: HEALTH AND SANITATION STANDARDS.
Every food store, food service establishment, temporary food service establishment, food vending machine and food delivery vehicle shall be governed by
the regulations set forth in chapter 8, article III of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-23: LICENSES.
Each person keeping, maintaining, or operating a food store, food service establishment or temporary food service establishment in the village, and each
owner or operator of a food delivery vehicle or food vending machine, shall on or before January 1 of each year, exhibit to the village clerk a current valid
permit, issued by the health officer as provided in chapter 8, article III of this code, and shall pay to the village clerk for each such establishment or
privilege, a license fee in the amount prescribed in appendix D of this code, whereupon a license shall be issued to such person. However, the owner or
operator of a food delivery vehicle with a permit from another municipality of this state may provide the village clerk with proof of permit from such other
municipality in lieu of such permit from the health officer of the village of Northfield. (1986 Code)
Division V - Service Occupations
Sec. 11-24: AUCTIONEERS.
A. License Required. No person other than a licensed auctioneer shall sell at public or private auction within the village any real or personal property of
any kind whatsoever (except under and by virtue of legal process). (1986 Code)
B. Approval Of License And Fee. A person may be licensed to sell real and personal property at auction, at a place to be named in his license, upon
approval by the village manager of his application therefor. The applicant shall execute a surety bond or other bond satisfactory to the village manager,
in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). An auctioneer's one hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) bond will be held for sixty
(60) days following the auction. If no claims have arisen against the auctioneer for the event for which the bond is held, the auctioneer may make a
written request to the village manager for the return of the bond. The license fee shall be in the amount prescribed in appendix D of this code. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 02-1131, 12-3-2002)
C. Revocation. Licenses to auctioneers shall be subject to revocation by the village manager whenever it appears to him that the party so licensed has
violated any provision of this section or of any ordinance of the village relating to auctions or auction sales, or any condition of the aforesaid bond.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 131/377
D. Noise. No bellman or crier, nor any musical instrument, nor any show signal or means of attracting attention of the public, other than a sign or flag, shall
be employed or suffered or permitted to be used at or near any place of such auction sale.
E. Descriptions. It shall be the duty of every auctioneer who shall offer for sale real or personal property of any kind whatsoever to have affixed thereto a
sign, tag, or label bearing a true statement of the character, quality, and description of the property offered for sale, and to announce to the persons
present, before proceeding to sell same, the character, quality, and description of the property offered for sale.
F. Return Of Goods. The purchaser at an auction sale of any article of goods, wares, and merchandise shall have the right to return it to the auctioneer at
any time within five (5) days from the date of sale if the article is not of the quality represented to him, and the auctioneer shall return to the purchaser
the price of the article.
G. Substitutions. No auctioneer shall exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article and induce its purchase by any bidder and afterward substitute any
article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder.
H. Representations. No auctioneer or person being present when real or personal property is offered for sale shall knowingly, with intent to induce any
person or persons to purchase the same or any part thereof, make any false representation or statement as to the ownership, character, or quality of
the property so offered for sale, or as to the poverty or circumstances of the owner or alleged owner of such property.
I. Bidding. No auctioneer shall procure any person to make a fictitious bid at any auction sale of real or personal property, or conspire with any person or
persons to make a fictitious bid at any such auction sale, or knowingly permit any person to make a fictitious bid at any such auction sale. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-25: BARBERSHOPS.
(1) License Required - Definition. No person shall operate a barbershop in the village without first having secured a license therefor. No license shall be
issued to any person who has not obtained a certificate of registration as required by the laws of this state. For purposes of this section, any
commercial establishment or premises in which men's hair is cut, washed or styled shall be deemed a barbershop.
(2) Fee. The annual fee for a barbershop license shall be as prescribed in appendix D to this code.
(3) Sanitation And Inspection. Premises used as a barbershop shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be subject to inspection by
the health officer in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be established by law.
(4) Safety. Premises used as a barbershop shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall be inspected at least once every six (6) months by the fire
prevention bureau. All such establishments shall conform to all safety provisions of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-26: HOUSE MOVERS.
(1) Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of moving or raising buildings in the village without having first obtained a permit
therefor.
(2) Bond. Each building mover or raiser shall file a bond before moving or raising any building in the village, that shall protect and insure the village
against loss or damage to its property and to save the village harmless from any loss, damage or liability resulting from the moving or raising of any
building or the conduct of business of such mover or raiser in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the village
manager.
(3) Permits. Building movers or raisers shall file with the village clerk applications for, and shall secure the necessary permit for raising any building or
moving any building on or over any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place. Applications must be filed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
proposed move.
(4) Fees. The permit fee for moving any building over any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way shall be as prescribed in appendix D to this
code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-27: LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS.
(1) License Required. No person shall operate or conduct a laundry or dry cleaning establishment in the village without having first secured a license
therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk, and shall state thereon the location to be occupied, the vehicles to
be operated, and such other information as may be required by the village authorities.
(2) Fee. The annual fee for a laundry or dry cleaning license shall be as prescribed in appendix D to this code.
(3) Sanitation. Premises used for a laundry or dry cleaner must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to
accumulate on such premises; and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice, and vermin. It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with
a venereal or any other contagious disease in a laundry or dry cleaning establishment, or for any person afflicted with such disease to work in or about
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 132/377
such premises.
(4) Inspections. Each laundry or dry cleaning establishment shall be subject to the following inspections at least once every six (6) months: a) the health
officer may require any person employed in a laundry or dry cleaning establishment upon reasonable cause to believe the person is infected with a
contagious disease to submit to a medical examination or produce a certificate from a reputable physician showing that the provisions of this section
are being complied with; b) the fire prevention bureau who shall assure that all establishments conform to all safety provisions of this code and it shall
be unlawful for any such establishment not to be in conformity with all requirements of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-28: AUTO RENTAL AGENCY, LICENSE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business of renting motor vehicles or any trailing devices unless he shall have obtained a rental vehicle
agent's license as provided in this chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-29: RENTAL VEHICLE AGENCY, DEFINITION.
The words "rental vehicle agency" as used in this article shall be held to mean and are hereby defined as meaning any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of keeping or maintaining any kind of motor vehicle or trailing device for rental or lease to the general public or to any other
person, firm or corporation. This shall apply to such agencies in the village of Northfield whether the vehicles are actually kept in the village of Northfield or
outside the village of Northfield so long as the business is conducted within the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-30: RENTAL VEHICLE AGENCY, LICENSE.
Each rental vehicle agent seeking a license as such shall file written application with the village clerk. No license shall be granted without the approval of
the village president and such license may be granted only if consistent with the village zoning ordinance. The business license shall be in addition to
whatever vehicle licenses are required by other provisions of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-31: RENTAL VEHICLE AGENCY, FEE.
The annual fee for operating a rental vehicle agency shall be as provided in appendix D to this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-32: RENTAL VEHICLE AGENCY, REGULATIONS.
(1) All vehicles must be kept in an orderly manner, provided that none are parked in a place that is not paved;
(2) No servicing of such vehicles may be done except in a building or structure that is completely enclosed. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-33: AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS, DEFINITION.
The words "automobile repair shop" as used in this article shall be held to mean and are hereby defined as meaning: 1) any building or structure or
enclosure within the village in which work or services are performed on any automobile, motor self-propelled vehicle, such work consisting of the replacing
of or adding to or repairing parts of such vehicles, including frames, wheels, bodies, tops or any other parts, or the painting or refinishing of such vehicles;
and 2) when such establishment does not also dispense petroleum products to the general public. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-34: AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS, LOCATION.
New automobile repair shops may be located only in an M-1 zoning district. Gasoline service stations in operation as of October 31, 1994, located in the
village center district may have automobile repair as a primary use subject to increased landscaping requirements, signage review by the architectural
commission and such other reasonable conditions as may be deemed necessary by the village. The change to allow such service stations to have
automobile repair as a primary use will require an amendment to the special use permit issued for the station. (Ord. 97-907, 7-21-1997)
Sec. 11-35: AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS, LICENSE.
Every person seeking an automobile repair shop license shall file written application with the village clerk. No license shall be granted without the approval
of the village president, and no license for an automobile repair shop as hereinabove defined shall be granted until and unless provision has been made
therefor in the zoning ordinance of this Village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-36: AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS, FEE.
The annual fee for operating an automobile repair shop shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this Code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-37: AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS, INSPECTION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 133/377
(1) Any police officer shall be permitted at any time to view every car stored or kept in any automobile shop, and it shall be unlawful to hinder such
inspection or to conceal any automobile from such inspection.
(2) Every automobile repair shop shall comply with all fire prevention regulations of this Code, and it shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to make, or
cause to be made, inspections at least every six (6) months of all automobile repair shops and to enforce the regulations prescribed herein. (1986
Code)
Sec. 11-38: PUBLIC GARAGES, DEFINITION, PROHIBITED.
A public garage is any building or premises used or held out or advertised to the public by the owner or person occupying or maintaining the same for the
sale, storage or parking of automobiles or other motor vehicles except motorcycles. No public garages shall be located within the corporation limits of the
Village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-38.1: HANDGUN AND AUTOMATIC WEAPON DEALERS PROHIBITED.
(Rep. by Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-39: PENALTIES.
In addition to any other remedies available to the Village, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this division shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
Division VI - Sewer Cleaners, Electrical Contractors, And Heating And Refrigeration
Contractors
Sec. 11-40: SEWER, CATCH BASIN AND SEPTIC SYSTEM CLEANERS.
(1) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to engage in the business of cleaning, collecting, or transporting the contents
of catch basins, sewers or septic tanks or like refuse without first obtaining a license from the Village Clerk. Provided, however, that plumbers or sewer
builders who may clean catch basins or sewers incident to other services shall not be required to obtain such license.
(2) Fee. The license fee shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this Code.
(3) Summary Revocation. Any license so granted may be suspended upon written notice by the Village Manager, whenever it appears to him that the
licensee has violated the provisions of this section or is conducting said business in violation of any other local, State or Federal law or regulation.
(4) Storage Of Materials. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of cleaning catch basins, sewers and septic systems or transporting
the contents thereof, to place, store, keep, or maintain any trucks, wagons, barrels, receptacles, vessels, or utensils used in connection with such
business within the Village, unless kept inside a building which shall be subject to monthly inspection by the Village Health Officer.
(5) Vehicles. The contents taken from catch basins and sewers in cleaning and repairing the same shall not be permitted to remain in any receptacle,
wagon, or vehicle used to transport and remove such contents. The same shall be disposed of at a place to be designated by the health authority or
the ordinances of the Village. No such receptacle or vehicle containing such material shall be permitted to be stored overnight on any premises within
the limits of the Village and such storage shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. All substances taken from catch basins and
sewers shall be conveyed to the place of disposal in tightly covered, watertight, impermeable receptacles. All vehicles, receptacles, and utensils used
in connection with such business when not in use shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-41: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
(1) Registration Required. No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without having first obtained a certificate of registration therefor
as herein required. Applications for such certificates shall be made to the village clerk.
(2) Fee. The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code.
(3) Definition. The term "electrical contractor" as used in this section is hereby defined as and shall be construed to mean any person, firm, or corporation
engaged in the business of installing or altering electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power not including radio
apparatus or equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce
commission for the use in their operation as public utilities. A separate certificate shall not be required for each employee of an electrical contractor.
(4) Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of this section to install any electrical equipment without strict
compliance with the ordinances relating to such fixtures; and it shall be unlawful for any person to do any such work without having obtained such
permits as may be required.
(5) Out Of Town Contractors. Out of town contractors shall obtain permits according to the following provisions: (1986 Code)
(a) Any electrical contractor who is registered as such in any other municipality of this state shall not be required to register or to pay a registration fee
in this village. Every person registered in any other city or village in the state shall produce for inspection by the community development director or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 134/377
his/her designate his certificate issued by such other city or village before doing business in this village. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(b) If any contractor does not have a current permit from any other municipality, he must obtain one before doing any work in this village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-42: HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, AND REFRIGERATION CONTRACTORS.
(1) Registration Required. No person shall engage in the business of heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration contracting without having first obtained a
certificate of registration therefor as herein required. Applications for such certificates shall be made to the village clerk.
(2) Fee. The annual fee for registering as a heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration contractor shall be as presented in appendix D of this code.
(3) Definitions.
AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM. Any air conditioning unit designed to cool the atmosphere of any building or rooms therein, which unit has a rated
heat removal capacity in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) BTU per hour; and also any unit, regardless of size or rating, that is installed in such
manner that it projects from a building where pedestrian traffic will pass below it.
HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, AND REFRIGERATION CONTRACTOR.
(a) Any person engaged in the business of installing, altering, or servicing, heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration systems;
(b) Any private nongovernmental utility if such utility installs heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration systems.
The term "heating, air conditioning, and refrigeration contractor" does not include:
(a) Any private or municipally owned public utility that supplies fuel and services and repairs heating or air conditioning appliances or equipment in
connection with or as part of their business of supplying the fuel used in such appliances or equipment; or
(b) Any liquefied petroleum gas dealer; or
(c) Any electrical contractor registered or licensed as such under the provisions of this code.
HEATING SYSTEMS. Any heating unit intended to warm the atmosphere of any building or rooms therein.
REFRIGERATING SYSTEM. Any refrigerating unit other than an "air conditioning system" as defined in this section, which is used as an aid to any
commercial enterprise but does not include a refrigerating unit used for family household purposes.
(4) Regulations. In order to provide for the safe design, construction, installation, alteration, inspection, and maintenance of heating, air conditioning,
or refrigeration systems specified in this section, each license holder must conform and adhere to all of the specifications and restrictions relating to
such installations as set forth in appendix C of this code.
(5) Out of Town Contractors. Out of town contractors shall obtain permits according to the following provisions: (1986 Code)
(a) Any heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration contractor who is registered as such in any other municipality of this state shall not be required to
register or to pay a registration fee in this village. Every person registered in any other city or village in the state shall produce for inspection by the
community development director or his/her designate his certificate issued by such other city or village before doing business in this village. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(b) If any contractor does not have a current permit from any other municipality, he must obtain one before doing any work in this village. (1986
Code)
Division VII - Taxicabs
Sec. 11-43: TAXICABS, DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, whenever used in this section, shall respectively be deemed to mean:
OPERATOR. Any person operating or in actual physical control of a taxicab in the village.
OWNER. Every person having the use or control of one or more taxicabs as herein defined.
TAXICAB. All public vehicles driven by mechanical power used for carriage of persons for hire, except those commonly known as buses, and including
limousines and other livery vehicles.
TAXIMETER. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of the taxicab is mechanically calculated either for distance traveled or for
waiting time or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated thereon. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 493, 3-24-1987)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 135/377
Sec. 11-44: TAXICABS, REASONABLY SAFE AND ADEQUATE SERVICE REQUIRED.
Every taxicab owner providing service within the village is required to furnish safe and adequate service at just and reasonable rates within the village as
may be required to assure adequate accommodations to the public in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, twenty
four (24) hour on call service. All operators shall have an adequate knowledge of the roadways of the area. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-45: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
The chief of police shall have power to appoint from the police department such inspectors as he may deem necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-46: TAXICAB STANDS.
(1) No public streets, avenues, or alleys of the village or the private driveways of any railroad company shall be used as a station or stand for the carrying
on of the taxicab business except at places to be designated by the corporate authorities.
(2) Each taxicab station or stand so designated shall be prominently marked by signs erected under the supervision of the chief of police. It shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab in any taxicab station or stand. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-47: LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall maintain a taxicab stand or station for the carrying on of the taxicab business within the village without first obtaining a license for each
taxicab from the village clerk. Taxicabs from a business address outside of the village may pick up and drop off passengers within the village, provided that
the vehicles are appropriately licensed and inspected by another public entity and provided that the vehicle is in compliance with all provisions of this
division with respect to the condition and method of operation of the vehicle and the taxicab service. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-48: PASSENGERS.
It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab; provided, such person is not
intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly manner. No taxicab shall carry more than five (5) adults, not including the operator, or more than four (4)
adults and two (2) children, not including the operator. Neither shall an operator carry any passenger other than the person first employing the taxicab,
except upon consent of such first passenger. Neither shall any person, other than the driver and the passenger(s) being conveyed, occupy any taxicab
while the taxicab is carrying passengers. The driver shall take his passenger(s) to the requested destination by the most direct available route from the
place where the passenger(s) enters the cab. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-49: APPLICATIONS.
All applications for licenses shall be made to the village clerk by the owner thereof or his agent, and shall give the following information:
(1) The names and addresses of all owners and operators, including all partners, general, limited, or inactive; or if a corporation, the names of all officers
and majority stockholders and if a subsidiary, the name of the parent corporation.
(2) Proof of liability insurance in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per event for personal injury, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
property damage.
(3) Record of any felony conviction.
(4) Record of any unpaid judgment or claim against applicant.
(5) Amount and type of experience of applicant in the taxicab business.
(6) Class of vehicle to be licensed.
(7) Passenger capacity of such vehicle.
(8) Length of time such vehicle has been in use. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-50: LICENSE ISSUANCE.
No license shall be issued to:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 136/377
(1) A person who has been convicted of a felony;
(2) One who cannot furnish proof of the required bond or insurance;
(3) One who, in the reasonable discretion of the village manager, has such an outstanding claim or claims against him that his financial condition would be
rendered unstable;
(4) One who fails to provide all information required by this code;
(5) One whose vehicle or vehicles, in the reasonable discretion of the chief of police, are not fit for the use of village residents, either by reason of
uncleanliness, poor mechanical condition, or otherwise;
(6) Any corporation if any officer or majority stockholder thereof would be ineligible as a license holder. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-51: USE OF SIMILAR NAME AND COLOR PROHIBITED.
No license shall be issued to any person having the same business name or whose taxicabs are of a similar color to that of any other taxicab already
licensed to operate within the corporate limits of the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-52: FEES.
The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be as prescribed in appendix D to this code, for each taxicab operated from a station or stand
within the village of Northfield. Whenever the number of cabs so operated shall be increased during the license year, the licensee shall notify the village
clerk of such change and shall pay the additional fee. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-53: TAGS.
The village clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of cabs covered by each license required by this division and such tag or sticker shall
be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab put in service to replace one withdrawn from service. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-54: LICENSEE TO REPORT CERTAIN INFORMATION TO VILLAGE CLERK.
The licensee shall notify the village clerk of the motor number and state license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding tag or sticker
number, as well as the number on the municipal vehicle license issued for such taxicab. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-55: REGISTER TO BE KEPT.
The village clerk and the chief of police shall keep a register of the name and address of each person owning or operating a vehicle licensed under the
provisions of this division, together with the license number and description, make, and necessary dimensions of such vehicle, with the date and complete
record of inspections made of it. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-56: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE, REISSUANCE.
Licenses granted under the provisions of this division shall be subject to revocation or suspension at any time by the village manager for violating any of
the provisions of this code or of state or federal law, or if it shall have been determined that such taxicab is not in good condition for operating or is unclean
or unsightly. Licenses, when so revoked or suspended, shall not be reissued until the cause for such revocation shall have been removed to the
satisfaction of the village manager. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-57: ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE.
Upon abandonment of taxicab service by an owner or operator and after five (5) days' written notice to the owner or operator, the village manager may
revoke the license of such owner or operator. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-58: FARES.
(1) Posting. There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab in a conspicuous place and in such manner that the same may be conveniently and easily
read by any person riding in such taxicab, a card upon which shall be printed in plain legible type, the prevailing rates of fare.
(2) Receipts. Any taxicab passenger paying a fare shall upon request be given a receipt showing the amount paid.
(3) Fare To Be Paid. It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of the trip. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 137/377
Division VIII - Solicitors
Sec. 11-59: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Areas intended to provide a variety of retail, service, industrial, professional or office uses.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Any person who, either individually or through the person's organization, has obtained a valid certificate of registration.
RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING. Any one or more of the following activities when no prior appointment, agreed to by the occupant of the premises, has been made:
(1) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description for any kind of
consideration.
(2) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind, or character.
(3) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, or any other type or kind of publication.
(4) Seeking to promulgate information or to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any
charitable or nonprofit association, organization or corporation registered or licensed as such by the state of Illinois or officially recognized as such in
the minutes of the board of trustees of the village of Northfield. (Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
Sec. 11-60: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
Every person or organization desiring to engage in "soliciting", pursuant to subsection (1), (2) or (3) of that term as defined in section 11-59 of this division,
and whose product is to be delivered at a later time, is required to make written application for a certificate of registration. No such person or organization
may solicit unless registered as set forth in this division. If the solicitor is an organization, only the person managing the solicitation effort in Northfield need
be named on the registration application. However, a list of all persons from the organization soliciting at residences in Northfield must be available upon
request of the chief of police. Persons "soliciting", pursuant to subsection (4) of that term as defined in section 11-59 of this division, are not required to,
but may, register. (Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
Sec. 11-61: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the chief of police of the village of Northfield and filed with the chief. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application:
(1) Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address, business address if other than residence address, and
social security number;
(2) Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of such
employment or representation;
(3) Period of time for which the certificate applies;
(4) Statement as to whether applicant or any member of the solicitation team has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the
state of Illinois or any other state or federal law. (Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
Sec. 11-62: THOSE NOT PERMITTED TO SOLICIT AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
No person who has been found guilty of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or federal law, within five (5)
years of the date of the application; or who has been found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this division, or whose certificate of registration
has previously been revoked may solicit in the village of Northfield.
If the holder of the certificate or any member of any soliciting organization violates any of the provisions of this division, the person and/or organization
shall immediately be disqualified from holding such certificate and the certificate of registration shall become null and void. If a solicitor who is not required
to obtain a certificate or any member of the solicitation organization violates any of the provisions of this division, the same disqualification shall apply.
(Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
The certificate of registration shall state on its face its expiration date. (Ord. 90-640, 7-25-1990; amd. Ord. 96-870, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 11-63: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITATION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 138/377
(1) Residential Solicitation. Residents of Northfield desiring to give notice to solicitors of permission to solicit or desiring to prohibit all solicitors from
soliciting shall do so by posting one of the following notices at the front or main entrance door:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN NORTHFIELD INVITED
or
SOLICITATION PROHIBITED
(2) Commercial Property Solicitation. Owners and tenants of commercial properties may give notice to registered solicitors of permission to solicit or
may prohibit all solicitors from solicitation only under the following conditions:
(a) An owner may post one of the following notices at each entrance to the building:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN NORTHFIELD INVITED
or
SOLICITATION PROHIBITED
(b) A tenant may post one of the following notices on the tenant's doorway only, stating:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN NORTHFIELD INVITED
or
SOLICITATION PROHIBITED
All notices shall be on placards or cover an area at least ten (10) square inches and all letters for all notices shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in
height. Cards available for such postings shall be available from the chief of police and the village hall.
The exhibition of such a card shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the premises of the occupant's
intention with respect to solicitors and shall also be sufficient to constitute notice for purposes of prosecuting any violators of this division. (Ord. 05-
1249, 7-19-2005)
Sec. 11-64: DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going into any premises in the municipality to first examine the notice provided for in section 11-63 of this
division. If any is attached, the solicitor shall be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If the notice states, "Only Solicitors Registered in
Northfield Invited", then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. If the
notice states, "Solicitation Prohibited", the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. (Ord. 05-1249, 7-
19-2005)
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any premises whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested
to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 96-870, 1-22-1996)
Upon request of any police officer of the village, each solicitor shall identify himself or herself by name and give the name of the organization and his or her
immediate supervisor. Failure to do so shall be cause for prohibiting that person from further solicitation in the village. (Ord. 90-640, 7-25-1990; amd. Ord.
05-1249, 7-19-2005)
A solicitor may not use a motor vehicle within the village for the purpose of demonstrating or displaying a product for sale, gift or premium. This prohibition
shall not apply to motor vehicles of the first or second class under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, which are otherwise lawfully used for the sale of snack
food items. (Ord. 91-690, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-65: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant of the premises and engaging in solicitation or to enter any private road or development where a "Solicitation Prohibited" sign is displayed at the
main vehicular entrance, or to enter any commercial property or office space where there is a notice exhibited on the premises in accordance with the
provisions of section 11-63 of this division. (Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
Sec. 11-66: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING RESIDENCES.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this division or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of any premises, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant for the purpose of engaging in soliciting at any residence prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any
weekday or Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. (Ord. 96-870, 1-22-1996)
Sec. 11-67: SEVERABILITY.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this division shall be held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect any of the other provisions of this division.
(Ord. 90-640, 7-25-1990; amd. Ord. 05-1249, 7-19-2005)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 139/377
Sec. 11-68: PENALTY.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this division shall be fined in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. Each solicitation of a
Northfield premises shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
Division IX - Gasoline Service Stations
Sec. 11-69: PURPOSE.
In order to maintain and enhance the current aesthetic character of the Village; and to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes,
vibration, dust, danger of fire and explosion, and traffic congestion which result from the unregulated construction and operation of gasoline service
stations; and with concern for the public safety in general, the following ordinance is established. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-70: NUMBER OF GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS PERMITTED.
No more than five (5) gasoline service stations shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the Village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-71: REVIEW OF PLANS.
Design, construction and aesthetic standards for all new gasoline service stations shall be subject to the review and approval of the Architectural
Commission, in addition to requiring a special use permit granted by the Corporate Authorities, following a joint public hearing before the Plan Commission
and Zoning Commission. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-72: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.
Gasoline service stations which are not currently in compliance with the terms of this division shall be required to comply according to the following
timetable and in conformity with the listed subsection:
(1) Ninety (90) days from the adoption of this division:
(a) Outdoor product displays, subsection 11-78B(1) of this division.
(b) Indoor sales area space and product, sale and display regulation, subsection 11-78B(2) of this division.
(c) Vending machine regulation, subsection 11-78B(3) of this division.
(d) Trash storage, subsection 11-78B(4) of this division.
(e) Outdoor parking, subsection 11-78B(5) of this division.
(f) Price signs, temporary window signs, self-service signs, Federal information signs, hours of operation signs, subsections 11-79(3) and (4) of this
division.
(2) Five (5) years from the adoption of this division:
(a) Outdoor surfaces, subsection 11-78B(7) of this division.
(3) One to ten (10) years (depending on age of sign) from the adoption of this division:
(a) Pole sign for company identification, subsection 11-79(1) of this division.
(b) Permanent wall sign, subsection 11-79(2) of this division.
(4) In addition to the requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section, all owners and operators of new gasoline service stations, as well as
owners and operators of gasoline service stations undergoing major alteration (if either 50 percent of the structure of the existing building is rebuilt or
an addition is made to the existing building which increases floor space, or the space covered by any roof or canopy, by 30 percent or more), shall
comply with the following requirements:
(a) Material, design and height restrictions, subsection 11-78A(1) of this division.
(b) Color, subsection 11-78A(2) of this division.
(c) Landscaping, subsection 11-78A(3) of this division.
(d) External lighting, subsection 11-78A(4) of this division.
(e) Canopies, subsection 11-78A(5) of this division.
(f) Driveways, subsection 11-78A(6) of this division.
(g) Storage tanks, subsection 11-78A(7) of this division. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-73: GASOLINE SERVICE STATION, DEFINITION, USAGES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 140/377
The words "gasoline service station" as used in this code are hereby defined to mean any premises utilized for the dispensing, sale or offer for sale of
automobile fuels and oils. All gasoline service stations shall be a special use, may only be used for the purpose set forth in this division and may sell only
those products set forth herein. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-74: NEW GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS AND ALTERATION OF EXISTING GASOLINE STATIONS.
All gasoline service stations erected after the effective date of this code shall be erected in full compliance with this division. Any alteration of a gasoline
service station existing on the effective date of this division shall be accomplished in conformity with these provisions and are also subject to article XVI of
the Northfield zoning ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, gasoline service stations and their construction, use or alteration must conform
to this code. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 11-75: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONFORMITY TO THIS CHAPTER.
The owner and operator of the station, the owner of the property upon which the business is located, and in the case of a franchise, or similar
arrangement, the company granting the franchise shall all be subject to the provisions of this code, including requirements for the abatement of nuisances.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 11-76: LOCATION AND AREA STANDARDS FOR NEW GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
New gasoline service stations erected after the adoption of this division shall be located only in the village center zoning district. A new gasoline service
station shall be located on a lot having a frontage along a dedicated roadway of not less than one hundred forty feet (140'), and having a minimum area of
not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No new gasoline service station shall be located nearer than five hundred feet (500') to the property
line of any private or public school. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-77: USE STANDARDS.
The following functions shall be permitted on a gasoline service station premises: (1986 Code)
(1) The storage and dispensing of petroleum products for automobiles and other products related to automobile repair and maintenance. (Ord. 520, 9-
22-1987)
(2) The repair and maintenance of automobiles. All lubrication equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be located entirely within the building. Body
repair work or equipment, and coin operated vehicle maintenance equipment other than air pumps are prohibited. All repair work must be performed
inside the bay area except that minor repair work may be performed on not more than two (2) automobiles at one time in the area immediately
outside of and adjacent to the inside bays. Minor repair may include changing of tires, replacement of hoses, belts and batteries, and similar
equipment. (Ord. 89-596, 6-27-1989)
(3) The sale of products not related to automobile repair and maintenance as set forth in subsections 11-78B(2) and B(3) of this division. (1986 Code)
(4) No use or function not specified in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section of any kind including, but not limited to, the sale or advertising for sale of
automobiles shall be permitted on a gasoline service station premises, except as otherwise may be included in the special use permit. The following
shall be the criteria for adding a product for sale to the special use permit:
(a) Whether the sale of such product(s) will constitute a risk to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(b) Whether the sale of such product(s) will unreasonably detract from the primary use of the site as a gasoline service station.
(c) Whether the sale of such product(s) will impede the flow of traffic either on or off premises.
(d) Whether the site has the capability to handle any additional parking that may be required by the sale of the product(s).
Any product added to the special use permit shall be sold in a manner which complies in all respects with subsection 11-78B(2) of this division regarding
customer sales office area. Only perishable food items permitted to be sold in subsection 11-78B(2) of this division shall be sold. (Ord. 520, 9-22-1987)
Sec. 11-78: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS; APPLICATION THEREOF.
A. Standards Applicable To New Service Stations And Those Undergoing Major Alteration.
(1) All buildings, building materials and accessory structures shall be designed to be compatible with neighboring structures in the village of Northfield.
No gasoline service station building shall contain more than one story, and the building may be no higher than twenty five feet (25') at its highest
point.
(2) The use of color on the building and accessory structures shall be for the sole purpose of enhancing the aesthetic quality of the premises and shall
be consistent with neighboring structures. Such use of color shall not be used for the purpose of calling attention to an oil company or any other
company or product. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 141/377
Business identity, either by awnings, accent bands, paint or other applied color schemes, signage, parapet details, or materials shall not be the
dominant architectural feature. (Ord. 14-1596, 6-17-2014)
(3) A comprehensive landscaping plan, showing caliper and species of trees, height and species of shrubbery, natural ground cover and other features,
shall be submitted to the architectural commission for approval as part of the special use application. Buffer zone planting shall be designated,
arranged and maintained so that, within two (2) years of planting, such buffer shall form a complete screen of not less than six feet (6') in height.
Where a gasoline service station abuts a residential zoning district, a buffer of a six foot (6') fence of natural wood or masonry, or a six foot (6')
planting screen or both as designated by the architectural commission, shall be used. Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area shall be
devoted to unpaved, easily maintained areas containing live plantings. All natural plantings serving a buffering function shall be continuously
maintained and replaced by the owner/operator. Any plant which either dies or loses more than fifty percent (50%) of its branches or foliage must be
replaced within thirty (30) days, weather permitting.
(4) All external lighting fixtures shall be designed and located so that light sources are not visible to the general public and direct light rays are confined
to the gas station premises. All electrical services shall be installed underground.
(5) Canopies, if any, shall be constructed in accordance with a special use permit. Permits shall be granted according to the following standards:
(a) All designs must be reviewed by the architectural commission.
(b) The canopy shall be an integral part of the overall design of the premises.
(c) The canopy may not impede the flow of traffic either on or off the premises.
(d) The architectural commission, as part of the review process, may require modification of the existing building to make it consistent with the
proposed design of the canopy.
(6) All driveways providing access to or from the street shall be approved by the plan, zoning, and architectural commissions and shall be located at
least twenty feet (20') from any intersection or other driveway.
(7) All storage tanks shall be underground, and access thereto by tanker trucks during filling shall not interfere with or obstruct off premises traffic.
(8) All gasoline pumps shall be located on concrete islands raised not less than five inches (5") above the grade of the paved area immediately
adjacent to the island.
(9) Concrete shall be required within ten feet (10') of all pump islands and on all garage floors.
B. Standards Applicable To All Stations (Existing And New).
(1) No outdoor displays for products shall be permitted with the exception of two (2) outdoor display and storage racks for automobile products other
than tires; such racks shall be located on or adjacent to a pump island or adjacent to the customer sales office but not on top of the gasoline pump.
The display shall be compatible with surrounding structures, contain no advertising and not interfere with visibility from traffic in or passing by the
gasoline service station. Each rack shall be no larger than twelve (12) cubic feet in volume.
Additionally, two (2) tire racks, not longer than ten feet (10') in length and each supporting not more than one row of tires, shall be permitted. Said tire
racks shall contain no information or advertising except that each individual tire may have attached to it an individual tag specifying the price, brand
and specifications of the tire. (1986 Code)
(2) It is the intent of this section that a gasoline service station shall not take on the character of "minimarket", a small grocery store or a convenience
store.
(a) Only the following nonautomotive products may be offered for sale:
1. Nonalcoholic beverages, food items, tobacco, health, personal, beauty and household products.
2. Products generally related to motor vehicle driving convenience or use.
3. Promotional items or premiums offered for sale on a temporary basis, but not for longer than sixty (60) days.
(b) The offering for sale of any nonautomotive product must conform to the following criteria:
1. Nonautomotive products may not be displayed or stored outdoors with the exception of the ice or beverage vending machine described in
subsection B(3) of this section. The customer sales office shall be no more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. The customer
sales office shall be used for the storage (including vending machines and refrigeration units), display and sale of nonautomotive and automotive
products. Products for sale must be capable of being displayed and sold in a manner consistent with the regulations of this division.
2. Nonautomotive products shall not detract from the gasoline service station's primary function as a provider of gasoline and/or automotive
service. (Ord. 14-1596, 6-17-2014)
(3) No vending machine, including refrigeration units, shall contain signs other than those which are an integral part of the machine and state the
product dispensed by the machine. Only one of either a nonilluminated ice vending or beverage vending machine may be located outside the
building. All other vending machines and refrigeration units must be located inside the building.
(4) All trash storage areas shall be fully shielded from public view. Closed containers shall be provided for all refuse. All combustible materials must be
separately stored in closed containers with tightfitting lids. If the trash storage area is not located inside a building, it must be contained within a
fenced area. Any liquid runoff from a gasoline service station shall be contained on the premises and disposed of lawfully. One trash container may
be placed on each pump island. This container shall contain no advertising. (1986 Code)
(5) To ensure adequate parking, a minimum of three (3) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each repair bay and one off street parking space
shall be provided for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of customer sales office area. In the event that a gasoline service station does not have
repair bays, then one off street parking space shall be provided for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross square footage of the building.
No vehicle may be stored more than forty eight (48) hours in an outside area not screened by a buffer zone of natural plantings or fencing as
provided in subsection A(3) of this section or as set forth in the special use permit. No vehicle, except for station owned vehicles used in normal
operation of the station, may remain on the premises for more than ninety (90) consecutive days, even if so screened. (Ord. 14-1596, 6-17-2014)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 142/377
(6) The number of gasoline pumps shall be as set forth in the special use permit. An existing station may not increase the number of pumps without
seeking an amendment to the special use permit to do so.
(7) The remainder of the lot, excluding the area occupied by the fully screened storage areas as specified in subsection B(5) of this section or the
designated landscaped areas, shall be sustained with concrete or a plant mixed bituminous material. The lot shall be constructed so as to prevent
stagnant pooling of gasoline and other volatile or toxic liquids on the premises. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-79: SIGNS AND DISPLAYS.
A. Permitted Signs. The following signs and displays and no others shall be permitted on a gasoline service station premises:
(1) One pole sign used for oil company identification, not to exceed sixteen feet (16') in height and sixteen (16) square feet in area. The sign may be
double faced if the distance between the faces is less than twelve inches (12"). The sign may be internally illuminated. The special use permit may
designate an existing pole sign as a nonconforming use.
(2) One permanent wall sign not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area. Such sign shall contain only the station name or oil company logo and
may not project more than six inches (6") from the face of the wall. No wall sign may be painted on the building.
(3) One nonilluminated price sign, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, containing the prices of not more than three (3) fuels. Such sign may
be double faced provided the distance between the faces is not greater than twelve inches (12"). Such sign may be placed on the pole which bears
the oil company's identifying insignia if such a pole is used. Otherwise, its location shall be designated in the special use permit. If a price sign frame
or standard remains unused for more than ten (10) consecutive days, it shall be immediately removed or become subject to a penalty as set forth in
section 1-13 of this code for each day of nonuse. If the area of a price sign is less than sixteen (16) square feet, the amount that it is less than
sixteen (16) square feet may be used for the station's permanent pole or wall sign. This amount shall be in addition to the maximum area for such
signs specified in subsections A(1) and A(2) of this section.
(4) In addition to the signs permitted in subsections A(1) through A(3) of this section, the following are permitted provided that the following signs shall
contain no other information whatsoever:
(a) Reasonable, self-serve/full serve identification designed for the sole purpose of notifying customers of the location of the respective service
island.
(b) Federally required and safety information shall be located on or adjacent to the pump or as required by law.
(c) One sign designating hours of operation not to exceed three (3) square feet.
(d) One sign designating the ownership of the station not to exceed three (3) square feet.
(e) One sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet designating the location of an air pump.
(5) The village of Northfield sign ordinance (chapter 12 of this code) shall be applicable to all gasoline service stations except to the extent that it may
conflict with this division, in which instance this division shall control.
(a) The amortization period for each nonconforming permanent wall or permanent ground sign shall be determined by subtracting the number of
years during which the sign has been displayed from the number ten (10). If the sign has been displayed ten (10) or more years, the period of
amortization shall be one year.
(b) The amortization period for a nonconforming price sign, window sign or self-serve/full serve sign shall be ninety (90) days from the date of
passage of this division.
(6) Nothing in the foregoing shall prohibit signs advertising temporary promotions of products or services subject to the following:
(a) Said signs shall not be displayed for longer than three (3) weeks.
(b) The total sign square footage shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet. Balloons, streamers, pennants, figures are not permitted.
(c) No more than two (2) such promotions shall be conducted at any gasoline service station in any twelve (12) month period.
(d) The village reserves the right to regulate any such promotions with respect to safety. (Ord. 14-1596, 6-17-2014)
B. Prohibited Signs. The following signs and displays are expressly prohibited on a gasoline service station premises:
(1) Use of supergraphics, which include a sign, with or without text, applied to the building facade as an adhesive or by other methods and not
otherwise permitted by this code, shall be prohibited.
(2) No video screens or audio devices shall be permitted on gasoline pumps. (Ord. 14-1599, 8-19-2014)
Sec. 11-79.1: AUTOMATIC CAR WASH FACILITIES.
(1) A single stall automatic drive-through car wash facility may be permitted in conjunction with a gasoline service station subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The site on which a car wash facility is located must contain not less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. This site must be under a single
ownership.
(b) There must be an unobstructed portion of the driveway at least two hundred (200) linear feet by ten feet (10') wide dedicated to automobiles waiting
to use the car wash facility.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 143/377
(c) Vacuuming machines may be permitted only upon a showing that its use will not interfere with the movement of other vehicles using the station and
that all precautions are taken to reduce the noise to the lowest level possible.
(d) There must be a designated on site area for persons wishing to park a vehicle and hand dry it after the car wash. This area may not interfere with
ingress and egress to the gas station site or the car wash facility. This area shall contain at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet for each
automobile capable of being washed at any one time.
(e) Prior to installing the car wash facility, the owner must submit a plan to the village for preventing water from leaving the actual car wash facility. This
plan shall be subject to review and approval by the village.
(f) All drive surfaces on the site which may be used for egress upon exiting the car wash facility shall be provided with rumble strips and automatic
heating devices for a reasonable length which operate when the drive surface falls below thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and which are capable
of keeping ice from forming down to ten degrees Fahrenheit (10°).
(g) The facility must be equipped with an approved water recycling system.
(h) Such facility shall not operate between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(i) At such time as the chief of police or a person acting in his stead, in his sole discretion, believes that weather conditions are such that the continued
operation of the facility constitutes a hazard to the safety of persons operating motor vehicles upon adjacent roadways, the chief of police or a person
acting in his stead may order it closed until such hazard is over. Under no circumstances shall the facility be operated when the temperature falls
below ten degrees Fahrenheit (10°F).
(j) The petitioner must demonstrate that the noise level of the proposed equipment is as low as state of the art equipment will permit. At any time during
the existence of the special use permit the corporate authorities may require, upon a showing that noise levels are sufficient to disturb a reasonable
person on adjacent properties, that the facility operate only when its doors are closed.
(k) At such time as the chief of police or person acting in his stead, in his sole discretion believes that intensive use of the facility is causing a traffic
hazard on adjacent roadways, he may order the facility closed until such hazard is removed. An order of closing under these circumstances may not
extend beyond four (4) consecutive hours. Under no circumstances may an employee of the facility or any other person not designated by the village
be permitted to direct traffic onto or off of adjacent roadways.
(l) There shall always be at least two (2) service station attendants on duty when the car wash is in operation, with a minimum of one of the attendants
specifically trained in the operation of the car wash.
(m) No portion of any car wash facility shall be located within twenty feet (20') of any property line and within sixty feet (60') of any roadway. (Ord. 89-
596, 6-27-1989)
Sec. 11-79.2: VIOLATIONS.
Any violation of a special use permit for an automatic car wash facility shall subject the owner or operator to an administrative fee and penalty as set forth
in appendix D, article III of this Code. A separate fee shall be assessed for each day that the violation continues. The determination shall be made solely
by the Village Manager. If the owner or operator disputes the determination of a violation, he shall notify the Village of the dispute in writing within seven
(7) days of notice of the determination of violation and the Village Manager shall cause a citation for the violation to be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook
County. Upon the finding that a violation occurred, a fine shall be assessed in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-
1997)
Sec. 11-80: SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.
A. All structures shall be kept in good repair and all areas shall be kept entirely free of litter. No gasoline, oil, grease or flammable liquid shall be allowed to
accumulate on floor or drive areas or to flow into or be placed in the sewer system. Sawdust or other combustible materials shall not be used to absorb
oil, grease or gasoline.
B. As a precaution to safeguard persons from potential hazards, an employee of the gas station must be on the premises when the dispensing of fuel
takes place.
C. When a station is temporarily out of service, the following precautions shall be immediately taken: 1) the fill line, gauge opening, and pump section shall
be capped and secured against tampering; 2) all electrical equipment involving the dispenser and pump shall be disconnected from the main
distribution panel; and 3) the main vent line shall remain open.
D. Gasoline service stations shall adhere to all rules and regulations of the following Fire Codes:
(1) National Fire Prevention Code, 1976 edition article 16.
(2) Flammable and Combustible Liquids, the National Fire Protection Association 30, 1981 edition.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 144/377
(3) Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, the National Fire Protection Association 101, 1976 edition.
(4) Life Safety Code, as adopted by the Village.
(5) Gasoline and Volatile Oils, 1977, State of Illinois, Division of Fire Prevention.
E. Representatives of the Village Fire Department, Building Department, Electrical Department and Health Department shall be permitted on the premises
to conduct inspections at any reasonable hour. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-81: ABANDONMENT.
A. Any gasoline service station determined by the Community Development Director or his/her designate to be abandoned shall be deemed a public
nuisance which adversely affects surrounding property values and the public safety and welfare. A gasoline service station shall be considered
abandoned if it is not operated for at least three hundred (300) hours in any sixty (60) day time period. Whenever the Community Development Director
or his/her designate shall determine that any service station is abandoned, he shall immediately so notify, either in person or by certified mail, the
owner or operator of the premises and issue an order of abatement that must be complied with within ninety (90) days. A nuisance caused by
abandonment may be abated only as follows: (Ord. 520, 9-22-1987; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(1) Placing the station back in operation for a minimum of six (6) hours per day, six (6) days per week.
(2) Razing all structures in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association sections B-4-1 and B-4-2 and all ordinances of the Village. After
razing, the entire lot must be sodded as soon as weather permits.
(3) Making an appropriate application for a change in use of the premises to a permitted or special use. If the proposed use is approved, the owner
shall then have a definite time period, as specified by the Corporate Authorities, to commence operation of the proposed use. If the new use is not
commenced within such time period, the nuisance shall be immediately abated under subsection A(1) or A(2) of this section. If the proposed use is
disapproved, the owner shall do one of the following within ninety (90) days:
(a) Apply for another proposed use.
(b) Abate the nuisance under subsection A(1) or A(2) of this section.
The village shall not be required to consider more than three (3) proposed uses.
B. Upon failure of the owner to abate the nuisance, the village may abate said nuisance pursuant to the nuisance abatement provisions of this code1. (Ord.
520, 9-22-1987)
Sec. 11-82: PERMIT PROCEDURES.
A. All persons seeking to own or operate a gasoline service station shall apply for a special use permit pursuant to article XVI of the village zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986; amd. Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003)
B. Along with the application, the petitioner must submit to the community development director or his/her designate thirty (30) copies of each of the
following: (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(1) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of all structures and other improvements, including buildings, driveways, the location of
entrance and exit ways, pedestrian walks, the location, size and brightness of all lights, landscaped areas, fences, walls, clearly marked off street
parking areas, trash storage areas, oil rack, vending machines, ice machine, pump service islands, utility services and drainage.
(2) A separate landscaping plan drawn to scale, showing the location, varieties and sizes of trees, plant materials and other pertinent landscape
features to be utilized on the site, pursuant to subsection 11-78A(3) of this division.
(3) Architectural drawings to scale, including complete floor plan layout, elevations and distances to property lines of the proposed structures and other
improvements as they will appear upon completion of construction.
(4) Specifications and samples of the type, color and texture of all fencing materials and exterior surfaces of proposed structures, including roofing,
glass and walls.
(5) A detailed sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size, design, color and method of illumination of all proposed signs, in compliance with
section 11-79 of this division. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986)
C. Whenever the community development director or his/her designate receives an application for a special use permit for a gasoline service station, he
shall examine the plans, specifications and other data submitted to him. At such time as the plans, specifications and other data are complete and the
community development director or his/her designate determines that the proposed gasoline service station as built would comply with the rules and
regulations of this division and other laws and ordinances of the village, a public hearing shall be scheduled before a joint session of the plan
commission, zoning commission and architectural commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in the village zoning ordinance, appendix A, article
XVI and chapter 4, sections 4-18 through 4-38 of this code. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-83: APPEALS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 145/377
The applicant may appeal the following decisions of the community development director or his/her designate to the architectural commission:
(1) The community development director or his/her designate's refusal to schedule a public hearing before the plan commission, zoning commission
and architectural commission because of noncompliance with subsection 11-82C of this division. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-
1999)
(2) A determination that an amortization period for compliance under any part of this ordinance has expired, and immediate conformity to this division is
required.
(3) A determination that the premises constitutes a nuisance pursuant to section 11-78 of this division. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986)
All appeals from a determination of the community development director or his/her designate shall be brought within sixty (60) days of the determination
except for appeals from determinations of a nuisance which must be brought within seven (7) days. All determinations by the architectural commission on
appeals shall be final. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-84: ZONING STATUS OF GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS IN EXISTENCE ON THE DATE OF THE ADOPTION OF THIS
DIVISION IX.
Subject to the following provisions, this division shall not cause any gasoline service station which was a permitted use or a special use under prior
ordinances to become a nonconforming use. However:
A. Each operating gasoline service station in existence when this division becomes effective shall apply for, and if no amendments are requested, be
granted a special use permit under this division with a waiver of fee.
B. No gasoline service station building or premises in existence on the date of the adoption of this division shall be expanded or added to without first
applying for and receiving an amendment to the special use permit. Variations may be granted as set forth in the village zoning ordinance.
C. If a gasoline service station is damaged by fire, flood, and or other calamity or act of God and was not in full compliance with this division as it would
apply to new gasoline service stations, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) If the extent of the damage is less than fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value and less than fifty percent (50%) of the bulk of the building, it may
be restored and its previous occupancy or use resumed, provided such restoration is started within six (6) months of the occurrence and completed
within one year and further provided that all restoration is done in compliance with this division and all other codes and ordinances of the village.
(2) If the extent of the damage is more than fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value or more than fifty percent (50%) of the bulk of the building, no
restoration shall be done unless the entire premises including all structures conforms to this division. The location and area standards of section 11-
76 of this division shall not apply to damaged gasoline service stations subject to restoration under this subsection C. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986)
Sec. 11-85: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this
ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the corporate authorities without the incorporation in this ordinance of such unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord. 489, 12-16-1986)
Division X - Newspaper Vending Machines
Sec. 11-86: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this division, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
DISTRIBUTOR. The person responsible for placing and maintaining a newspaper vending machine in a public right of way.
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINE(S). Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for
the display and sale of newspapers or other news periodicals.
NUDITY. The showing with less than a fully opaque covering of the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus or anal region of any person,
other than a child under the age of puberty, or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person, other than a child under the
age of puberty, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PARKWAY. The area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and
property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL. Any pictorial material depicting human sexual intercourse, human or animal masturbation, bestiality, excretory
functions, homosexual acts, direct physical stimulation or touching of unclothed genitals or pubic areas of the human male or female, flagellation or torture
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 146/377
by or upon a person in the context of a sexual relationship or sexual stimulation. The material shall be judged without regard to any covering which may be
affixed or printed over the material in order to obscure genital areas in a depiction otherwise falling within the definition of these subsections. Works of art
or of anthropological significance are not included within this definition.
SIDEWALK. Any surface provided primarily for the use of pedestrians.
STREET. All that area dedicated to public use for public street purpose and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
(Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-87: PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, in the village
any newspaper vending machines without first having obtained a permit from the village specifying the exact location of such machine(s). One permit may
be issued to include any number of newspaper vending machines and shall be signed by the applicant. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-88: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Application for a newspaper vending machine(s) shall be made upon a form provided by the community development director or his/her designate of the
village and filed with such community development director or his/her designate. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application: (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(1) Name and address of present place of residence.
(2) Specific location of proposed newspaper vending machine(s).
(3) As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the village officers, directors,
and employees against any loss or liability of damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by
any person as the result of the installation, use or maintenance of a newspaper vending machine(s) within the village.
(4) Every applicant for a permit for a newspaper vending machine(s) which will be located on a public right of way shall file with the village a copy of liability
insurance covering all damage or injury that might be caused by the newspaper vending machine(s), issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state. The limits of liability shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage and personal injuries. The village,
its officers, agents, and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. Such policy shall be maintained in force throughout the life of the permit.
If at any time the policy shall not be in full force, the permit shall become null and void.
(5) Application shall be signed by the applicant. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
(6) Also such additional information as the community development director or his/her designate may deem necessary to process the application. (Ord.
482, 10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newspaper vending machine(s) without prior inspection of the location of such newspaper vending
machine(s) and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned solely upon observance of the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 482, 10-
28-1986)
Sec. 11-89: FEES.
The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code, for each vendor or distributor that erects, places,
maintains, or operates, on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, one or more newspaper vending machines in the village.
Whenever the number of newspaper vending machines so erected, placed, maintained or operated shall be increased during the license year, the licensee
shall notify the community development director or his/her designate of such change. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-90: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION.
Any newspaper vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
(1) No single-newspaper vending machine shall exceed fifty inches (50") in height, twenty seven inches (27") in width, or twenty inches (20") in depth. No
double-newspaper vending machine shall exceed sixty inches (60") in height, twenty four inches (24") in width, or twenty inches (20") in depth.
(2) No writing or advertising may be displayed on any newspaper vending machine except for the name and price of the newspaper, instructions for its
use, and information to report malfunction of such machine.
(3) Each newspaper vending machine shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate
refund in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 147/377
(4) Each newspaper vending machine shall have affixed to it in readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newspaper vending machine a
notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone number to call during normal business hours
to report a malfunction of the coin return mechanism. Such notice shall not exceed one square foot in size.
(5) Each newspaper vending machine shall be dark brown in color.
(6) Each newspaper vending machine shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newspaper vending machine shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
(b) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(c) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon.
(d) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discoloration.
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any publication or material in newspaper vending machines which exposes to public view
any pictorial material which depicts or appears to depict nudity or offensive sexually explicit material. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-91: LOCATION AND PLACEMENT OF NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES.
Any newspaper vending machine which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a public right of way or which projects onto, into, or over any
part of a public right of way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this section:
(1) No newspaper vending machine shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which
rests, wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
(2) No newspaper vending machine shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance
endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other
governmental use, or when such newspaper vending machine unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including
any legally marked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or
signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near said location.
(3) No newspaper vending machine shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right of way, except to other
newspaper vending machines.
(4) Newspaper vending machines shall be placed next to each other, provided that no group of single-newspaper vending machines shall extend for a
distance of more than seven feet (7'), and no group of double-newspaper or combination single and double-newspaper vending machines shall extend for
a distance of more than four feet (4').
(5) No newspaper vending machines shall be placed, installed, used or maintained on any public right of way:
(a) Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.
(b) Within twelve feet (12') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(c) Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.
(d) Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
(e) Within three feet (3') ahead or fifteen feet (15') to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.
(f) Within three feet (3') of the outer end of any bus bench.
(g) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet (6').
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 148/377
(h) Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(i) Within a five hundred foot (500') radius of any other newspaper vending machine located on public right of way containing the same issue or
edition of the same publication.
(j) At the intersection of or along the parkway of any street that does not permit parking. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
(6) If compliance with the provisions contained in subsection (5) of this section would prohibit the placement of newspaper vending machines beyond a
five hundred foot (500') radius of other newspaper vending machines, allowance may be made for the placement of concrete pads on grass areas at
the cost of the vendor. A building permit must be obtained pursuant to existing building codes of the village2. Concrete blocks may be substituted for
concrete pads if prior approval is given by the community development director or his/her designate.
(7) When a newspaper vending machine is removed, either by the community development director or his/her designate, as provided for in section 11-92
of this division, or by the distributor or person acting on behalf of the same, from a premises where concrete pads or blocks have been placed, the
distributor or person for whom the same has been installed shall remove the concrete and replace the sod. The concrete shall be removed and the sod
replaced within ten (10) days, weather permitting. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-92: VIOLATIONS.
(1) Upon determination of the community development director or his/her designate that a newspaper vending machine has been installed, used or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this division, an order to correct the offending condition shall be issued by the community development
director or his/her designate to the distributor of the newspaper vending machine. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by
mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions
necessary to correct the condition. Failure to correct the offending condition within three (3) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays)
after the mailing date of the order shall result in the offending newspaper vending machine being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed
property by the community development director or his/her designate.
(2) If the offending newspaper vending machine is not properly identified as to owner under provisions of subsection 11-90(4) of this division, the
community development director or his/her designate shall have the authority to proceed forthwith to remove, or cause to remove, and process as
unclaimed property such newspaper vending machines in violation of the provisions of this division.
(3) If the offending condition creates a danger to public safety, the community development director or his/her designate shall have the authority to
immediately proceed forthwith to remove or cause to remove such newspaper vending machine in violation of the provisions of this division. (Ord. 482,
10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
(4) The cost of such removal shall be charged to and recovered from the distributor thereof or from the person for whom the same has been or is being
installed. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
(5) The Community Development Director or his/her designate shall remove, or cause to be removed, any concrete pads that have not been removed
and/or any sod that has not been replaced by the licensee, as required in subsection 11-91(7) of this division. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986; amd. Ord. 99-
960, 1-25-1999)
(6) The cost of removal and replacement as outlined in subsection (5) of this section shall be charged to and recovered from the distributor or from the
person for whom the same had been installed. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-93: PLACEMENT OF NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES ON PUBLIC BUILDING PREMISES.
Newspaper vending machine licenses may deny placement on the premises, inside or outside of a building owned or leased by the local, County, State or
Federal government when, in the judgment of the appropriate government authorities, such machine(s) will interfere with any of the following conditions:
(1) The public safety;
(2) The primary activities of the building;
(3) The aesthetic continuity or scheme of the building or its premises. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-94: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
The Community Development Director as used in this division shall include his or her designate. (Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-95: ABANDONMENT.
In the event a newspaper vending machine remains empty for a period of fourteen (14) continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may
be treated in the manner as provided in section 11-92 of this Code. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Sec. 11-96: PENALTY.
In addition to any other remedies available to the Village, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this division shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 149/377
Sec. 11-97: SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this division is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this division. (Ord. 482, 10-28-1986)
Division XI - Raffles
Sec. 11-98: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this division, the terms defined in this section have the meaning given them.
NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
RAFFLE. A raffle is any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised
consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name, in which:
(1) The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or
by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
(2) The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest. (Ord. 90-627, 4-23-1990)
Sec. 11-99: RAFFLES PROHIBITED EXCEPT BY PERMIT.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without obtaining a raffle license from the Village. The permit fee per raffle shall be as provided in
appendix D, article I of this Code. (Ord. 90-627, 4-23-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1130, 12-3-2002; Ord. 15-1610, 3-17-2015)
Sec. 11-100: APPLICATIONS.
A. Applications are available from the Office of the Chief of Police and must include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the organization making application, including the type of organization as defined in subsections 11-102A and B of this
division.
(2) The location in which the chances for the raffle will be sold.
(3) The time span in which the chances will be sold for such a raffle.
(4) The time and place where the drawing will be held.
(5) The amount the player pays or agrees to pay for a chance (the maximum amount must be stated).
(6) The retail value of all prizes awarded for such raffle.
(7) The retail value of the single most valuable prize.
(8) The name and address of the presiding officer of the organization and the name and address of the manager or operator of the raffle.
(9) A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary
of that organization. (Ord. 90-627, 4-23-1990)
Sec. 11-101: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO LICENSE.
The following are ineligible for any license under this division:
A. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
B. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
C. Any person who is not of good moral character;
D. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
a person is active or employed;
E. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 150/377
F. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined
in this article II, division XI. (1986 Code)
Sec. 11-102: LICENSES.
A. A license may be issued only to the following organizations: (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 15-1610, 3-17-2015)
(1) Bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and
which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had
during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects; or
(2) A nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (1986 Code)
B. For the purpose of this article II, division XI, the following definitions apply:
(1) Nonprofit: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
(2) Charitable: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of persons. The service rendered to those eligible
for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 15-1610, 3-17-2015)
(3) Educational: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax
supported schools. (1986 Code)
(4) Religious: Any church, synagogue, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 15-
1610, 3-17-2015)
(5) Fraternal: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.
(6) Veterans: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such
a way as to confer a public benefit.
(7) Labor: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
(8) Business: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community. (1986 Code)
C. A raffle license is valid for only one raffle. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 15-1610, 3-17-2015)
Sec. 11-103: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization so licensed.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. (Ord. 90-627, 4-23-1990)
D. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this article II, division XI, or similar provision of another local ordinance or state law. (Ord. 91-667, 2-25-1991)
E. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
F. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
G. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle may not exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
H. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle may not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 151/377
I. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
J. The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold may not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991;
amd. Ord. 15-1610, 3-17-2015)
Sec. 11-104: RAFFLES MANAGER, BOND.
A. The manager or operator of the raffle must be a bona fide member of the organization holding the license for such raffle and may not receive any
remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
B. All raffles must be conducted by a single manager or operator.
C. A fidelity bond in the sum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total value of the prizes to be awarded shall be required. The terms of the bond shall
provide that notice be given in writing to the village of Northfield, office of chief of police, thirty (30) days prior to the bond's cancellation.
D. The village of Northfield may waive the bond requirement if a unanimous vote of the members of the governing board of the licensed organization
requests such a waiver. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-105: RECORDS.
A. Each licensed organization must keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning
chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records
indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net
proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, amount and date of payment.
B. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization and separate records shall be kept.
C. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for
other revenues of the organization.
D. Records must be kept for three (3) years and must be available for public inspection at a reasonable time and place.
E. The following records regarding the raffle must be maintained and provided to the Northfield police department, office of the chief of police, within ten
(10) days of the drawing:
(1) Gross receipts from the raffle.
(2) Expenses associated with the raffle.
(3) Net proceeds from the raffle.
(4) The organization receiving the net proceeds of the raffle and the amount and date of payment. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Division XII - Film Production
Sec. 11-106: FILM PRODUCTION REGULATIONS.
No film production shall be permitted within the village of Northfield except as set forth in this division.
For purposes of this division, "film production" shall mean the use of public or private property within the village of Northfield for the purpose of producing,
videotaping or filming of commercials, movies, television programs, training tapes or films and other moving picture media activities. Provided only that
nothing herein shall prevent schools, businesses, places of worship or residents from using their own premises for producing films for their own
educational, family or training purposes without the requirement of a permit. Further, nothing herein shall prevent the filming of actual news events within
the village of Northfield subject to the rules and regulations of the village of Northfield and any orders of the village of Northfield officials. (Ord. 91-689, 8-
26-1991)
11-107: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
No film production of movies, television programs, commercials or training films and related activities for commercial use shall take place in the village
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 152/377
without first having obtained a permit from the village manager. The fee for this permit shall be as designated in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 91-689, 8-
26-1991; amd. Ord. 14-1591, 6-17-2014)
Sec. 11-108: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
A. Information. A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this division shall file an application with the village manager at least seventy two (72)
hours before the desired production date. The application shall state: (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991; amd. Ord. 03-1167, 8-19-2003)
(1) The title of the production to be filmed or taped;
(2) The name, address and phone number of the applicant production company;
(3) The name and phone number of the producer and the director;
(4) The name, phone number and address of the location coordinator and the name and phone number of the Illinois Film Office representative for the
production;
(5) The type of production;
(6) The production schedule;
(7) The proposed location(s) of production;
(8) A general description of the script or content of the production, as well as a description of any proposed special effects for the production;
(9) The anticipated need of the Village personnel, equipment and/or property;
(10) An agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the Village and its Corporate Authorities, officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees,
attorneys, agents and representatives from and against any loss, damage, expense, claims, costs of every nature and kind arising out of or in
connection with any filming or taping, or by reason of issuance of any permit, or the use of public property, or the assistance of the Village personnel;
and
(11) Any other information which the Village Manager shall find reasonably necessary to determine whether permit should issue hereunder.
B. Certificate Of Insurance. The applicant shall attach to such application a certificate of insurance, naming the Village and its Corporate Authorities,
officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents and representatives as additional insureds, in the amount of ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00) general liability, including bodily injury, property damages and automobile liability. Such certificate shall include the following
language:
The Village of Northfield, its Corporate Authorities, officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents and representatives are
made additional insureds with respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or are in any way related to, the operations of [the film maker] while
present in the Village of Northfield.
The applicant shall also attach to such application proof that the appropriate worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance have been
provided for the employees of the filming company. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
The Village Manager may, on written recommendation of the Village Attorney, reduce the insurance requirement to not less than two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) if the applicant can demonstrate that the production will not, under any reasonable set of circumstances, expose the Village to
potential liability in excess of the reduced amount and that providing of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) of insurance will impose such a hardship
that it will prevent the activity from occurring. (Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999; amd. Ord. 18-1734, 12-4-2018)
C. Report On Discussions With Property Owners In The Affected Neighborhoods. The applicant shall provide a short written description of and
schedule for the proposed production of the owners and residents of each property in the affected neighborhood (as defined by boundaries set by the
Village Manager). The applicant shall talk with owners and residents of all such property and submit as part of the application a report noting any owner
or resident's reaction along with the addresses and phone numbers of all such property owners and residents.
D. Vehicles And Equipment. The applicant must submit a report listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the production
including their proposed parking locations. Such locations are subject to the specific approval of the Village Manager in order to maintain traffic safety.
E. Effect Of Permit. A permittee shall fully comply with all applicable ordinances as if the same were fully set forth in such permit.
F. Time Period Of Permit. The authorization granted pursuant to and in accordance with the application shall be for a specific time period to be
determined by the Village. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-109: RIGHTS OF THE VILLAGE.
As a condition of any permit granted pursuant to this division, the applicant shall agree that the Village may in its discretion:
(1) Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the use of public streets, rights-of-way, and buildings of the Village during the time of
production;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 153/377
(2) Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the hours of production and the general location of the production;
(3) Prohibit all filming or taping or order cessation of filming or taping and the revocation of the permit if determined to be hazardous to the public
health, safety and welfare or upon a finding of violation of any ordinance or any condition or provision of the permit; and
(4) Inspect all structures and/or devices and equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-110: RATES FOR USE OF THE VILLAGE PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY.
A. Personnel. The producer shall pay for the costs of any public safety, public works or other village personnel assigned to the project at the discretion of
the village manager (whether specifically requested by the producer or not) at a rate determined annually by the village manager.
B. Equipment. The remuneration rates for the use of any village equipment shall be established by the village manager on a case-by-case basis.
C. Property. Based upon the extent of the use of the village property, the producer shall reimburse the village for using village property and the
inconvenience resulting from such use. Reimbursement shall be in accordance with an estimated rate schedule:
(1) Total or disruptive use (regular operating hours) of a public building - per day basis.
(2) Partial nondisruptive use of a public building - per day basis.
(3) Total closure of a public street or right of way - per hour basis.
(4) Partial closure of a public street or right of way on a per hour basis.
D. Payment. All checks shall be made payable to the "Village of Northfield".
E. Restoration. The producer shall be responsible for the restoration of all public property or village equipment to substantially the same condition that
such property or equipment was in prior to its use for the production. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-111: BOND.
In addition to the agreement for indemnification contained in the application for a permit, the village manager may in his discretion require the applicant to
furnish a bond in order to protect adequately the interests of the village and its residents. The terms and amount of any such bond shall be determined by
the village manager in the exercise of his sound discretion. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 11-112: FILM PRODUCTION STAGES, SETS OR OTHER FACILITIES (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY).
A special use shall be required for such a facility if any one of the following conditions apply:
(1) The film production will be of more than thirty (30) day duration at the particular site.
(2) There is to be refitting or new hard wiring of electrical or mechanical installations or any set construction on the interior of a building which is
different than that existing prior to the commencement of the film production. The aforesaid type of film production, even with the special use, shall
be allowed only in M1 zoning districts or in schools with campuses of at least twenty five (25) acres.
A special use shall be granted only if there is compliance with the provisions of section 11-108 through section 11-112. Additionally, there must be full
compliance with all building, fire and life safety codes as adopted by the village of Northfield, including such reasonable requirements as the fire marshal
may impose. (Ord. 91-689, 8-26-1991)
Division XIII - Firearms Dealers
Sec. 11-113: DEFINITIONS.
As used in article II of this chapter the following terms shall have the following meaning:
AUTOMATIC WEAPONS. A firearm of any size which requires only consistent pressure on a trigger or triggering device for firing or which chambers, locks
and fires one round after another without release or repulling of a trigger or triggering device.
The term "automatic weapon" includes a combination of parts from which such firearms may be assembled.
ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. The same meaning as in 18 USC section 921(a)(21).
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 154/377
FIREARM. The same meaning as used in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1.
FIREARMS DEALERS. Any person licensed by the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms as "dealer" pursuant to section 923(a)(3)(B) or section
923(a)(3)(C) of title 18 of the United States Code and possessing a "type 01" federal license; and excluding any persons licensed solely as a "collector"
pursuant to section 923(b) of title 18 of the United States Code and possessing only a "type 03" federal license.
GUN SHOW OR EVENT. Any show or exhibition conducted for a temporary, fixed time period at a temporary location and sponsored by a national, state,
or local organization or any affiliate of any such organization devoted to the collection, competitive use, or other sporting use of firearms.
HANDGUN. A firearm:
(1) Designed or redesigned or made or remade or intended to be fired while held only in the hands without support of any other part of the body or on
any other thing; or
(2) Having a barrel of less than ten inches (10") in length; or
(3) Of a size which may be concealed upon the person.
The term "handgun" includes a combination of parts from which such firearms may be assembled.
PERSON. Any individual, public or private corporation, partnership, firm, society, or unincorporated association.
PUBLIC PARK. Any land or buildings set apart for public recreation and owned by any unit of government and any land owned by the forest preserve
district of Cook County.
SCHOOL. Any public or private elementary or secondary school, community college, college or university.
SHOTGUN. A shoulder held firearm that is manufactured to chamber and fire shells with multiple pellets through a smooth bore barrel. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-
1995)
Sec. 11-114: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
(1) Any person licensed as a firearms dealer pursuant to federal law at a business premises located within the village shall apply for and obtain a
Northfield firearms dealer's license. A Northfield firearms dealer's license shall be required in addition to any other license required by law. Possession
of a valid federal firearms dealer's license shall be deemed proof of being engaged in an activity requiring a federal firearms dealer's license and thus
requiring a Northfield firearms dealer's license.
(2) Gun shows shall not be permitted within the village.
(3) Any person who becomes a federally licensed firearms dealer after September 1, 1994, and is required under this division to obtain a Northfield
firearms dealer's license, shall apply for such license within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the federal firearms dealer's license.
(4) No person shall be licensed for more than one location within the village.
(5) No license issued under this division shall be transferable or assignable to any other person or any other location. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-115: LICENSE AND PERMIT ADMINISTRATION.
(1) The chief of police or his designate shall administer the licensing of firearms dealers and shall approve or deny all applications for licenses or permits
and revoke existing licenses and permits pursuant to this division.
(2) The chief of police may promulgate reasonable rules, definitions and regulations necessary to carry out the duties imposed by this division; including,
but not limited to, developing reasonable procedures consistent with existing practices of licensing persons engaged in the business of dealing in
firearms, and including seeking the assistance of other law enforcement agencies advisable to conduct investigations or inspections in connection with
this division. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-116: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEE.
The annual fee for a Northfield firearms dealer's license shall be as specified in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 99-960, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 11-117: LICENSE AND PERMIT APPLICATION, ISSUANCE.
(1) Application. All applications for a license or permit under this division shall be made in writing to the chief of police on a form provided for that
purpose. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, each application for a license or permit shall contain:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 155/377
(a) The applicant's full name, residence, and the address and telephone number where the person is engaged in the business of dealing in firearms;
(b) If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, business, and principal place of business of the applicant; the date and state of incorporation;
and the names and residence addresses of the corporate officers and its registered agent;
(c) If the applicant is a partnership, the name and business address and telephone number of the principal officer or place of business; the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of all partners; the name, address, and telephone number of a person authorized to receive notices issued
pursuant to this division XIII.
(2) Proof Of Federal License. The chief of police shall not issue a Northfield firearms dealer's license to any person who fails to provide proof of a valid
federal firearms dealer's license and a valid firearm owners identification card issued by the state of Illinois.
(3) Location Restrictions. The chief of police shall not issue a Northfield firearms dealer's license to any person who is engaged in the business of
dealing in firearms or any other activity requiring a federal firearms dealer license, or indicates an intention to do so, within one-quarter (0.25) miles of
the grounds of a school or public park, measured from the property lines of the respective properties.
(4) Grandfather Clause. The restrictions on location contained in subsection (3) of this section shall not apply to any person who on February 28, 1995 is
engaged in the business of dealing in shotguns or shotgun ammunition within one-quarter (0.25) miles of the grounds of a school or public park,
measured from the property lines of the respective properties. This grandfathering shall permit the sale of no firearms except shotguns and such
shotguns may not be sold for less than six hundred dollars ($600.00).
(5) Posting. Any license or permit issued under this division XIII shall be posted and kept available on the premises covered by the license or permit for
inspection by the village. All sales and other business records relating to the activity for which a federal firearms dealer's license is required shall also
be made available for inspection upon the request of the village. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-118: LICENSE OR PERMIT DENIED OR REVOKED.
(1) The chief of police may deny an application for a license if the applicant fails to provide the information required by, or is otherwise not in compliance
with, any provisions of this division XIII or any applicable rules or regulations. Any person seeking to appeal the denial may do so by filing a written
request for a hearing with the village manager. Such request must be filed within thirty (30) days of the denial, and a hearing must be held within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the request. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein.
(2) The chief of police may revoke or suspend the license or permit of any person who violates any provision of this division XIII or rules or regulations
adopted pursuant to division XIII. Before any such revocation or suspension is imposed, the licensee or permit holder shall be notified by mail of the
specific violation and the date for a hearing on the matter, to occur not fewer than seven (7) days and not more than fourteen (14) days after the mailing
of the notice. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-119: HEARING PROCEDURES.
(1) If a person wishes to appeal the decision of the chief of police to deny or revoke a license or permit, the village manager shall conduct a hearing or
appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing. The hearing officer is authorized to conduct hearings concerning any matter covered by this
division XIII and may determine factual and legal matters raised by the parties to the hearing. However, neither the chief of police nor the hearing
officer shall hear or decide any claim that the ordinance is unconstitutional on its face or that the president and board of trustees of the village of
Northfield did not have the authority to enact this division XIII.
(2) The hearing officer may:
(a) Examine any books, papers or memoranda bearing upon the business or activities of the licensee or permit holder;
(b) Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of any person having personal knowledge of any contested issue;
(c) Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas duces tecum for the production of books, records, papers, or memoranda;
(d) Administer oaths;
(e) Take testimony;
(f) Make rulings as to the admissibility of evidence; and
(g) Take any other action as may be required for the expeditious conduct of the hearing.
(3) The hearing officer is not bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceeding or in the manner of taking testimony or receiving
evidence shall invalidate any order, decision, ruling or recommendation of the hearing officer or final decision of the chief of police.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 156/377
(4) The village's books, papers, records and memoranda or parts thereof may be proved in any hearing or legal proceeding by the original documents or
by reproduced copy under the certificate of the chief of police. Without further proof, the original documents or reproduced copy shall be admissible into
evidence before the hearing officer.
(5) If the circuit court issues a subpoena duces tecum, the following rules apply:
(a) Service shall be made as provided by the Illinois civil practice law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-201 et seq.;
(b) Fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the circuit court of Cook County and shall be paid
after the witness is excused from further attendance;
(c) When a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is issued at the instance of either party, the hearing officer may require that party to bear the cost of
services and witness fees. The hearing officer may require a deposit to cover the cost of service and witness fees.
(6) Any party to a hearing may apply to any judge of the circuit court of this state for endorsement of any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued in
connection with a hearing authorized by this division XIII.
(7) At any hearing held under this division, the chief of police's initial decision to deny or revoke a license or permit shall be prima facie correct and the
person contesting the decision shall have the burden of proving with books, records and other documentary evidence that it is incorrect.
(8) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the village manager. The village manager shall adopt, reject or
modify the recommendation based on a review of the record within thirty (30) days of receiving the hearing officer's recommendation, and shall issue a
final decision. The village manager shall give written notification to the licensee or permit holder of the decision and the reasons for such decision.
(9) A person seeking judicial review of the hearing officer's final decision shall bear the cost of certification.
(10) Items constituting the record may include notices and demands; the initial decision; the written protest and petition for hearing; all relevant pleadings,
briefs and memoranda of law; evidence admitted at the hearing; the transcribed testimony given at the hearing; the recommendation of the Hearing
Officer; and the final decision of the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-120: PROHIBITIONS.
(1) The sale of firearms within one-fourth (0.25) mile of the grounds of a school or public park is prohibited. Each sale in violation of this subsection shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(2) The sale of any handgun or automatic weapon within the Village is prohibited. (Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Sec. 11-121: PENALTIES.
(1) Failure to comply with the provision of this division shall result in a fine as outlined in appendix D, article III of this Code. Each day of operation in
violation of section 11-114 or 11-120 of this division shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and fines shall be levied per day. (Ord. 97-915, 10-
27-1997)
(2) The sale of firearms without a license as required by this division or at a gun show or event without a permit or a location prohibited by this division is
punishable by up to six (6) months imprisonment or a fine as provided in subsection (1) of this section, or both. Each sale in violation of this division
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(3) The County of Cook may seek an order to restrain violation or enjoin future operation of a firearms dealer operating in violation of this division, or both.
(Ord. 95-831, 2-27-1995)
Division XIV - Massage Establishments
Sec. 11-122: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
EMPLOYEE. Any person other than a massage therapist who renders any service for the licensee and who receives compensation directly from the
licensee but has no physical contact with customers or clients.
LICENSEE. The operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding, painting, irritating, or
stimulating of external soft parts of the body with hands or with the aid of any manual, mechanical, or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder, creams, lotions, soaps, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 157/377
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having its place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in, carries on,
or permits to be engaged or carried on any of the activities referenced in the definition of "massage" in this division.
MASSAGE SERVICES. The performance of a massage.
MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of "massage" as defined herein.
PERSON. Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, including the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-
2011)
Sec. 11-123: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct, operate or maintain or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance
of, a massage establishment within the Village unless the Village has issued a license for such massage establishment as provided for in this division
which is in full force and effect, and such valid and current license is displayed in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment at all times.
Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be valid only for the address specified as the location of the massage establishment in the
application for license. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-123.1: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE FEE.
The annual registration permit fee for each massage establishment shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance and shall be paid as required in
appendix D, article I of this Code. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-123.2: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Any person desiring to operate a massage establishment shall make application for a license to the Village on a form supplied by the Village. The
application shall comply with the requirements of section 11-1 of this chapter and shall include the following additional items:
(1) The name of the person(s) who will serve as the licensee under whose management or supervision the massage establishment will be operated;
(2) Copies of a valid license or licenses issued by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation pursuant to the Massage Licensing
Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., for each massage therapist who will provide massage services at the massage establishment;
(3) In connection with the applicant or any employee, written authorization for the conduct of a criminal background investigation pursuant to section
11-123.3 of this division;
(4) Such other information as the Village may request. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-123.3: INVESTIGATIONS BEFORE LICENSE ISSUANCE.
A. In addition to the investigation pursuant to section 11-4 of this chapter, the Village shall have the right and opportunity to request information and
assistance from any appropriate Federal, State, or local governmental agency as part of the authorized investigation of the applicant or any employee.
Criminal background check forms will be completed and forwarded to the Illinois State Police who will conduct a criminal background investigation. In
addition, the Village shall review the materials required pursuant to this division. Payment of all costs associated with any investigation or criminal
background check pursuant to this section shall be paid by applicant.
B. Information concerning convictions or findings of guilty of a person investigated under this section, including the source of the information and any
conclusions or recommendations derived from the information shall be provided, upon request, to the applicant prior to final action by the Village on the
application. Such information on convictions or findings of guilty shall be provided, upon request, to the person investigated.
C. Any information concerning criminal convictions or findings of guilty obtained by the Village shall be confidential and may not be transmitted outside the
Village, except as required herein, and may not be transmitted to anyone within the Village except as needed for the purpose of evaluating the
applicant, an employee, or other person investigated pursuant to this section.
D. Only information and evaluation standards that bear a reasonable and rational relation to the operation of a massage establishment shall be used by
the Village. Any person receiving confidential information under this section who gives or causes to be given any confidential information concerning
any criminal convictions or findings of guilty of an applicant, employee, or other person investigated shall be guilty of a violation of this Code unless a
release of such information is authorized by this section, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by the person investigated. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-
2011)
Sec. 11-123.4: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
A massage establishment license may be denied if the applicant or any person employed by, or working in, the massage establishment has been
convicted of committing or attempting to commit any of the following offenses:
(1) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 158/377
(2) An offense enumerated in any provision of article 11, entitled "Sex Offenses", of the Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1 et seq.;
(3) A violation of the Controlled Substances Act;
(4) A violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
(5) A violation of any law of the State of Illinois regarding the sale of an illegal substance;
(6) An offense in any other state, or a Federal offense, the elements of which are similar and bear a substantial relationship to any offenses
enumerated in this section. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-124: COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.
Upon issuance of a massage establishment license, in addition to the inspection requirements of article II of this chapter, the licensee shall provide any
representative of the village with reasonable opportunity to inspect the premises for which the permit is requested and to interview the licensee's agents
and employees for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this division and other applicable ordinances and state and federal laws are being
complied with. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow any representative of the village access to the premises of the massage establishment or
to hinder such access in any manner. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-125: EMPLOYMENT OF LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPISTS.
No massage therapist may be employed in a massage establishment who does not hold a current, valid license issued by the Illinois department of
financial and professional regulation, as required by the massage licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., which license may not have
been suspended, revoked or temporarily suspended by the department under that act. Each massage establishment shall maintain a current listing of all
licensed massage therapists who perform massage services at the massage establishment, along with proof of their valid and current Illinois licensure,
and must allow inspection of such records at any reasonable time upon the request of any representative of the village. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-126: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including any and all appliances, apparatus, or other mechanical and therapeutic devices shall be kept
clean and operated under sanitary conditions. The massage establishment shall contain facilities for sanitization of equipment before use on each
customer.
B. Price rates for all massage services shall be prominently posted in the reception area of the massage establishment in a location available to all
prospective customers.
C. All employees and massage therapists shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas.
D. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be refurnished for use of another patron until
laundered.
E. The sexual or genital areas of clients must be covered with nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
massage therapist.
F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths, and steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
the massage establishment is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it
shall be kept dry.
G. Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean individual use containers, closed containers or
cabinets.
H. Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering any massage to any
customer or client.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person in the massage establishment to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, or fondle in any
manner, or massage a sexual or genital area of any person.
J. No massage therapist, employee, or licensee shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of a client's sexual or
genital area.
K. No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a client exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless a
physician duly licensed by the state of Illinois shall certify in writing that such person may be safely massaged and shall describe the conditions under
which such massage may be performed.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 159/377
L. No client shall be permitted to operate any device capable of recording or transmitting still or moving images in any area of the massage establishment,
including, without limitation, still or video cameras, video recorders, camera phones, or any similar device. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-126.1: CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.
A. Every massage establishment shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
(1) All massage tables, lavatories, and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
(2) Separate dressing, locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall be provided for female and male clients, so that female and male clients may be
served simultaneously in the event that clients of both sexes are permitted. Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
(3) Toilet facilities shall be provided within the massage establishment. When five (5) or more employees, massage therapists, or patrons of different
sexes are contemplated to be on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A lavatory capable of
providing both hot and cold running water shall be installed in each toilet room and shall be supplied with soap and a dispenser with sanitary towels.
(4) Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean linens, towels, and other materials used in administering massage services. All
soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas.
B. Subsections A(2), A(3), and A(4) of this section shall not apply to a massage establishment where all massages are administered to patrons who are
fully clothed and where there is no application of oils, creams, lotions, or other liquids to the body of any client. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-126.2: RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISING.
No massage establishment shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted, placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that
suggests to prospective clients that any services are available other than those services permitted by this division, or which would suggest that employees
or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this division. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-126.3: EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-127: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
No massage establishment license shall be required for hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or any facility at which a healthcare worker duly licensed
by the State of Illinois provides, on an ongoing basis, professional health services to individuals, including the offices of an occupational therapist licensed
under the Illinois Occupational Therapy Practice Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 75/1 et seq.; a physician therapist licensed under the Medical Practice
Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/1 et seq.; a chiropractor licensed under the Medical Practice Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/1 et seq.; and a
naprapath listed under the Illinois Naprapathic Practice Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 63/1 et seq. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-128: JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.
The owner and manager of the massage therapy establishment shall be jointly and severally liable, along with the individual committing the violation, for
any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to this division. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-129: LICENSE REVOCATION; MORATORIUM ON PREMISES.
The license of any business upon whose premises a violation of this division takes place shall be subject to revocation. Upon such revocation, that
premises shall be ineligible to be licensed for the purpose of performing massages of any nature for twenty four (24) months from the date of the
revocation. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
Sec. 11-130: PENALTY.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall be fined in an amount set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each time on each day during or on which violation occurs or is permitted to continue. (Ord. 11-1479, 2-15-2011)
FOOTNOTES
Footnote 1: See section 14-7 of this code.
Footnote 2: See appendix C of this code.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 160/377
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF
WAY
Sec. 11-131: PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way, which will provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the rights of way and the village as a whole.
B. Intent. In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way and, in particular, the use of the public ways and
property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
(1) Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
(4) Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
(5) Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
(6) Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
(7) Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
(8) Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
(9) Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed
and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise,
license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way. Utilities that
are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements.
(1) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license
or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and
any lawful renewal or extension thereof; provided, however, that the village may impose on such provider such competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this chapter: a) as are necessary to observe, protect or to advance the public safety
and welfare or to manage rights of way, and b) do not conflict with the requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village.
(2) Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof; provided, however, that the
village may impose on such provider such competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this chapter: a)
as are necessary to observe, protect or to advance the public safety and welfare or to manage rights of way, and b) do not conflict with the
requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise, license or similar agreement with the village.
F. Conflicts With Other Articles. This article supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article,
the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment. The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village
to regulate rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-132: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code 530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 161/377
ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this article.
BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE. The municipal code of the village of Northfield.
CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The village director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY. Any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended
use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials,
equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or
equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER. The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY. A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 162/377
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC. Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT. Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE. The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY. Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 11-134 and 11-135 of this article.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE. The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION. The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village, which are located within the corporate boundaries of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or
personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to section 11-140 of this article.
SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 163/377
VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE. The village of Northfield.
WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 07-
1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-133: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 11-138 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-134: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
A. Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right of way
within the village which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this article), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of
way.
B. Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
(2) The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
(3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
(4) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
(5) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
(a) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
(b) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
(6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
(7) Evidence of insurance as required in section 11-138 of this article;
(8) Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 11-140 of this article;
(9) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 11-151 of this article); and
(10) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
(1) In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
(2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 164/377
(3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
(4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district have been satisfied; or
(5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-135: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of
public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the director of public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
article.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers.
(1) Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
(2) In the event that the director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article.
(3) Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 11-134 of this article the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007.
Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty
five (45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village
codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-136: EFFECT OF PERMIT.
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities
in accordance with this article on rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will
occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-137: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 165/377
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with section 11-151 of this article. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-138: INSURANCE.
A. Required Coverages And Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections
A(1) and A(2) of this section.
(1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as X, C,
and U coverages) and products completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
(a) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(b) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(c) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
(2) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
(3) Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
(4) Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that
are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by
the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effective under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-139: INDEMNIFICATION.
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether
such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 166/377
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 07-1349,
10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-140: SECURITY.
A. Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
(1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article;
(2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this article; and
(3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform
or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law.
B. Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
(1) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
(2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
(3) Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single
phase.
D. Withdrawals. The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
(1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
(2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
(3) Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
(4) Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved
by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right
the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-141: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 167/377
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit. The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
(2) Noncompliance with this article;
(3) Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
(4) Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension. The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
(1) Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
(2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
(3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-142: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
A. Notification Of Change. A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
B. Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 07-
1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-143: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
A. Standards And Principles. All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
(1) "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
(2) "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
(3) "Highway Design Manual";
(4) "Highway Standards Manual";
(5) "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
(6) "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Illinois administrative code 545);
(7) "Flagger's Handbook"; and
(8) "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 168/377
final. If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-144: TRAFFIC CONTROL.
A. Minimum Requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked. At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 11-150 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under
the circumstances.
E. Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-145: LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
A. General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
(1) No Interference With Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
(2) Minimum Interference And Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
(3) No Interference With Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
(4) No Limitations On Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
(5) Size Of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
(1) Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
(a) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
(b) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
(c) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
(d) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
(e) Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
(2) Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
(a) The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
(b) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
(c) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways.
(1) No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 169/377
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
(2) Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
(3) Ninety Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
(4) Overhead Power Or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction Of Electric Power And Communication Lines" (83 Illinois
administrative code 305);
(b) Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
(c) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
(5) Underground Power Or Communication Facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
(b) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
(6) Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way. The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities.
(1) The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
(2) The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
(3) A utility shall screen any facility, lawfully established within a right of way prior to the effective date of this article, within a reasonable period of time
not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days after notification from the village to screen a specific facility.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
(1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
(2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
(3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures.
(1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
(2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
(a) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
(b) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
(c) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
(d) The proposed method of attachment;
(e) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
(f) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
(g) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
(h) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards.
(1) The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 170/377
(2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-ofway
user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-
16-2007)
I. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing Requirements. Taking into consideration visual impact and public safety, the location and spacing of ground
mounted equipment shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works in consultation with the Director of Community Development. (Ord.
18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 11-146: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods.
(1) Boring Or Jacking.
(a) Pits And Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director
of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
(b) Wet Boring Or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
(c) Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches. Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
(d) Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less. Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
(e) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under
or around the root system.
(2) Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
(a) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (1/2)
of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works.
(b) Open Trench And Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the
"Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the
trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does
not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
(c) Drip Line Of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
(3) Backfilling.
(a) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
(b) For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.
(4) Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A(4) is permitted under section 11-151 of this article, the following requirements shall
apply:
(a) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works.
(b) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
(c) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
(d) For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
(5) Encasement.
(a) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
(b) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
(c) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 171/377
or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
(d) In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
(e) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
(f) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
(6) Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m), as determined by village
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities.
(1) Electric Power Or Communication Lines.
(a) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity
with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "Rules For
Construction Of Electric Power And Communications Lines", and the national electrical safety code.
(b) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
(c) Underground Facilities.
1. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
2. If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if:
a) the crossing is installed by the use of moles, whip augers, or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
3. Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
(d) Burial Of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting,
utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
(2) Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
(a) The use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
(b) Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
(c) Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
(d) Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
(3) Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service. Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(4) Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping. (Liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
(5) Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current standard specifications for water and sewer main
construction in Illinois.
(6) Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way,
shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free
area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public works. With
the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 172/377
C. Materials.
(1) General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
(2) Material Storage On Right Of Way. No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the village director of public
works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
(3) Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions.
(1) Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
(2) These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
(3) Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth in this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act3. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-147: VEGETATION CONTROL.
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in
the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the
village as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation,
but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article.
(1) Application For Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
(2) Damage To Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance. The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use.
(1) Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
(2) Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director
of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-148: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
A. Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 173/377
(2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
(3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or
(4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities. The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within rights of way,
as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the
municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing
a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90) days. Following
receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works determines that such
removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all
or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-149: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended
by the director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-150: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
A. General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
(1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
(2) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
(3) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-151: VARIANCES.
A. Request For Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of public
works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances. The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance. The Director of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
(1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
(2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out
the purposes of this article.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 174/377
E. Right To Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director of
Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring
at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-152: PENALTIES.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with appendix D, article III, "Penalties", of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007; amd.
Ord. 07-1352, 12-3-2007)
Sec. 11-153: ENFORCEMENT.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this article. (Ord. 07-
1349, 10-16-2007)
Sec. 11-154: SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof. (Ord. 07-1349, 10-16-2007)
ARTICLE IV. GARAGE, ESTATE AND DEMOLITION SALES; REGULATIONS AND
REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 11-155: GARAGE AND ESTATE SALES.
A. Definitions.
ESTATE SALE. An estate sale is a sale of personal property in a residential district conducted with the assistance of a person who is paid for such
assistance or who conducts such sales as a business.
GARAGE SALE. A garage sale is a sale of personal property in a residential district conducted only by the owner of the premises without help from any
person who conducts such sales as a business.
B. Regulations. All garage and estate sales conducted in the Village of Northfield's Residential District shall comply with the following standards and
limitations:
(1) No garage or estate sale shall be held within the village unless the property owner shall first obtain a permit from the village.
(2) Not more than two (2) garage sales may be conducted during a calendar year at any one residence.
(3) Not more than one estate sale may be conducted during a calendar year at any one residence. (Ord. 00-1034, 7-17-2000)
(4) It is illegal to sell merchandise that was brought in from elsewhere and was not owned by the property owner prior to the sale.
(5) The personal property to be sold must have been owned by one or more persons residing in the residence on the property and which was acquired
in the normal course of living in or maintaining the residence, rather than for the purpose of resale.
(6) Bulk sales, the sale of multiple new items of the same description and the sale of consigned merchandise, merchandise brought to the premises for
resale or for reconditioning for resale are prohibited.
(7) The sale shall not include the sale of junk or antique items as a business activity by a person involved therein as a junk or antique dealer. (Ord. 13-
1567, 9-17-2013)
(8) Not more than three (3) households may conduct a sale at any one residence. When members of more than one residence join in holding a sale,
the sale shall be considered to have been held at the residence of each participating member.
(9) Each sale shall be limited to not more than two (2) consecutive days.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 175/377
(10) The hours of operation shall be limited from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
(11) No items for sale may be displayed except in a garage or driveway. Items displayed in a driveway may not extend into the village parkway or right
of way.
(12) Any sign shall comply with subsection 12-5(4) of this code.
(13) The appropriate fee, as set forth in appendix D of this code shall be paid by the applicant.
(14) In addition to the above stated conditions, the village manager may require any other conditions necessary to properly regulate the proposed sale
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents in the area. (Ord. 00-1034, 7-17-2000; amd. Ord. 13-1567, 9-17-2013)
C. Approval Procedure. A person proposing to conduct such a sale shall submit an application not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to the proposed
sale. The applicant(s) shall certify that they will abide by the rules and regulations set forth above, and by all other applicable rules and regulations of
the village of Northfield any special conditions as may be required in accordance with subsection B(14) of this section. The applicant shall provide
names and addresses of all persons and/or households who are providing items for the sale. The application shall be on file in the office of the
community development director who shall review all such requests and approve conforming sales.
D. Stop Orders. The village shall issue a stop order for sales which do not meet the performance standards or foregoing criteria. When a stop order is
issued, such sales shall cease immediately. (Ord. 00-1034, 7-17-2000)
Sec. 11-156: DEMOLITION SALES.
A. Definition. A "demolition sale" is a sale held for the purpose of permitting persons to remove and purchase fixtures such as flooring, windows, heating,
air conditioning, plumbing, masonry or lumber from a structure. For purposes of this section, a sale shall not be a demolition sale if such fixtures are
being sold only after having been previously removed from the building. Likewise, it shall not be deemed a demolition sale if no flooring, safety railings,
windows, door lintels or jambs or structural members are to be offered for removal.
B. Conditions.
(1) All demolition sales must be conducted in accordance with the requirements for garage and estate sales set forth in section 11-155 of this article.
(2) A certified structural engineer must be in attendance on site at the location of the demolition sale during the hours in which the sale is conducted.
(3) All owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the demolition shall be notified at least one week prior, by certified mail, of the proposed
demolition sale.
(4) No demolition sale shall be held within the village unless the property owner shall first obtain a permit from the village. No permit shall be issued for
a demolition sale unless either a building demolition or building permit has been issued by the department of community development. (Ord. 00-
1038, 8-21-2000)
ARTICLE V. SHOWCASE DISPLAY HOMES; REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM
STANDARDS
Sec. 11-157: DEFINITION.
A "showcase display home", for the purpose of this article, shall be a single-family home temporarily open to the public for the purpose of displaying the
work of interior designers, landscapers and/or architects, or any similar projects. (Ord. 00-1035, 7-17-2000)
Sec. 11-158: REGULATIONS.
A showcase display home or other similar event, may be conducted within the village of Northfield's single-family residence districts, subject to the
following standards:
(1) The village manager must receive an application for the date of the proposed showcase display home six (6) months prior to the proposed event
and must receive the application for the specific location of the proposed home no less than three (3) months prior to the event.
(2) All proceeds raised in conjunction with any entrance fee charged to the public shall benefit local charitable organization(s), which are qualified as
such under IRC 501(c)(3).
(3) The sponsor of the event and the owner of the premises must apply for and receive a showcase display home permit from the village. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in appendix D of this code.
(4) The sponsor must be a not for profit entity.
(5) The sponsor must notify, by registered mail, the owners of all properties within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed location. The sponsor
shall schedule a meeting at a reasonable time and location within the village at least three (3) months prior to the event with such persons to attempt
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 176/377
to resolve the concerns raised on account of the proposed event. The sponsor shall issue a written report of the meeting to the village manager
within seventy two (72) hours of the meeting.
(6) If the showcase display home or similar event is on a private street, all residents with an ownership interest in the portion of the street to be
traversed shall give written approval of the showcase display home or similar event.
(7) There shall be no parking for a showcase display home or similar event on any public or private street or on the property of any residence for any
showings. The owner or sponsor must provide bus or shuttle service from an institutional parking lot, either within or outside the village, from the
parking area to the showcase display home or similar event. (Ord. 00-1035, 7-17-2000)
(8) The sponsor shall post either a cash bond or a security bond issued by an approved surety company in the amount as set forth in appendix D of this
code. The proceeds of the bond may be used by the village to repair any damage done to village or private property by the sponsor, builder or the
patrons of the event. (Ord. 00-1041, 9-18-2000)
(9) Such other conditions as the village manager in his sole discretion may deem appropriate and reasonable. (Ord. 00-1035, 7-17-2000)
ARTICLE VI. ADULT USES
Sec. 11-159: FINDINGS.
A. The president and board of trustees have made the following findings:
(1) It is uncontested that the village may regulate, through its zoning power, the location of sexually explicit businesses.
(2) Zoning, when used to preserve the character of the residential and commercial areas of the village, is perhaps the most essential function
performed by the village.
(3) The village is predominately a single-family residential community with ninety one percent (91%) of the total land area of the village zoned and used
for residential, school, park, library and governmental purposes.
(4) The regulation of adult uses serves a substantial governmental interest, while allowing for reasonable alternative avenues of communication.
(5) The supreme court of the state of Illinois has judicially confirmed that the regulation of adult uses serves a valid governmental interest.
(6) The proposed regulations are not aimed at the content of adult entertainment, but at the secondary effects associated with it including, but not
limited to:
(a) A negative impact on the real estate market where adult entertainment is offered;
(b) Urban blight as a result of the decrease in property values; and
(c) An increase in the need for police patrols and services.
(7) Sexually oriented businesses in the incorporated area of the village of Northfield require special supervision from public safety and health agencies
in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as citizens of the village.
(8) The corporate authorities and staff have reviewed the studies concerning the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses in other cities
including, but not limited to, the "Attorney General Of Minnesota's Report Of 1989" which summarized the following studies: Indianapolis, Indiana
(1984); village of Los Angeles, California (1984); Phoenix, Arizona (1979); and St. Paul, Minnesota (1978).
(9) From review of other cities' studies and their own surveys and testimony from its citizens, there is convincing documented evidence that sexually
oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential
areas adjacent to them, causing among other adverse secondary effects, increased crime and downgrading of property values.
(10) It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when
they are operating in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to crime, lower property values, urban blight and downgrading of the quality
of life in the adjacent area.
(11) The corporate authorities find that sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities including prostitution, sexual
liaison of casual nature.
(12) Increased crime and unhealthful conduct tend to accompany, concentrate around and be aggravated by sexually oriented businesses including,
but not limited to, prostitution, pandering, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession and distribution of obscene materials and child
pornography, possession and sale of controlled substances and violent crimes against persons and property.
(13) Concern over sexually transmitted diseases including AIDS, is a legitimate health concern of the village which demands reasonable regulations of
sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well being of the citizens.
(14) The corporate authorities have considered in part, each of the following matters: a) areas within close walking distance of single- and multiplefamily
dwellings should be free of sexually oriented business uses; b) areas where children could be expected to walk, patronize, or frequent should
be free of sexually oriented business use; c) sexually oriented business uses should be located in areas of the village which are not in close
proximity to residential uses, churches, parks, or other public facilities and schools; d) the image of the village of Northfield as a pleasant and
attractive place to reside will be adversely affected by the presence of sexually oriented business uses in close proximity to residential land uses,
churches, parks and other public facilities, and schools; e) sexually oriented business land use should be regulated by zoning to separate it from
other dissimilar uses just as any other land use should be separated from uses with Northfield and persons who are nonresidents but use the village
of Northfield for shopping and other commercial needs will move from the community or shop elsewhere if sexually oriented business land uses are
allowed to locate in close proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and other public facilities and schools; f) merchants in the commercial area of
the village are concerned about the adverse impact and the character and quality of the village in the event that sexually oriented business land uses
are located within close proximity to residential uses, churches, parks, and other public facilities and schools and that such locations will reduce retail
trade to commercial uses in the vicinity, thus reducing property values and tax revenues to the village; and that such adverse effect on property
values and business would cause the loss to some commercial districts within the village leading to deterioration of the commercial quality of the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 177/377
village; and g) no evidence has been presented to show that location of sexually oriented businesses within the village will improve the commercial
viability or qualify of life of the community.
(15) Zoning, licensing and other police power regulations are legitimate reasonable means of accountability to ensure the operator of sexually oriented
businesses comply with reasonable regulations and are located in places which minimize the adverse secondary effects which naturally accompany
the operation.
(16) The village recognizes the possible harmful effects on children and minors exposed to the effects of such businesses and the deterioration of
respect for family values and the avoidance of such businesses which necessitate children walking through or visiting in the immediate neighborhood
of such businesses.
(17) There would be deterioration in the quality of businesses which choose to operate in and around such sexually oriented businesses.
(18) The desire to minimize and control these adverse secondary effects and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, protect the
citizens from increased crime, preserve the qualify of life, preserve the property values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods and
businesses, deter the spread of urban blight and protect against the threat to health from the spread of communicable and social diseases.
(19) The corporate authorities have considered the decisions of the United States supreme court regarding local regulation of sexually oriented
businesses; including, but not limited to, Young v. American Mini-Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) reh. denied 429 U.S. 873; Renton v. Playtime
Theaters, 475 U.S. 41(1986) reh. denied 475 U.S. 1132; FWIPBS, Inc. v. Dallas, 493 U.S. 215(1990); and Barnes v. Glen Theater, 501 U.S. 560,
1111 S.Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991); and Village of National Village v. Wiener. et al., 3 Cal.4th 832 (1992) (as modified January 21, 1993); Topanga
Press, Inc. et al. v. Village of Los Angeles, 93 D.A.R. 3585 (March 22, 1993) 93 D.A.R. 5261 (as amended April 27, 1993); Erie v. Paps, Village of
Erie et al. v. PAP's A.M. dba "KANDYLAND".
(20) Locational criteria alone do not adequately protect health safety and general welfare of the people of Northfield and thus certain requirements with
respect to the ownership and operation of sexually oriented businesses is in the public interest.
(21) Consistent with sale and consumption of alcohol and outside advertising limitations, restricted hours of operation will further prevent the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
(22) It is not the intent of this article to suppress any speech activities protected by the first amendment, but to enact content neutral legislation which
addresses the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
(23) It is not the intent of the corporate authorities to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material, and the corporate authorities recognize
that state law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects and encourages state enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity
statutes against such illegal activities in Northfield. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-160: PURPOSE AND INTENT.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens
of the village and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses
within the village, thereby reflecting or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this article
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first
amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-161: DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this section, certain terms and words are defined as follows:
ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar
machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each are regularly used to show films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which has over twenty five percent (25%) of
its stock in trade or derives over twenty five percent (25%) of its revenues or devotes over twenty five percent (25%) of its interior business or advertising
to the sale, rental for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly
feature: 1) persons who appear seminude or in a state of seminudity; 2) pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: 1) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising including, but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, or 2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10)
hours; or 3) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 178/377
any form of consideration.
ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of seminudity.
DANCER OR PERFORMER. A person who dances, performs or otherwise entertains in any sexually oriented business.
EMPLOYEE. Any person who works, dances, performs or otherwise entertains for a sexually oriented business; regardless of whether or not said person
is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business or works as an independent contractor.
ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
article;
(3) The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this article to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice of
massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor any licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or
technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or
professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. Means: 1) the appearance of human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the
female breast; or 2) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.
OPERATOR. Means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as
well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the village, any special district, school district, or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which is used for governmental purposes.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or
similar public land within the village which is under the control, operation, or management of the village park and recreation authorities.
PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which the general public has a right to go or is invited.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. A single-family home, duplex, townhouse or multiple-family residence as defined in this code.
SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school.
SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of seminudity is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities" when one or
more of the persons is seminude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or seminude model studio.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS AND ACTIVITIES. As used in this division means and includes any of the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 179/377
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
(5) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF THE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen
percent (15%), as the floor areas exist on the date of passage hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or
other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-162: ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED.
The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in a B-1 zoning district and shall be subject to the following restriction:
(1) No person shall cause or permit the establishment or operate or maintain any sexually oriented business, within five hundred feet (500') of another
such business or within five hundred feet (500') or any religious institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, or
public park or public building, or within five hundred feet (500') of any property zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes.
(2) As regarding subsection (1) of this section, distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest portion of the respective property lines of each business. The distance between any sexually
oriented business and any religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth
organization, or public park or public building or any properties zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes shall also be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the property line where the sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, boys club, girls
club, or similar existing youth organization or public park or public building or any properties zoned for residential use or used for residential
purposes.
(3) A person commits a violation if he or she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-163: INJUNCTION.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit or license is subject to a suit for injunction as
well as prosecution for the violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine for every day the violation continues, and if an injunction must be sought,
attorney fees and costs will be assessed against the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-164: PERMIT REQUIRED.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit or license issued by the village for the
particular type of business.
B. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the village an original and two (2) copies of a sworn permit application on the
standard application form supplied by the village.
C. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is twenty one (21) years of
age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of Illinois, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state: a) the sexually
oriented business' fictitious name; and b) submit the required Illinois registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this section has, within the two (2) or five (5) year period as specified in
section 11-167 of this article immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal act
involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 180/377
(4) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to this section has had a previous permit under this article or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinances from another village, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether
the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder
of a corporation that is permitted under this article whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this article or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinance from another village, city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
(6) The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing. (See classifications within definition of sexually oriented businesses.)
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any.
(8) The applicant's mailing addresses and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
(12) A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by an Illinois registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this article within five hundred feet (500') of the property to
be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school or public park or recreation area within five hundred feet
(500') of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or property used for residential purposes within five
hundred feet (500') of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at
the time an application is submitted.
(13) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant.
(14) If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes, or other video reproductions
which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas then the person shall comply with the application requirements stated at section
11-167 et seq., of this article.
D. Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the
event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30)
days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the director of community development and building or his/her
designee, shall be grounds for suspension of a permit.
E. In the event that the director of community development and building or his/her designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has
improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the
applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which
the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)
F. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health,
fire and building codes and laws. All inspections by the village shall be conducted to comply with section 11-166 of this article.
G. The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in appendix D of this code at the time of filing an application.
H. Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any sexually oriented business and as part of any application for a permit under this section, the
applicant shall obtain from the village or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the locational
requirements of section 11-162 of this article.
I. The fact that a person possesses other types of state, county or village permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit from the village of Northfield.
J. By applying for a permit or license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise
by the director of community development and building or his/her designee, the village of Northfield police department and all other village agencies
charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the village of their respective responsibilities.
K. The applicant shall be required to provide the village with the names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to section 11-
175 of this article. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-165: ADULT USE AFFIDAVIT.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 181/377
In addition to all application requirements of section 11-164 of this article, any person or entity desiring to operate any business of any kind or nature in the
village shall be required to disclose upon application for any new or renewal business license or any building permit for the construction or remodeling of
any structure whether or not the business or structure will be used as or become a sexually oriented business. All such licenses or permits shall contain an
adult use affidavit, the purpose of which shall be to disclose whether the applicant intends to operate a sexually oriented business. The adult use affidavit
shall require a detailed description of the type of business to be conducted, the proposed hours of operation and whether or not a liquor license will be
sought. This affidavit will require that the applicant swears, under oath, whether or not the business operation will fall under any of the definitions of a
sexually oriented business. If the business is operated in any particular or detail, contrary to the disclosures on the adult use affidavit, which is attached to
ordinance 03-1148 and made a part of this article, the license may be revoked pursuant to section 11-172 of this article. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-166: INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.
A. Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the village and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the village or its designee, shall
immediately send photocopies of the application to the village of Northfield police department and any other village agencies responsible for
enforcement of health fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application
and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this article. The investigation shall be
completed promptly. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or
disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event it disapproves, state the reasons for disapproval. The village of Northfield police
department shall only be required to certify the NCIC records request check.
B. A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any
statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the
photocopy of the application to the director of community development and building. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-167: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.
A. Authority. The director of community development and building or his/her designee, shall grant or deny an application for a permit or license within
sixty (60) days from the date of its proper filing. However, any failure to grant or deny the permit within sixty (60) days shall not be deemed a waiver by
the village of its right to deny the permit.
B. Grant Of Application For Permit.
(1) The director of community development and building or his/her designee, shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in
subsection C of this section is present.
(2) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business whether permitted or not may be subject to indecency
pursuant to the United States supreme court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991). The permit shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
C. Denial Of Application For Permit.
(1) The director of community development and building or his/her designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
(a) An applicant is under twenty one (21) years of age.
(b) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her.
(c) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the village to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
(d) An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or permit applicant for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(e) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented businesses have not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes
by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance. If the agency is the village, all inspections required shall be
conducted and completed promptly.
(f) The application or permit fees required have not been paid.
(g) An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to,
the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business under section 11-162 of this article.
(h) The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order.
(i) The applicant has a permit under this article which has been suspended or revoked.
(j) An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of finding of guilty or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if
the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or
crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 182/377
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering or tax violations.
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of finding of guilty or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if
the finding of guilty are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials
harmful to minors, prostitution pandering or tax violations, offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month period;
4. The fact that a finding of guilty is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
5. An applicant who has been found guilty of the above described "specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only
when the time period required above in this section has elapsed.
(k) An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in section 11-175 of this article.
(2) If the director of community development and building or his/her designee denies the application, they shall notify the applicant of the denial and
state the reason(s) for the denial within fourteen (14) days of the denial.
(3) If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different
decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-168: ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-169: INSPECTION.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the code enforcement officer, the county health department and the fire department to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this article, or his/her agent or employee commits a violation of this article if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at
any time that it is occupied or open for business. Such violation is punishable by fine as set forth in appendix D of this code for each and every day the
operator refuses to allow the inspection. The village, at its discretion, may petition any court with jurisdiction to compel the operator to allow the
inspection. In addition, the refusal of the operator to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of his or her business
license or any permit associated with the business. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-170: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 11-167 of this
article. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
B. When the director of community development and building or his/her designee, denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit
for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the village or its designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has
been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-
18-2003)
Sec. 11-171: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
A. The director of community development and building or his/her designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she
determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or
(2) Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in the sexually oriented business premises; or
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
(5) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state
or local, based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing the rules or laws. In the event of such violation, the
village shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the violation. If the
permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven (7) day period, the village shall suspend the permit and shall notify the
permittee of the suspension.
(6) Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section 11-174 of this article. In the event that the village or its designee, suspends a permit on the grounds
that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to this section, the director of community development and building or his/her designee shall
forthwith notify the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 183/377
(7) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation section 11-179 of this article. The suspension shall remain in effect
until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected.
(8) Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as required in section 11-175 of this article.
(9) Knowingly allowed nudity to occur in or on the permitted premises. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-172: REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
A. The director of community development and building or his/her designee shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in section 11-171 of this article
occurs and the permit has been previously suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The director of community development and building or his/her designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that:
(1) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's
opportunity for obtaining a permit; or
(2) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
(3) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or
(4) A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended;
or
(5) A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for which the time period required in section 11-167 of this article has not elapsed; or
(6) On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a finding of guilty has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a finding of guilty is being appealed shall have no effect on the
revocation of the permit; or
(7) A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees related to a sexually oriented business; or
(8) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
(9) A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented business under a single roof.
C. When the director of community development and building or his/her designee revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the
permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became effective, except as set forth in this
subsection. If, subsequent to first revocation, the director of community development and building or his/her designee finds that the basis for revocation
under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation
became effective. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-173: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek within
fourteen (14) days from the date of the denial, suspension or revocation review of such administrative action through the village board. Within seven (7)
days of the filing of such an appeal, the village shall schedule a hearing date on such appeal. The hearing shall be commenced within fifteen (15) days of
the date the appeal was filed. The rules of evidence applicable in a court of law in the state of Illinois shall be relaxed at this hearing.
Once the hearing is concluded, the village board shall make a ruling and mail to each participant a written decision within fourteen (14) days of the date of
the conclusion of the hearing.
During the pendency of any hearing or any judicial review, a sexually oriented business that has been denied a permit or renewal license or whose license
has been suspended or revoked shall be closed until the village board or the court has made a final determination that the reason for the denial,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation is invalid. Any sexually oriented business subject to a permit denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation is hereby
deemed to be an emergency threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction
permits the sexually oriented business to remain open pending appeal, then as a condition of remaining open, a penal bond in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) cash shall be posted. An absolute condition of the bond shall be that if any provision of this article is violated in any
manner during the pendency of any appeal, the entire bond shall be forfeited at the sole discretion of the village. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-174: TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
A. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
B. A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
(1) Obtains an amendment to the permit from the director of community development and building or his/her designee, which provides that he/she is
now the permittee, which amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the director of community
development and building or his/her designee, setting forth the information called for under section 11-164 of this article in the application; and
(2) Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 184/377
(a) No permit may be transferred when the director of community development and building or his/her designee has notified the permittee that
suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
(b) A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location.
(c) Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be deemed
revoked. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-175: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
A. License Fee. Each person who dances, performs or otherwise entertains in a sexually oriented business shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented
business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. The fee is to cover reasonable administrative
costs of the licensing application process.
B. License Application Form. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to
be provided by the director of community development and building or his/her designee the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) State driver's license or identification number;
(7) Social security number; and
(8) Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least twenty one (21) years of age.
(9) Attached to the application form as provided above, a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the village of Northfield police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant.
(10) A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate in this or any other county, village, state, or country has ever
had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension,
state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(11) Whether the applicant has been found guilty of a "specified criminal act" as defined in subsection 11-167C(1)(j) of this article. This information shall
include the date, place, and nature of each finding of guilty and identify the jurisdiction.
(12) The director of community development and building or his/her designee shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to
the village of Northfield police department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application
process shall be completed within fifteen (15) working days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the director of
community development and building or his/her designee shall issue a license unless the report from the village of Northfield police department find
that one or more of the following findings is true:
(a) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the village of Northfield police department or other department of the village;
(b) The applicant is under twenty one (21) years of age;
(c) The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" as defined in subsection 11-167C(1)(j) of this article;
(d) The sexually oriented business employee license prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions
of this article;
(e) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the village within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
C. Renewal Of License.
(1) A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal by the director of community development and building or his/her
designee upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the director of community development and building or his/her designee and
the village of Northfield police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal act" as defined in subsection 11-
167C(1)(j) of this article or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit
application.
(2) The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment as set forth in appendix D of this code.
(3) Applicants for this section's license may work during the processing of the application and license. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-176: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 185/377
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued to said business under this article, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight
feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram
in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to be north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The director of community development and building or
his/her designee, may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the village.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight form the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
view area specified in subsection A(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, curtains, partitions,
screening or other materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this subsection A.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes", shall be permitted in the
walls or partition separating each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room, restroom or any other room on the premises. No door may be
attached or installed on any viewing room. All viewing rooms must be at least one hundred (100) square feet with no dimension less than ten feet
(10') and must be fully open on at least one side within no obstructions at all on the open side. The open side must be in full view of the manager's
station.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
and an illumination of not less than two (2.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
B. A person having a duty under subsections A(1) through A(9) of this section commits a violation if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 03-1148,
2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-177: MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
A person commits a violation of this article if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know permit, suffer or allow:
(1) Admittance of a person under twenty one (21) years of age to the business premises;
(2) A person under twenty one (21) years of age to remain at the business premises;
(3) A person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; or
(4) A person who is under twenty one (21) years of age to work at the business premises as an employee. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-178: ADVERTISING REGULATIONS.
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this article if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless
of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute
or local ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this article if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, and
displays or otherwise exhibits any materials and/or performances found at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside
the premises. This shall apply regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business. This prohibition shall not extend to the
advertising of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business.
C. The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 186/377
D. All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This
required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business
for the personal safety of the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism
and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-179: HOURS OF OPERATION.
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for said business, and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, before one o'clock (1:00) P.M. of any day or after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any day.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for the business, the employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or
solicits a service before one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on any day or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. of any day. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-180: NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES NOT OFFERING FOR SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
The United States supreme court in the decision of Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456, (June 21, 1991) and Erie v. Paps, Op. Cit.
has upheld the right of cities to prohibit live public exposure of a persons' private parts, specifically applies to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued to said businesses under this article), including the businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or
consumed at the premises.
Live nudity is prohibited in the village of Northfield within any business, including, but not limited to, a sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented
business which is found in violation of this section shall have its permit revoked pursuant to the provisions of section 11-172 of this article. (Ord. 03-1148,
2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-181: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID
PERMIT.
In addition to the provisions found in other sections of this article, the following additional provisions shall also apply to sexually oriented businesses:
It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for said business and the person knows or should know that:
(1) The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under this article for any applicable classification;
(2) The business has a permit which is under suspension;
(3) The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
(4) The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-182: EXEMPTIONS.
A. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
B. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted
under this article, exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of
a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-183: PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the state of Illinois criminal code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any
of the provisions of this article, such person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be punished by a fine as set forth in
appendix D of this code. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or
noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 187/377
Nothing shall prevent or restrict the village from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at
law for damages.
All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and independently available to the village and the village shall be authorized to
pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-184: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
The village and its designees, the village of Northfield police department and all other departments and agencies, and all other village officers, agents and
employees charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith
trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this article. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-185: PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES.
A. It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purpose, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
B. Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include, but are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, leather restraints,
racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. (Ord.
03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-186: CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES AND PATRONS.
A. An employee of a sexually oriented business while within the establishment or on the property, commits a violation if she or he touches a customer or
the clothing of a customer while performing or dancing, or performs, dances or performs any service from a distance in violation of section 11-188 of
this article.
B. A customer or patron of any sexually oriented business commits an offense if he or she touches an employee or the clothing of an employee of any
sexually oriented business. It is the intent of this article that there be no physical contact of any kind or nature (skin to skin, skin to clothing or clothing
to clothing), between an employee and a patron. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-187: TIPS.
A. Except as set forth in subsection C of this section, no patron shall, in any manner or form, pay for any service or form of entertainment or give any
gratuities directly to any dancer or performer.
B. Except as set forth in subsection C of this section, no dancer shall solicit, in any form or manner, any payment for any service or form of entertainment
or solicit any gratuity from any patron of any sexually oriented businesses.
C. Any payment for any service, entertainment or gratuities for dancers or performers of any sexually orientated businesses must be placed in a
designated box within the facility not located on the dancing or performing stage or in violation of the distance requirements stated in section 11-188 of
this article. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-188: PERFORMANCE LOCATION.
Any dancing or performance must be on a designated fixed or immovable stage elevated at least four feet (4') from the floor and no patron or audience
member may be seated or otherwise perform or be within ten feet (10') of the edge of a stage or go onto a stage. No dancer, entertainer or employee of
any sexually oriented business may stand, kneel or crouch with any patron or provide any form of entertainment for any patron in violation of the distance
requirements of this section. (Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 11-189: ALL AREAS MUST BE OPEN.
No employee, dancer, performer or other entertainer of any sexually oriented business may provide any service or form of entertainment for any person in
any area which is not open to all other persons within the sexually oriented business. All areas of the sexually oriented business shall be open and
accessible to all customers and patrons and must be visible from the main customer seating area and shall not be closed off from other customer areas.
The interior of the patron washrooms shall not be visible to other customers, but employees may not use the same washrooms as patrons or customers.
(Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE VII. SALES TAX PREDATION PROHIBITED
Sec. 11-190: SALES TAX SHARING ARRANGEMENT.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 188/377
The Village of Northfield shall not enter into any sales tax sharing arrangement with a retail entity when the sales transaction does not take place in the
Village of Northfield or otherwise have the appropriate nexus to the Village. (Ord. 11-1503, 12-5-2011)
Sec. 11-191: REPORT OF SALES.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity located in the Village of Northfield, that is required by law to collect the Illinois Retailers' Occupation Tax, to: 1)
report sales that are made from a Village of Northfield location as being made elsewhere; or 2) enter into any agreement with any other unit of local
government to make such reports. (Ord. 11-1503, 12-5-2011)
ARTICLE VIII. CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
11-192. PAID SICK LEAVE.
A. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist
from time to time with regard to paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave shall also be in compliance with all applicable Federal and/or
State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave imposed by any ordinance adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners shall apply
to employers located within the Village.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons the
employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the
person has its principal place of business within the Village or does business within the Village.
D. For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean:
(1) The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
(2) An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
(3) The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
(4) The government of any municipality. (Ord. 17-1696, 12-5-2017)
ARTICLE IX. PENALTY
Sec. 11-193: PENALTY.
The license of any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to revocation. In addition, a person, firm
or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code.
However, in addition to revocation, any person violating a provision of article II, division XI of this chapter shall be penalized according to the penalties
available under a Class C misdemeanor pursuant to the Illinois Criminal Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997; amd. Ord. 98-948, 9-28-1998; Ord. 98-952, 10-
26-1998; Ord. 00-1035, 7-17-2000; Ord. 03-1148, 2-18-2003; Ord. 11-1503, 12-5-2011; Ord. 17-1696, 12-5-2017)
Footnote 1: See section 14-7 of this code.
Footnote 2: See appendix C of this code.
Footnote 3: 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
Title Chapter 12
SIGN REGULATIONS
Chapter 12
SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-1: INTENT OF REGULATIONS.
In order that the public locate goods, services and facilities in the village without difficulty or confusion, and to maintain a high quality of development
throughout the village, it is the intent of this chapter to encourage excellence in the design of signs, to promote signs compatible with their surroundings,
appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain and expressive of the identity of the proprietors of the premises on which such signs are located. In
no case shall permanent signage be used for the sole purpose of advertising. These regulations are further intended to reduce visual confusion, restrict
signs which overload the public's capacity to receive information or which increase the probability of accidents by distracting attention, obstructing vision or
which otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 189/377
Sec. 12-2: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine where required by context. ln addition, the
following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. Any definition which is regulatory in its terms, shall be
deemed part of the regulations of this chapter.
DEFINITION OF A SIGN.
SIGN. Any permanent or temporary description, display, identification, illuminated device, or illustration which is visible from any public place or is located
on private property and exposed to the public and which its sole purpose is to provide information, identify or offer direction to an activity, building,
business, institution, governmental building, person, place, service or structure; includes any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, poster, symbol
installed or situated merchandise or temporary sign designed to identify or convey information, with the exception of a flag of a unit of government.
OTHER RELEVANT DEFINITIONS.
ADDRESS SIGN. A sign identifying the street and number of the building on which it is placed.
AGGREGATE SIGN USAGE. The total square footage of all the signs on a lot.
ANIMATED SIGNS. Any sign which includes action or motion.
AREA OF A SIGN. The area of a sign shall be computed by the applicable mathematical formula for the shape of the sign face. ln the case of a sign made
up of separate letters or characterizations connected in meaning the area shall be computed as the area lying within straight lines connecting the extreme
projections, corners, or edges of the letters, characters, and other figures composing the sign taken as a whole. See illustration 3 at the end of this chapter.
In the case of a ground sign, the area of the base of the sign shall not be counted towards the total square footage of the sign. The base shall be limited to
four feet (4') in height and landscaped wherever possible. See illustration 3A at the end of this chapter.
In the case of a multifaced sign, the area shall be computed as follows:
(1) If the outermost projection of one face is less than twelve inches (12") from the outermost projection of the other face and the message on each
face is the same; the sign area shall be the area of one face. Said sign shall be considered a single sign for purposes of this chapter. See illustration
4 at the end of this chapter.
(2) If the outermost projection of any face of a two (2) faced sign is more than twelve inches (12") removed from the outermost projection of any other
face, or if the message of one face differs in any respect from the message on the other face, the area shall be determined by multiplying the
distance between the outermost projections of the two (2) faces times the height of the sign face and adding that product to the sum of the area of
the two (2) sign faces. See illustration 4 at the end of this chapter.
(3) If a sign has more than two (2) faces with messages, the area shall be the combined area of all faces.
AREA OF STREET EXPOSURE. The square foot area of the building wall (width x height) which faces or is primarily oriented towards the principal street.
The height of the wall shall not include any portion of the roof. If a wall has an irregular form, or is rounded, the area of street exposure shall be calculated
as the area of a projection of an elevation of such wall upon a plane which is parallel to the principal street. See illustration 2 at the end of this chapter.
This calculation shall be used to determine the aggregate sign usage permitted on a lot.
ASYMMETRICAL MULTIFACED SIGN. Multifaced signs with faces which are of different dimensions or whose faces have sides that are not parallel.
AWNING. An overhead cover, often of fabric or metal designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which
projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door or the like. See section 12-18, illustration 1 of this chapter.
BANNER. A sign made of lightweight material, such as vinyl, fabric or a similar flexible material that is either ground mounted between two (2) poles,
mounted to an exterior building wall or designed as part of a permanent sign structure which promotes grand openings, special promotions, holidays,
special events, charitable events, educational events and is displayed for a limited amount of time.
BENCH SIGN. A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right of way.
BILL. A poster or similar public notice.
BILLBOARD. See definition of Off Premises Sign.
BUILDING. Any structure permanently affixed to the ground with a permanent roof, separated on all sides from adjacent open space by exterior or party
walls; built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind.
CANOPY SIGN. A sign which is located in a hood, awning, or roof like structure which projects from a building wall for the purpose of providing shelter or
protection from the weather. See section 12-18, illustration 1 of this chapter.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A permanent sign that is designed or used so that characters, letters, or symbols can be manually changed or rearranged
without altering the surface of the sign for purposes of conveying store hours or help wanted.
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN. A temporary sign advertising retail and nonretail uses as defined herein.
DIRECTORY SIGN. A sign stating the names and locations of occupants and uses within the building in letters not exceeding one-half inch (1/2") in height
and width and which sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. A directory sign must be attached to the building which it serves.
ELECTRIC SIGN. See definition of Illuminated Sign (Internal).
EMBELLISHMENT. Letters, numbers, objects, figures, characters or representations projecting more than six inches (6") from the surface to which they
are attached.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 190/377
EMBLEM. An object or representation that functions as a symbol.
FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent of flashing light by means of
animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
GARAGE SALE SIGN. Any sign advertising a sale open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone as defined by
the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property owned and maintained by an individual or members of the immediate family
residing on the property and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence.
GROUND SIGN. Any sign located on the ground or supported by structural members placed in the ground and which is structurally independent of any
other structure on the lot. See section 12-18, illustration 1 of this chapter.
HEIGHT OF SIGN. The vertical distance from the upper surface of the nearest adjacent street curb to the highest point of the sign; or if no curb is present,
then from the adjacent street grade.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign containing only the name and address of the occupant or business establishment.
ILLUMINATED SIGN (EXTERNAL). A sign characterized as having its source of artificial light located on or outside the perimeter of such sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN (INTERNAL). A sign characterized as having its source of artificial light located within the perimeter of such sign.
ILLUSTRATIONS. Various signs are depicted in the addendum of this chapter. These illustrations are an integral part of this chapter.
INDEXING SIGN. A sign designed to change from one message to another by use of multifaced sections with moving and stopping actions.
LOT. A zoning lot unless the context of the chapter clearly indicates otherwise.
LOT LINE. A recorded property boundary line of any single lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a right of way.
MARQUEE SIGN. See definition of Canopy Sign.
MULTIFACED SIGN. A sign with a message or surface intended for a message on more than one side.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN. Signs, espousing charitable, political, social, civic, religious, philanthropic or other nonprofit ideological causes. This is
intended to include the promulgation of all information protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution which does not promote retail or
nonretail commercial establishments as defined herein.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign existing before the adoption hereof which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter.
NONRETAIL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which produces or distributes goods for use by industry, a particular trade or retail
establishments.
OFF PREMISES SIGN. Any sign including a billboard which directs attention to any promotion, business, commodity, service, or activity which is not
conducted, sold, or offered on the lot upon which the sign is located.
OPAQUE. A surface or material completely impervious to the passage of light.
OPEN HOUSE SIGN. Any sign which may accompany a real estate sign and be used to indicate the premises is open for viewing by the general public.
OPEN WALL SIGN. A wall sign that consists of formed or shaped letters, numerals, trademarks or other insignia that are attached to a wall and between
which the wall is exposed. See illustration 3 at the end of this chapter.
OWNER. Shall include either the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located.
PAINTING. A picture, design or display in paint.
PENNANT. See definition of Banner.
PERMANENT SIGN. Any fixed sign whose structure and location is not intended to be subject to temporary or routine alteration.
PHYSICAL INTERFERENCE. Any obstruction or distraction caused by a sign that adversely affects highway safety.
PLACARD. A printed or written announcement or display in a public place.
POLE SIGN. See definition of Ground Sign.
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign designed to be moved from place to place or not permanently attached to the ground or to any structure.
POSTER. A large printed placard, bill, or announcement, often illustrated, posted to advertise or publicize something.
PREMISES. A zoning lot including any structure thereon.
PRINCIPAL STREET. The principal street shall be only one of the following at the option of the owner:
(1) The street from which the building takes its address.
(2) The street on which the building has its main entrance.
PROJECTED IMAGE SIGN. Any sign which has a prephotographed light image projected onto it.
PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign that is fastened directly to an outside wall of any building and projects outward more than twelve inches (12") from such
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 191/377
wall.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY. Land under the control of a public agency that is dedicated for public use to accommodate a transportation system and/or public
infrastructure.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN. Any sign intended primarily to promote items of general interest to the community rather than to espouse a
particular idea, product or service.
PUBLIC STREET. The area lying within the described limits of a dedicated right of way or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic (excluding an alley) which is
open to public use as a matter of right.
PYLON SIGN. See definition of Ground Sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. Both residential, commercial and
office real estate signs are included.
RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE SIGNS. A nonilluminated sign identifying only the name, address, profession or degree of the occupant of premises on which
the sign is located.
RETAIL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which sells products or services to the general public.
RIGHT OF WAY. A strip of land acquired by the public or by a utility and occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, walkway, railroad, utility or other
similar use.
ROOF SIGN. Signs on, above, mounted on, attached to or overhanging the roof of any building.
SEASONAL OR HOLIDAY SIGNS. Signs used for generally recognized holidays which are installed for a limited period of time, e.g., Christmas
decorations.
SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of and intended to support a sign.
SINGLE FACED SIGN. A sign with a message on only one side.
SNIPE SIGN. Any sign of any material that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, traffic sign pole or fence located on public or private property.
Banners displayed for the purpose of publicizing civic events shall not be included in this definition.
SOLD SIGN. Signs with a message indicating that real estate has been sold.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including advertising signs.
SYMBOL. See definition of Emblem.
TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, or advertising description or display, which has a designated display period in conjunction with a special event (e.g., sale,
construction, for sale or lease), usually constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper or other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a
short period of time not to exceed three (3) months. See section 12-18, illustration 1 of this chapter.
TRANSLUCENT. A surface or material that allows light to be transmitted but causes sufficient diffusion to eliminate view of the light source.
UNIMPROVED LOT. A lot or tract of land which is unoccupied by any building or structure.
VILLAGE. The village of Northfield, Illinois.
WINDOW SIGN. Any sign which is applied to, placed in or attached to a window or is located within a building such that the sign may be viewed from the
exterior of the building. See section 12-18, illustration 1 of this chapter. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 95-845, 5-22-1995; Ord. 03-1149, 2-18-2003;
Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003; Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011; Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
Sec. 12-3: STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.
All signs erected or posted in the village of Northfield, except those listed in section 12-5 of this chapter shall be submitted with detailed designs to the
building commissioner for referral to the architectural commission. The following standards shall be utilized in the architectural commission's evaluation of
submittals:
(1) Signs may only be displayed on a principal street exposure except as follows:
(a) If the building has more than one tenant and the main entrances of those tenants are on different sides of the building, then each tenant may
have signs on his side of the building. This exception will not increase the aggregate sign usage permitted on the lot.
(b) If it is demonstrated to the architectural commission that strict enforcement of this provision: 1) is clearly impractical; or 2) that no public detriment
will result from waiver of this restriction.
(2) An overall sign plan shall be submitted where a building, lot, or group of continuous buildings are under common ownership or control and
contemplate more than one sign.
(3) The information contained in a sign shall be:
(a) Appropriate to the activity to which it pertains.
(b) Legible in the circumstances in which it is seen.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 192/377
(c) Limited in quantity so as not to be confusing or misleading.
(4) No advertising sign shall be permitted on any railroad right of way or siding regardless of the zoning district in which it is located.
(5) No sign may be erected or maintained in any zoning district if the sign emits or reflects more than thirty (30) foot-candles of light at a distance of one
foot (1') based upon an average of three (3) readings taken at any three (3) points on the sign as long as the distance between each of those points
is at least one-third (1/3) of the longest side of the sign or if the sign is round, one-third (1/3) its diameter. No single point of light emission or reflection
shall exceed seventy five (75) foot-candles at a distance of one foot (1'). Any sign violating this standard shall be deemed to cause excessive glare.
In addition, the sign contractor must certify in writing that the lighting source meets village code.
(6) A sign shall have a harmonious relationship with nearby signs, buildings and neighborhood. The sign shall be designed so as not to adversely
impact upon adjacent structures. The size, shape, material, color, texture, lettering, numbers, location, arrangement, and lighting of a sign shall be
consistent in character with its building and its surrounding neighborhood.
(7) Colors shall be used with restraint. Sign surfaces shall not be treated with any reflective or glitter type material.
(8) External lighting shall be arranged so that light sources are not visible.
(9) An internally illuminated sign may have no transparent surfaces and may display only letters, trademarks or logos.
(10) Any illuminated sign shall be extinguished between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., except that such sign
may remain illuminated during such times as the activity to which the sign pertains is open for business during eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
(11) The sign must be constructed and used so as to maintain the architectural integrity of the building to which it relates. For internally illuminated
signs, only the copy, display and logo shall be of translucent materials, the background of such signs shall be of opaque materials.
(12) Additional restrictions and requirements included elsewhere in this chapter shall be part of the criteria of the design review process. (1986 Code)
Sec. 12-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS.
The following signs are specifically prohibited throughout the village of Northfield.
(1) A-frame, sandwich board, and other signs which are placed on a sidewalk or curb or between a sidewalk and curb or other parkway except as
otherwise provided herein. This prohibition shall not include duly authorized governmental signs.
(2) Permanent advertising signs. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(3) All off premises commercial advertising signs, except those permitted by section 12-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
(4) Animated signs.
(5) Asymmetrical multifaced signs.
(6) Bench signs.
(7) Flashing signs.
(8) Ground signs greater than twenty four (24) square feet in area or twelve feet (12') in height from the average grade of the lot.
(9) No wall sign shall be placed higher than the second floor windowsill of a structure; provided, however, that if the wall area to be covered has no
windows or openings, the sign may extend to sixteen feet (16') to top of sign.
(10) Ground signs which overhang any part of another structure, parking or loading area, driveway or walkway.
(11) Signs greater than fifty (50) square feet in area for each face.
(12) Indexing signs. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(13) Neon or similar gaseous tube illuminated signs, except where the neon is used as a backlight and the lamp/bulb is not visible. (Ord. 95-845, 5-22-
1995)
(14) Portable signs.
(15) Projected image signs.
(16) "Projecting signs", as defined herein, except awning and canopy signs.
(17) Roof signs.
(18) Signs consisting of a string, cluster or series of lights, with the exception of "seasonal or holiday decorations" as defined in this chapter.
(19) Signs painted or pasted directly on the wall of a building or on a fence. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(20) Signs or lighting for signs located on or projecting into a public right of way. This shall not include signs or lighting otherwise permitted and which
are eight feet (8') above an adjoining sidewalk and project no more than twelve inches (12") into the right of way. This likewise shall not include
directional or traffic signs authorized by the state, county, or village; or village approved streetlight banners that promote civic events or seasonal
messages/graphics. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 07-1338, 7-17-2007)
(21) Signs posted on any commercial or retail building entrance or exit door with the exception of: a) operating instructions for the door itself, b) signs
required by any government department or organization, c) signs depicting hours of operation. Such signs may not exceed one square foot in area.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 193/377
(22) Signs which move, expand, rotate or in any way change size to attract attention.
(23) Snipe signs.
(24) Permanent signs in any residential district with the exception of street signs and subdivision names.
(25) Sold signs displayed on any lot or premises.
(26) For sale signs displayed in vehicles on any lot or premises. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(27) All other signs of whatever kind or nature which are not specified in section 12-5 or 12-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
Sec. 12-5: SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
Each of the following signs is exempt from the application and review process so long as the sign conforms to all other requirements of this chapter and
other regulations of the village of Northfield:
(1) Indoor signs which are not visible from outside the building.
(2) A residential nameplate sign not exceeding eighty (80) square inches in area. Such a sign may also contain a street and house number.
(3) In the case of apartment houses for three (3) or more families, one identification sign not exceeding five (5) square feet in area indicating the name
of the building and its ownership. This may be in addition to such other signs as may be permitted by reason of any commercial use of the first floor.
(Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(4) Nonilluminated signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, for a garage, estate or demolition sale may be placed on the lot or premises on
which such sale/event is conducted. There may not be more than two (2) such signs on the lot or premises and one off premises. Such signs may be
displayed only on the day of the event. No residential address shall display such a sign more than two (2) times in a calendar year for garage sales
and one time in a calendar year for estate or demolition sales. A permit for such sales shall be obtained after the appropriate application permit/fee
for the sales event has been secured from the village and placed in the front window of the event. No other type of signs shall be permitted for these
events. (Ord. 13-1567, 9-17-2013)
(5) A sign placed on a vehicle. However such vehicle may not be parked for more than two (2) consecutive hours in any location where visible from any
public right of way. This two (2) hour limitation shall not include business vehicles which are parked at a residence or business premises other than
that of the owner of the vehicle while conducting business at that premises. This shall not prohibit an election sign provided such sign conforms to
subsection (16) of this section. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(6) Directional or instructional signs, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, which provide direction or instruction to guide persons to
noncommercial facilities intended to serve the public. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-2002)
(7) Temporary nonilluminated window signs in retail establishments only advertising special sales or merchandise or special occasions. The total area
covered by such signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total window area of the street exposure side of the building. Such signs may not
be displayed more than fourteen (14) days prior to the special sale or event to which they pertain, and they shall be removed within twenty four (24)
hours after said sale or event. Temporary nonilluminated window signs shall be used only insofar as they do not produce an aggregate percentage of
sign usage greater than seven percent (7%) of the area of principal street exposure for the lot when added to the permanent signage under
subsection 12-6(2)(b) of this chapter.
(8) Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical plaques and similar designations not exceeding three (3) square feet displayed for noncommercial
purposes.
(9) Temporary nonilluminated residential real estate signs, advertising the sale or lease of the lot or premises on which it is placed. Information on such
sign shall pertain to said property only. Such signs shall be ten (10) square feet or less in area and limited to one sign per lot and no higher than four
feet (4') in height to the highest part of such sign. Such signs shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the sale or lease of the premises.
(10) Temporary nonilluminated commercial and office real estate signs, advertising the sale or lease of the lot or premises on which it is placed.
Information on such sign shall pertain to said property only. Such signs shall be twenty four (24) square feet or less in area and limited to one sign
per lot and no higher than eight feet (8') in height to the highest part of such sign. Such signs shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the
sale of the premises or seventy five percent (75%) of the premises is leased.
(11) Open house signs shall be displayed with real estate signs only on Wednesdays and Sundays. Each premises or lot is allowed a maximum of two
(2) signs. One of the two (2) open house signs may be displayed adjacent to the real estate sign on the lot itself and the other may be displayed off
premises at the closest dedicated intersection. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(12) Seasonal or holiday signs or decorations customarily displayed in conjunction with a national holiday or a village sponsored event, for a period not
to exceed sixty (60) days. Lights with globes of more than one inch (1") diameter at any point are not included within this exemption. (Ord. 90-655,
11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-2002)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 194/377
(13) Temporary banners. Nonilluminated temporary special event sign/banners to celebrate a special event, such as a grand opening or other special
events, may be displayed outdoors under these conditions:
(a) Banners are to be professionally made and adhere to the following:
1. Banners are to be clear and legible. Letter height is to be at least four inches (4") if all uppercase and at least five inches (5") if upper and lower
case mixed.
2. Banners may not be illuminated unless the banner is part of a permanent ground sign structure.
3. Banners may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet on properties with one hundred (100) linear feet or more of frontage and twenty four (24)
square feet if the frontage is less than one hundred (100) linear feet and/or six feet (6') above ground level unless wall mounted.
4. Wall mounted banners may not be placed higher than the second floor windowsill of the structure.
(b) Banners may be displayed for a maximum period of fourteen (14) days and must be removed within one day following the event, no more than six
(6) times a year.
(c) One banner is allowed per lot. In case of multiple tenants, no more than two (2) banners from different tenants shall be permitted at one time and
no closer than one hundred feet (100').
(d) Banners shall be affixed in such a manner so the banner sign does not allow wind activation and wall banners must remain flush with the wall.
(e) Off site banners are prohibited.
(f) Banners may not be located in the local, county or state right of way or within the sight distance triangle at any street or drive intersection. (Ord.
11-1481, 3-15-2011)
(14) Flags and emblems of any unit of government. The structure to which any such flag or emblem is attached shall conform to the height
requirements for heights of buildings or structures of the zoning district in which it exists.
(15) Address signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-2002)
(16) Nonilluminated signs, expressing a political message, that are thirty two (32) square feet or less in area on any single lot or premises. No single
such sign may exceed ten (10) square feet in area. (Ord. 10-1463, 7-20-2010)
(17) Signs required of property owners or occupants by the police, fire or other government departments for the convenience or safety of the public.
(18) Scoreboards for athletic fields. Such scoreboards shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
(19) Directory signs, as defined herein.
(20) "No Trespassing" signs posted on the property to which the signs relate, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) Such signs shall be no more than two (2) square feet in area, and
(b) Such signs may be placed no closer than one hundred (100) yards apart on the same lot, and, in no event, shall exceed four (4) in number per
lot.
(21) Signs warning of danger or prohibiting certain activities with respect to public utility property, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area and limited
in number to such as are necessary to adequately inform the public. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-2002)
(22) Residential construction signs are limited to one per lot. Such a sign shall be no greater than five (5) square feet in area and may be displayed on
any lot or premises in any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6 residential dwelling district as established by the Northfield zoning ordinance.
(23) Any municipal or community related signs as approved by the village manager or designee. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-
2002; Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011)
(24) Construction hour signs in accordance with appendix C, section C-8.3, "Construction Signage", of this code. (Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005; amd. Ord.
11-1481, 3-15-2011)
(25) Banners displayed for the purpose of publicizing civic events located on village approved ornamental streetlight poles located within the Central
Avenue right of way and in the village center district. The banners may not exceed twelve (12) square feet. A maximum of one banner per streetlight
pole may be displayed. The artwork, copy and colors of all banners are subject to the review and approval of the architectural commission. The
banners may display the name or logo of a community based organization, seasonal messages or graphics, and information announcing villagewide
events. The banners may not contain advertisement of any individual business entity. The banners shall be constructed of fade resistant materials
and incorporate wind flaps to reduce strain. Torn, damaged and faded banners may not be displayed. Banners shall not be displayed under this
subsection until a governmental entity or quasi-governmental entity enters into a written agreement with the village to consider requests for banners
by governmental entities; determines the term of display of banners; determines if proposed public service announcements, seasonal messages, and
civic events are appropriate for publicizing on banners, and provides for the installation, maintenance and removal of banners, subject to the village's
hold harmless, indemnification and insurance requirements. "Civic event" for purpose of this subsection shall include any event sponsored in whole
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 195/377
or in part by the village or any governmental entity. A "quasi-governmental agency" for purposes of this subsection shall be determined by the village.
(Ord. 07-1341, 8-21-2007; amd. Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011)
Sec. 12-6: SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
The following signs are allowed in the village of Northfield subject to the securing of a permit pursuant to section 12-8 of this chapter:
(1) Construction Site Signs. Such signs shall be temporary, nonilluminated and identify only the parties engaged in design, construction, or financing
on the lot or premises on which they are displayed and then only where new construction or remodeling work is in progress and shall be subject to
the following additional restrictions: (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(a) Only one sign no greater than twenty four (24) square feet in area may be located on a lot or premises in any R-6, O/R, NC, village center, B-1, B-
2, or M-1 district, as established by the Northfield zoning ordinance. Information with respect to design, construction and financing shall be
removed within seven (7) days after completion of work. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003; Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011; Ord.
16-1661, 9-20-2016)
(2) Permanent Signs. Permanent signs calling attention to establishments located on the premises within O/R, village center, B-1, B-2, and M-1 zoning
districts of the village and permitted nonresidential uses in residential districts, with the following restrictions: (Ord. 03-1172, 9-16-2003; amd. Ord.
16-1661, 9-20-2016)
(a) Such signs must be placed only on the principal street exposure side or face of the building, except as stated in subsection 12-3(1) of this
chapter.
(b) The aggregate sign usage for any lot shall not exceed a total of seven percent (7%) of the area of principal street exposure, subject to the
following restrictions:
1. Permanent sign usage shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the area of principal street exposure or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is
less.
2. Temporary window sign usage for retail establishments under subsection 12-5(7) of this chapter shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
total window area of the principal street exposure side of the building, subject to the seven percent (7%) limitation for all sign usage on the
building. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(3) Off Premises Directional Signs. No more than two (2) off premises directional signs for educational institutions and governmental buildings. No
single sign shall be more than six (6) square feet in size. The location, placement, design, and color shall be subject to the approval of the
architectural commission. (Ord. 02-1106, 3-18-2002)
Sec. 12-7: OFF PREMISES SIGNS.
Off premises signs, as defined in this chapter, shall not be permitted in the village of Northfield except as noted in subsection 12-5(4) of this chapter
regarding nonilluminated signs for a garage sale, and subsection 12-6(3), "Off Premises Directional Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
Sec. 12-8: OBTAINING SIGN PERMITS.
Any person desiring to erect, construct or maintain a sign, for which a permit is required pursuant to section 12-6 of this chapter, shall submit an
application to the building commissioner on forms provided by the village. (Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
(1) Whenever the building commissioner receives an application for a sign permit, he shall examine the plans, specifications, and other data submitted
to him. If the proposed sign is in compliance with the rules and regulations of this chapter and other laws and ordinances of the village, he shall refer
the application and other submitted data to the architectural commission which shall have final authority to approve or deny issuance of the permit. If
the proposed sign would not conform to the rules and regulations of the village, the building commissioner shall notify the applicant of the items of
nonconformance and deny the application. The applicant shall then have sixty (60) days to amend the application to conform to the regulations of the
village.
(2) All applications shall contain the following information and material:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located.
(b) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant (owner of the sign).
(c) Name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor, if applicable.
(d) Location of the building, structure or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected.
(e) One set of color photographs taken within seven (7) days of the application showing from various angles existing signs on the premises and
adjacent property. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(f) Seventeen (17) copies of drawings and other appropriate materials showing: (Ord. 99-961, 1-25-1999)
1. The position of the proposed sign in relation to adjacent signs, buildings, and structures.
2. The design, size, structural details, materials, colors, and placement of the proposed sign and sign structure on the lot or building.
(g) A statement specifying the aggregate size of all signs existing on the lot and building at the time of making such application.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 196/377
(h) The information submitted by the applicant shall be in sufficient detail to illustrate clearly the design for which approval is being sought and its
relationship to the structure it serves. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(i) All applications must be made in writing and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee required in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 99-961, 1-25-
1999)
(3) Upon receipt by the building commissioner of a properly completed application for a sign permit, the architectural commission shall, at its next
meeting occurring not less than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the application, review and render a decision on the application. The applicant or a
qualified representative is required to be in attendance at such meeting. The architectural commission shall apply the standards and criteria set forth
in section 12-3 of this chapter. Additionally:
(a) The architectural commission may, prior to rendering its decision, continue the hearing and make recommendations to the applicant as to
changes in the sign plans which, in the commission judgment, would effect compliance with the standards and criteria set forth in section 12-3 of
this chapter.
(b) Should the architectural commission make recommendations for changes in the sign plans, the applicant shall then have twenty one (21) days
from the date of the initial hearing to notify the architectural commission in writing as to whether the applicant intends to incorporate the
recommendations into the applications. If the applicant decides not to incorporate the recommendations into the application he shall state the
reasons for this decision.
(c) If the applicant accepts in writing the recommended changes, the application shall be deemed to have been amended to conform to the
recommendations.
(d) If the applicant rejects the recommendations, the architectural commission shall decide on the application as originally submitted. If the
commission receives no notice of either acceptance or rejection, the recommendations shall be deemed to have been rejected.
(e) At the next meeting after making its recommendations the architectural commission shall vote on whether to approve or disapprove the
application unless the commission and the applicant agree to further continue the hearing.
(f) The architectural commission may approve a permit application only upon a majority vote of all members. Decisions of the architectural
commission shall be a final order for purposes of administrative review. Therefore, any rejection of an application by the commission shall include,
in writing, the reasons for said rejection. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
(4) The community development and building department shall approve or deny the construction site sign application. Two (2) copies of construction
site sign information including: property owner's signature, contact name, address and phone number, site plan including address, rendering of
construction site sign including size, text, colors and dimensions and date to be installed are required. (Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011)
(5) All signs for which a permit has been approved under the provisions of this chapter are subject to a final inspection by the building commissioner to
assure compliance with this chapter and the terms of the permit granted hereunder. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 11-1481, 3-15-2011)
Sec. 12-9: INDEMNIFICATION; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
A. Every applicant for a permit for a sign which will extend over or be located within a public right of way shall file with the village a copy of a liability
insurance policy or a certificate of insurance covering all damage or injury that might be caused by the sign, issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state. The limits of liability shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage and ten
million dollars ($10,000,000.00) for personal injuries. The village, its officers, agents, and employees shall be named as additional parties insured.
Such policy shall be renewed and maintained in force throughout the life of the permit. If at any time the policy shall not be in full force, the permit shall
become null and void.
B. Persons, other than the owner of a premises on which an advertised business is located, who are engaged in the business of erecting, repairing, or
maintaining signs in the village, shall file with the building commissioner a bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with a
responsible surety company as surety thereon. Said bond shall be subject to the reasonable approval as to form by the village attorney. Said bond shall
indemnify the village, its officers, agents, and employees for any and all loss, cost, expense or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever including
attorney fees which said village or its officers, agents, or employees may sustain by reason of the issuance of a sign permit. This bonding requirement
shall not apply to window signs.
C. Neither the provisions of this section nor the issuance of any sign permit shall be construed as relieving any person erecting, owning or maintaining any
sign from liability arising by reason of personal injury or property damage resulting from work related to the sign; nor shall such permit limit the liability
of any such person for personal injury or property damage resulting therefrom. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon
the village or its officials or employees any liability by reason of the approval of any sign or sign permit under any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-10: REVOCATION OF SIGN PERMIT.
A. In the event that the person to whom a sign permit has been granted fails to complete the work required in accordance with the provisions of said permit
during the time said permit is in effect, the building commissioner shall so notify such person in writing. If such failure is not corrected within ten (10)
days after said notification, the sign permit shall be revoked by order of the building commissioner.
B. Any sign permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the building commissioner when it is shown that:
(1) The permit was issued without or in excess of the authority of the commissioner or architectural commission; or
(2) The application for the sign permit contained a material misrepresentation of fact; or
(3) The sign or its structure was erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or used in a manner not in compliance with this chapter or the permit and
the submittals which served as the basis for issuance of the permit. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 197/377
Sec. 12-11: SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.
All safety and maintenance requirements shall be the joint and several obligation of the owner of the sign and the owner of the premises on which it is
located.
(1) All signs shall be designed and constructed to safely support their weight, and to withstand wind and other stresses to which they may be subjected.
(2) All signs in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall have a plate showing the voltage of the apparatus attached to it. No
overhead services shall be allowed.
(3) No sign shall be erected, relocated, maintained or otherwise permitted to obstruct or prevent free ingress and egress from any window, door, or
stairway of any building or structure. No sign shall be attached to a fire escape.
(4) No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained where by reason of its position, shape, color or wording, it may interfere with, obstruct the view
of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; nor shall it otherwise cause a safety hazard. All signs shall be maintained in a
safe, and orderly condition and appearance, and shall be repainted or otherwise maintained periodically to prevent corrosion or deterioration caused
by weather, age or other condition. The owner shall be responsible for providing such maintenance, including any necessary repairs, which shall be
completed within thirty (30) days after notification by the building commissioner of maintenance required hereunder. With respect to freestanding
signs, such maintenance shall also require that the ground area be kept free and clear of weeds, trash and other debris.
(5) Whenever any business, service or other party moves from or vacates the premises previously occupied by it, or for any reason renders a sign not
applicable to the premises, all signs relating to such business, service or use shall be removed from such premises within ten (10) days from the date
of such move, vacation or rendering inapplicable. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
A. If a lot or premises is improved or remodeled to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more, of its existing area or fair market value, all permanent signage
upon the lot and premises shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
B. If a nonconforming sign is damaged by fire or other casualty, the entire sign shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 90-655, 11-
26-1990)
Sec. 12-13: VIOLATIONS, NUISANCE DECLARATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation which displays a sign or is the legal or beneficial owner of the premises on which a sign is located shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter; and any time this chapter refers to the ownership of a sign, it shall refer with equal effect to legal and beneficial owners of the
lot on which the sign is located. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
B. Any sign not authorized under section 12-5 or 12-6 of this chapter is prohibited. (Ord. 11-1489, 7-19-2011)
C. The building commissioner or his representative is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce this chapter. He is hereby authorized to make
inspections and tests of all signs within the village to obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. He shall have the right to enter upon any
premises for inspections whenever the premises are open to the general public. If the building commissioner is unable to conduct an inspection which
he deems appropriate, he may apply to the appropriate court for a warrant authorizing entry.
D. Subject to the provisions of section 12-12 of this chapter, all signs violating the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are
subject to abatement pursuant to the State law and the nuisance provisions of this Code.
Additionally, in the event that any sign is deemed by the Northfield Chief of Police to present an immediate peril to persons or property, such sign may
be removed by the Village summarily and without notice. The Village shall be entitled to recover the costs of removal from the owner of the sign or the
owner of the premises on which the sign is located and to place a lien on the property for its costs. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
E. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any person displaying a sign in violation of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine as outlined in appendix D,
article III of this Code. Additionally, each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense with respect to the computation of fines. (Ord.
97-915, 10-27-1997)
F. In addition to other remedies as specified in this chapter, the Village may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate any violation of this chapter, including any action to recover costs incurred in removing or altering signs. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-14: APPEALS.
A. Appeals may be taken to the Architectural Commission as follows:
(1) If the Building Commissioner denies a permit application pursuant to subsection 12-8(1) of this chapter or revokes a permit pursuant to section 12-
10 of this chapter.
(2) If the Building Commissioner determines that a sign is nonconforming pursuant to section 12-12 of this chapter.
B. All appeals pursuant to section 12-7 of this chapter shall be brought before the President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 198/377
C. All appeals from a determination by the Building Commissioner must be brought within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-15: VARIATIONS.
A. Requests for variations from any provisions of this chapter may be filed with the Building Commissioner who shall refer the request to the Architectural
Commission within thirty (30) days. A variation may be permitted only if the variation requested will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
(1) It is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter; or
(2) The plight of the petitioner is due to unusual circumstances; or
(3) There are practical difficulties or particular hardships in carrying out the strict requirements of this chapter which difficulties and hardships have not
been created by the petitioner. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
B. When by reason of nonavailability of materials or any other valid circumstance, it becomes appropriate to vary the provisions under which a permit was
issued, the applicant shall submit the requested changes, along with a written report stating the circumstances necessitating such changes, to the
Architectural Commission for its review, along with the applicable fees as required in appendix D of this Code. (Ord. 99-961, 1-25-1999)
C. Every decision with respect to a variation by the Architectural Commission shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons for granting
or denying the requested variation and shall constitute final administrative action. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-16: SEVERABILITY.
The several provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be separable in accordance with the following rules:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this chapter to be invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of
any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the court's decision.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this chapter to be invalid as applied to any particular sign, such
declaration shall not affect the application of such provision to any other sign not specifically included in the court's decision. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-
1990)
Sec. 12-17: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
Any decision made under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of article 3-101 et seq., of the Illinois code of civil procedure providing for review of
administrative decisions. (Ord. 90-655, 11-26-1990)
Sec. 12-18: ILLUSTRATIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 199/377
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 200/377
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 201/377
(1986 Code)
Title Chapter 13
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
Chapter 13
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
The provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 through 5/20-402, inclusive, except where applicable to matters not within
the jurisdiction of the village, are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the authority granted in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204. This adoption
by reference shall contain such amendments as are from time to time adopted by the general assembly. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-2: DEFINITIONS.
All terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois vehicle code, unless otherwise provided. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. LICENSING
Sec. 13-3: DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this article, the various classes of vehicles shall be defined as set forth in 5/1-101 through 5/1-224 of the Illinois vehicle code, unless
otherwise specified in this code, in which case the definition of this code shall govern. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-4: VILLAGE LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person or any business, association, firm or corporation residing within the village, or any other person owning a motor vehicle which is registered in
the village of Northfield shall pay to the director of finance each year a tax or license fee for the use of each motor vehicle owned or leased by such person
and used on any public street or highway in the village, or principally garaged or stored in the village, or registered with the office of the secretary of state
of the state of Illinois to an address within the village. Such garaging, storing or state registration shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such vehicle
shall require a village vehicle license. For purposes of this code, a license year for motor vehicles shall be July 1 through June 30 of the following year.
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 92-721, 5-26-1992)
Sec. 13-4.1: SENIOR DISCOUNT ON VEHICLE STICKERS.
Seniors sixty five (65) years of age and older who participate in the state of Illinois circuit breaker program may receive a discount of fifty percent (50%) of
the cost of one passenger vehicle sticker per household. (Ord. 03-1183, 12-2-2003)
Sec. 13-5: SCHEDULE OF LICENSE FEES.
The respective fees (exclusive of any penalties) for licenses issued hereunder for a full license year shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this code.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 13-6: LICENSE FEES, PART YEAR.
The respective fees for licenses hereunder, when sought for a period after January 1 of any license year for all motor vehicles shall be one-half (1/2) the
yearly license fee prescribed by section 13-5 of this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-7: LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
Any person desiring a license for such motor vehicle shall file an application with the director of finance upon a form to be provided by the director of
finance; signed by the applicant and setting forth the applicant's name and address, a description of the motor vehicles to be licensed, and the class to
which it belongs, and such other information as may be required in order to identify said motor vehicle and to enforce the provisions of this article. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 92-721, 5-26-1992)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 202/377
Sec. 13-8: PROPER STATE LICENSES, REGISTRATIONS AND DISPLAY OF VEHICLE STICKERS REQUIRED.
The State license plates, display title, State vehicle emission inspection sticker and Village vehicle sticker, where required, shall be current and properly
displayed. All of the required vehicle equipment, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12, shall be operational on all vehicles used, operated,
stored or parked within the Village of Northfield. The property owner shall have and display upon request to authorized Village officials, proof of ownership
of any vehicle or recreational equipment. See appendix D, article III of this Code for the appropriate fine. (Ord. 10-1455, 6-15-2010)
Sec. 13-9: VILLAGE VEHICLE STICKER ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY.
Upon receipt of such application and payment of the vehicle sticker fee herein specified, the Director of Finance shall issue a Village vehicle sticker to the
applicant for the operation of such motor vehicle and shall provide the applicant with a suitable vehicle sticker with an adhesive substance on one or both
sides thereof, bearing the word "Northfield", the vehicle sticker number, the designation of the class to which the vehicle belongs and the year for which the
vehicle sticker is issued. Such sticker shall be affixed to the lower left hand corner (driver's side) of the front windshield of the motor vehicle to be
registered, if such vehicle has such windshield and, otherwise, shall be affixed to such vehicle in such manner that it can be plainly seen from the front or
left side of such vehicle. No out of date vehicle sticker(s) from any jurisdiction may be displayed at any time. In the case of motorcycles or motor driven
cycles, said sticker/tag may be attached to the rear of the vehicle. (Ord. 10-1455, 6-15-2010)
Sec. 13-9.1: FAILURE TO OBTAIN VILLAGE STICKER ON TIME.
Every person required to obtain a Village vehicle sticker/tag by section 13-4 of this article, and who has not obtained his or her motor vehicle sticker(s) or
tag(s) prior to July 1, shall pay a penalty as noted in appendix D, article III of this Code. This penalty shall not be applicable to vehicles purchased or
leased after June 30 of that year. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties assessed for a violation under this Code. (Ord. 10-1455, 6-15-
2010)
Sec. 13-9.2: CITATION FOR FAILURE TO OBTAIN AND DISPLAY VILLAGE STICKER.
Any person ticketed for failing to obtain and display a Village vehicle sticker shall be fined, upon a finding of guilty, at the rate indicated in appendix D,
article III of this Code. (Ord. 10-1455, 6-15-2010)
Sec. 13-10: LICENSE EXPIRATION.
Each license issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 following its issuance. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-11: REPLACEMENT OF VILLAGE LICENSE AND STICKER.
In the event of destruction of any license sticker, the Director of Finance, upon application by the person to whom such sticker was issued and upon
receipt of an affidavit by such person or other satisfactory proof of such destruction, shall issue to the applicant a new license and license sticker for the
same year as the license sticker destroyed, for the same vehicle if such vehicle has not been sold or assigned, or for another vehicle acquired by the same
owner during such year, upon payment of the fee as noted in appendix D, article I of this Code, for the following reasons: (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 92-721,
5-26-1992; Ord. 07-1352, 12-3-2007; Ord. 08-1385, 7-15-2008)
(1) If the new license and license sticker is to the same owner for use on the same vehicle previously licensed, a replacement fee will be charged as
outlined in appendix D, article I of this Code; (Ord. 07-1352, 12-3-2007)
(2) If the vehicle originally licensed has been sold or assigned and the owner since said sale or assignment has acquired another vehicle for which
license is desired, the fee noted in appendix D, plus the excess, if any, is required in the amount per appendix D, article I of this Code for the vehicle
so acquired for the remainder of the year after the date of its acquisition, over the fee required for the same period for the vehicle so sold or
assigned. (Ord. 07-1352, 12-3-2007; amd. Ord. 08-1385, 7-15-2008)
Sec. 13-12: DESTRUCTION OF VILLAGE STICKER ON SALE OF VEHICLE.
If any person owning a motor vehicle licensed hereunder shall sell or assign such motor vehicle, he shall destroy such license sticker before the delivery of
such motor vehicle to the purchaser or assignee thereof. Notice of such sale or assignment shall be given to the director of finance within ten (10) days
after the delivery of such vehicle to the purchaser or assignee. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 92-721, 5-26-1992)
ARTICLE III. OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 13-13: AUTHORITY TO CONTROL TRAFFIC WITHIN THE VILLAGE.
(1) The corporate authorities or their lawful delegate shall place and maintain official traffic control devices including, but not limited to, electronic signals,
signs, roadway markings, lane designations and manual or oral signals from law enforcement officers when and as required under the village traffic
ordinances or the Illinois vehicle code for the purpose of making such ordinances or statutes effective. This authority includes, but is not limited to, the
designation of one-way streets, arterial streets, through streets, parking and no parking areas, play streets, crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes.
(2) All rules and regulations concerning the placement and maintenance of the traffic control devices included in subsection (1) of this section, heretofore
authorized by the corporate authorities or their lawful delegate prior to the passage of this chapter, shall remain in force and effect to the extent that
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 203/377
they do not contradict or conflict with the rules and regulations passed pursuant to this chapter. (1986 Code)
(3) In cases of emergency, or when public health, safety or convenience require, the village manager may establish temporary traffic controls, including the
designation of one-way streets, through streets and the regulation or restriction of parking on any street or alley; provided that such controls shall not
become effective until the posting of proper signs, which must remain conspicuously displayed while said regulation is in effect. (Ord. 13-1557, 6-11-
2013)
Sec. 13-14: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by the corporate authorities in
accordance with the laws of the state. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-14.1: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
The intersections described below are hereby designated as stop intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle within the
designated streets to enter into such intersections without coming to a full and complete stop as required by an appropriately located stop sign.
Avon Avenue Riverside Drive Three-way stop
Bosworth Lane Avon Avenue Stop sign at the southeast corner
Bristol Street Four-way stop
Churchill Street Two-way stop (north-south)
Dickens Street Four-way stop
Eaton Street Two-way stop (north-south)
Wagner Road Two-way stop (east-west)
Bristol Street Abbott Court Stop sign at the northeast corner
Willow Road Stop sign at the southeast corner
Central Avenue Ash Stop sign at the northeast corner
Cherry Stop sign at the northeast corner
Elm Stop sign at the southwest corner
Maple Stop sign at the northeast corner
Oak Stop sign at the southwest corner
Drury Lane Sunset Ridge Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Wagner Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
East Frontage Road Harding Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Edens Lane Happ Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Elder Lane East Frontage Stop sign at the northeast corner
Lockwood Avenue Stop sign at the southwest corner
Grove Drive Avon Avenue Three-way stop
Riverside Drive Three-way stop
Happ Road Arbor Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Bridlegate Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Camden Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Colonial Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Earl Drive Stop sign at the northwest corner
Harding Road Two-way stop (east-west)
Holder Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Landmark Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Mount Pleasant Street Stop sign at the northeast corner
Norfork Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Northgate Avenue Stop sign at the southwest corner
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 204/377
Orchard Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Pine Street Two-way stop (east-west)
Southgate Avenue Stop sign at the southwest corner
Sterling Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Suffork Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Willow Road (Old) Three-way stop
Willow View Terrace Stop sign at the southwest corner
Harding Road West Frontage Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Hibbard Road Meadowview Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Winfield Drive Stop sign at the southwest corner
Illinois Road Colton Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Hibbard Road Four-way stop sign
Lagoon Lane Harding Road Three-way stop
Sunset Road Two-way stop (north-south)
Winnetka Road Stop sign at the northwest corner
Meadowbrook Drive South Ridge Terrace Stop sign at T
Valley View Road 2 stop signs, 2 yield signs
Middlefork Road Norfork/Suffork intersection Stop signs at the southwest corner and northeast corner
Mount Pleasant Street East Frontage Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Lagoon Avenue Two-way stop (north-south)
Lagoon Drive Stop sign at the southwest corner
Latrobe Avenue Two-way stop (east-west)
Linder Avenue Stop sign at the northwest corner
Lockwood Avenue Four-way stop
West Frontage Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Northfield Road Dominicks Two-way stop sign (north-south)
Winnetka Road Stop sign at the northwest corner
Orchard Lane Linder Avenue Stop sign at the southwest corner
Walnut Avenue Stop sign at the northwest corner
Southridge Terrace Sunset Drive Stop sign at T
Stockton Drive Avon Avenue Stop sign at the northeast corner
Riverside Drive Stop sign at the southwest corner
Sunset Drive Valleyview Drive Two-way stop (east-west)
Sunset Ridge Road Birchwood Lane Stop sign at the northeast corner
Burr Oak Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Clover Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Country Lane Stop sign at the northeast corner
Dorina Drive Stop sign at the southwest corner
Hedge Row Stop sign at the southwest corner
Maple Row Stop sign at the northeast corner
Meadowbrook Drive Stop sign at the northeast corner
Old Farm Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Old Hunt Road Stop sign at the southwest corner
Private Lane Stop sign at the northeast corner
Rolling Ridge Stop sign at the southwest corner
Shadowwood Lane Stop sign at the northeast corner
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 205/377
Steeplechase Lane Stop sign at the southwest corner
Sunset Drive Stop sign at the northeast corner
Winnetka Road Four-way stop
Sunset Road Lagoon Drive Stop sign at the southwest corner
Latrobe Avenue Two-way stop (east-west)
Lockwood Avenue Stop sign at the northeast corner
Willow Road Alice Road Stop sign at the southeast corner
Bracken Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Bristol Avenue Stop sign at the northwest corner
Bristol Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Chapel Hill Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Churchill Street Stop sign at the southeast corner
Dickens Street Stop sign at the southeast corner
Eaton Street Stop sign at the southeast corner
Forest Way Stop sign at the northwest corner
Latrobe Avenue Stop sign at the southeast corner
Linder Avenue Stop sign at the southeast corner
Lockwood Avenue Stop sign at the southeast corner
Walnut Stop sign at the southeast corner
Whittier Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Willow Road (Old) Briar Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Earl Drive Stop sign at the northwest corner
Pleasant View Lane Three-way stop
Somerset Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Thornwood Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Wagner Road Three-way stop
Willow Road Stop sign at the northeast corner
Woodland Lane South Stop sign at the northwest corner
Winnetka Road Arbor Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Avon Avenue Stop sign at the northwest corner
Balmoral Avenue Stop sign at the southeast corner
Brandon Road Stop sign at the southeast corner
Bristol Road Stop sign at the northwest corner
Coventry Road Stop sign at the southeast corner
East Canterbury Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
East Frontage Road Two-way stop sign (north-south)
Eddy Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Enid Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Happ Road Four-way stop sign
Lagoon Drive Stop sign at the southeast corner
Lagoon Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Landmark Road Stop sign at the northwest corner
Meadowview Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Red Barn Lane Stop sign at the northwest corner
Regentwood Courts (1) Stop sign at the northwest corner
Regentwood Courts (2) Stop sign at the northwest corner
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 206/377
Riverside Drive Stop sign at the northwest corner
Wagner Road Four-way stop sign
West Canterbury Lane Stop sign at the southeast corner
Winnetka Court Stop sign at the northwest corner
(Ord. 04-1213, 8-17-2004; amd. Ord. 07-1351, 12-3-2007; Ord. 08-1387, 7-15-2008; Ord. 10-1453, 6-15-2010; Ord. 14-1587, 5-20-2014)
Sec. 13-15: NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in an unreasonable manner, which endangers or is likely to endanger any person or
property.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit, pursuant to this section. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-16: SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
(1) The provisions of the Illinois vehicle code of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall be applicable to all streets under the jurisdiction of the village,
subject, however, to whatever lower speed limits may be posted by the corporate authorities in accordance with the laws of the state.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit, pursuant to this section. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-17: MUD OR REFUSE ON WHEELS.
No vehicle shall be driven from any unpaved area or parcel of land onto any improved public street or alley in the village without first having the wheels of
such vehicle free from any mud, dirt, clay or other refuse which may be deposited on the public streets or alleys by the operation of the vehicle. (1986
Code)
Sec. 13-17.1: WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
(1) The maximum weight provisions of the Illinois vehicle code of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall be applicable to all streets under the jurisdiction of
the village, subject, however, to whatever lower weight limits may be posted by the corporate authorities in accordance with the laws of the state.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in excess of the maximum weight limit, pursuant to this section. (Ord. 92-715, 4-27-1992)
ARTICLE IV. PARKING REGULATIONS
Sec. 13-18: NO PARKING REGULATIONS.
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle at any time except when necessary to avoid conflict with other vehicles or in compliance with the direction of
traffic policemen or traffic signals, to stand in any of the following places:
(1) In any intersection.
(2) In a crosswalk or on a sidewalk.
(3) Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway of the approach thereto.
(4) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of the safety zone.
(5) Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or of a through street sign on the approach side.
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.
(7) At any place where the standing of a vehicle reduces the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
(8) At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
(9) In such a place as to block safe ingress and egress from any driveway.
(10) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(11) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to such station
within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance.
(12) Within twenty feet (20') of the entrance to a driveway on which police department vehicles are customarily parked at the village hall when not on
the road. (1986 Code)
(13) At any place where official signs prohibit parking, including, but not limited to, fire lanes (on public or private property) as properly designated by
the village. (Ord. 91-666, 2-25-1991)
(14) With the vehicle facing in a direction which is against the flow of traffic on the side of the street where the vehicle is parked.
(15) Between a curb line and the adjacent sidewalk line unless this has been designated as a parking area by the corporate authorities.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 207/377
(16) On any private portion of any curbed street other than in a driveway.
(17) Upon the parkway portion of any curbed street other than in a driveway.
(18) Upon a parkway at a distance of more than fifteen feet (15') from the pavement, or upon the planted portion of a parkway so as to damage any
grass, plants, trees, bushes, or other foliage.
(19) On either side of the New Willow Road, Wagner Road, Waukegan Road or Sunset Ridge Road at any point in the village. (1986 Code)
(20) On North Happ Road, except on the section north of Old Willow Road, parking shall be allowed on the east side and only with the permission of
the village of Northfield police department. This allowance for parking shall be subject to the remaining provisions of this article. (Ord. 94-820, 11-28-
1994)
Sec. 13-19: PARKING BETWEEN TWO O'CLOCK A.M. AND SIX O'CLOCK A.M.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any village street or in any village parking lot during the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 13-20: PARKING AT CURB.
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb line and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except upon those streets which have been marked for angle parking, in which case vehicles shall be parked at the angle and in a
space indicated by such marks. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-21: PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle except a private passenger vehicle with a seating capacity of not more than ten (10) passengers in
any block in any street in which more than one-half (1/2) of the buildings in such block are used exclusively for residential purposes, for a longer period
than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious unloading and loading of such vehicles. Loading and unloading as used herein shall not include loading
or unloading for the purpose of displaying or demonstrating a product for sale, gift or premium, but shall be limited to the delivery of a product for which an
actual sale has already been made. (Ord. 91-690, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 13-22: PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle, taxicab, truck or trailer within any residential area in the village or upon the traveled
portion of the dedicated right of way of any street or highway in the village or nearer than fifty feet (50') to any building in said village except during the
loading or unloading of said vehicle, truck or trailer in the regular course of business. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-22A: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or decals issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or 5/11-1301.2 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 5/3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code, as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off street parking facility specifically
reserved by the posting of an official sign for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-22B: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key,
and effectively setting the brake thereon. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-22C: ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIRED1.
Parking spaces provided in accordance with this code shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the Illinois accessibility code, 71 Illinois
administrative code chapter I, section 400.310, as it may be amended from time to time and which is hereby incorporated into this code by reference. The
village community development and building department shall provide copies of the pertinent regulations and diagrams to residents, businesses and
property owners on request and shall require compliance with this provision in all other respects, where applicable. (Ord. 06-1301, 10-17-2006)
Sec. 13-23: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (1986
Code)
Sec. 13-24: RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER FOR VIOLATIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 208/377
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose
name such vehicle is registered and the actual operator shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. This
responsibility shall be joint and several.
For the purpose of this section, it is the intent of the corporate authorities of the village of Northfield that vicarious liability shall be imposed upon the
registered owner of the vehicle and it shall not be a defense that someone other than the registered owner was in control of the vehicle when the violation
occurred. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-25: LOADING ZONES.
During the time specified in this section it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop a passenger vehicle for longer than is necessary to load or
unload passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stop any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes at any of the following places:
(1) In a public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
(2) At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on a Sunday. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-26: SNOW REMOVAL.
(1) Whenever a snowfall of three inches (3") or more has occurred in the Village, the owner or operator of any motor vehicle parked in any roadway or
Village parking lot shall promptly remove it therefrom to permit snow removal. In addition to other penalties, any such vehicle not so moved may be
moved or impounded by the police in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to plow or remove snow from any property and deposit such plowed or removed snow on any public road or
sidewalk. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE V. ACCIDENT REPORTS
Sec. 13-27: ACCIDENT REPORTS.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle which has collided with any vehicle, person or property within the Village of Northfield, in such a manner as to
cause injury or damage, to fail or refuse to report each such accident in writing to the Northfield Police Department within twenty four (24) hours after the
accident. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE VI. MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 13-28: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES BECAUSE OF EMERGENCY.
When any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any vehicle from any public way, members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove or have removed any such vehicle from one location to any other location. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-29: PARKING TRAILERS, PROHIBITED.
No person shall park on any street in the Village any vehicle to which is attached a trailer for hauling except as may be allowed for loading and unloading,
which loading or unloading shall be done as expeditiously as possible. This provision shall not apply to any recreational vehicle as defined by the Illinois
Vehicle Code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-30: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park upon any street, any vehicle from which
merchandise is offered for sale. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-31: RIDING ON VEHICLE EXTERIOR.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the roof, hood, fender, running board, outside step or any part of a vehicle not designed to carry goods or
passengers. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-32: TOY OR OTHER NON-ROAD WORTHY VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or ride skates, skate board, coaster sled, hover board, motorized skate board, electric scooter or Segway type
vehicle or other toy vehicle upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. (Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 209/377
Sec. 13-33: UNATTENDED ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other animal unattended in any street. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-34: PERMIT REQUIRED TO DRIVE OVER CURB.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle, truck, tractor or wagon to drive over any curb, parkway or sidewalk in the Village without first
having obtained a permit from the Village. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE VII. BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Sec. 13-35: LICENSE REQUIRED.
No bicycle owned by a resident shall be operated upon the streets or alleys of the Village unless the owner of such bicycle procures and displays a license
therefor as provided in this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-36: LICENSE APPLICATION.
Any person desiring a license for such bicycle shall file an application with the Village Collector upon a form to be provided by him, signed by the applicant,
and setting forth the applicant's name and address, a description of the bicycle to be licensed, and such other information as may be required in order to
identify said bicycle and to enforce the provisions of this article. A copy of this application shall be filed with the Chief of Police. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-37: LICENSE TAG, ATTACHMENT.
Upon receipt of such application and payment of the license fee herein specified, the Village Collector shall issue a license to the applicant for the
operation of such bicycle and shall provide the applicant with a suitable license tag bearing the word "Northfield" and the license number. Such license tag
shall be affixed to such bicycle in such manner that it can be plainly seen. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-38: LICENSE FEE.
The fee for licenses issued hereunder shall be as prescribed in appendix D of this Code. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-39: DESTROY TAG UPON SALE OF BICYCLE.
If any person owning a bicycle licensed hereunder shall sell or assign such bicycle, he shall destroy such license tag before delivery of said bicycle to the
purchaser or assignee thereof. Notice of such sale or assignment shall be given to the Village Collector within ten (10) days after the delivery of such
bicycle to the purchaser or assignee. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-40: REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE AND TAG.
In the event of destruction of any license tag, the Village Collector, upon application by the person to whom such tag was issued and upon receipt of an
affidavit by such person or other satisfactory proof of such destruction, shall, upon payment of the fee set forth in appendix D of this Code, issue to the
applicant a new license and license tag for the same bicycle if it has not been sold or assigned, or for another bicycle acquired by the same owner. (1986
Code)
Sec. 13-41: TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
(1) Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(2) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or a turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no person operating a bicycle
shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians and have the rights of pedestrians. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-42: OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
Sec. 13-43: SPEED OF BICYCLES.
No person shall operate a bicycle in any manner or at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, which shall in no
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 210/377
case exceed the speed limits posted for motor vehicles. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-44: RIGHT OF WAY.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway or building upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alley,
driveway or approach shall yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-45: LEAVING OR PARKING BICYCLES.
No person shall park or leave a bicycle upon a street or other public way for use of motor vehicles, and no person shall park or leave a bicycle upon any
other public way, including sidewalks, except in a rack to support a bicycle, or in such other manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 13-46: MECHANICAL CONDITIONS, EQUIPMENT.
(1) Every bicycle when in use shall be in a safe mechanical operating condition.
(2) In addition to complying with the requirements set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1507 and 5/11-1507.1, no person shall operate a
bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred feet (100'), except
that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(3) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which shall enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1986
Code)
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sec. 13-47: POLICE TO ENFORCE TRAFFIC ORDINANCE AND LAW.
Officers of the police department, or such other authorized officers as are assigned by the chief of police shall have the authority to enforce all street traffic
ordinances of the village and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-48: DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
Officers of the police department, or such other authorized officers or crossing guards as are assigned or authorized by the chief of police, are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws or ordinances; provided that, in the event of a fire or other
emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws or ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the chief of police to direct traffic except in case of an
emergency. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-49: ATTACHING NOTICE ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking, a notice to appear in court may attach to
the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the driver of the vehicle to which said complaint is attached, to remove the same from said
vehicle. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-50: AUTHORIZATION FOR REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
Members of the police department are hereby authorized to cause the removal of abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicles in the manner
provided by the statutes of the state of Illinois. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-51: AUTHORIZED TOWING SERVICE AND GARAGE.
The Chief of Police shall designate authorized towing service or services, garage or garages or other vehicle pound or pounds for the purpose of
removing, towing away and receiving abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicles pursuant to this article or the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
(1986 Code)
Sec. 13-52: RECORD AND DESCRIPTION OF VEHICLES IMPOUNDED.
The Chief of Police shall cause an accurate record of all information required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois to be kept with respect to each vehicle
towed away or impounded pursuant to this article. Said record shall include the names of the police officers from whom such vehicle was received, the
person employed to tow or deliver the same to the pound or authorized garage, the date and time when received, the place where found, seized or taken
possession of, the make and color of the car, the style of the body, the motor number, serial number, where built, state license number, if any, equipment
and general description of condition, the name and address of the person redeeming said vehicle in case the same shall not have been redeemed
together with the towing and storage charges. Said record shall be in a form prescribed by the Chief of Police. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 211/377
Sec. 13-53: NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
Whenever the Police Department has impounded any vehicle, as aforesaid, said Police Department shall ascertain, if possible, from the registration
records of the State, or of this Village, or of any other city, village or municipality, the name and address of the owner thereof, and shall immediately give or
cause to be given notice in writing to such owner, if known, of the fact of such removal and impounding and reason therefor and of the place to which such
vehicle has been removed. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-54: DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
Whenever the Police Department has caused to be towed away or impounded any vehicle pursuant to this article, such vehicle shall be held, released,
sold or disposed of in accordance with the applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-55: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT ORDERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer, Fire Department official, or any
other authorized official. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-56: PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision contained in the foregoing articles of these traffic regulations shall be fined, upon a finding of guilty, as indicated in
appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997; amd. Ord. 03-1144, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 13-57: ARRESTS FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
Any person arrested for a violation of the foregoing traffic regulations shall be issued an appropriate traffic violation complaint and released upon proper
bail being furnished as required by statute or rule of court. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE IX. PARADES AND MOTORCADES
Sec. 13-58: DEFINITIONS.
MOTORCADE. An organized procession containing fifteen (15) or more vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley.
PARADE. Any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public street,
sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-59: PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the village, or knowingly participate in
any such parade unless and until a permit to conduct such a parade or motorcade has been obtained from the village manager. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-60: PARADE OR MOTORCADE FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade which is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any produce, goods,
wares, merchandise and is designed to be held purely for private profit. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-61: INTERFERENCE WITH PARADE OR MOTORCADE.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or motorcade conducted under permit from the village in violation of any of the terms of said
permit or knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner
interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-62: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Any person who desires to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to the village manager for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date
of the proposed parade or motorcade. The application for such permit shall be in writing on a form approved by the president and board of trustees of the
village or in a form acceptable to the village manager. The village manager may waive the fifteen (15) day requirement as provided herein. In order that
adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the parade or motorcade, the application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade or motorcade chairman, and the addresses and telephone numbers of each.
(2) The nature of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the location of the
disbanded area, route to be traveled and the approximate time when the parade or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 212/377
(3) A general description of the units to be used.
The village manager shall immediately forward a copy of the application to the chief of police and the fire chief. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-63: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
(1) Standards Of Issuance. The village manager shall issue a parade or motorcade permit conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to
comply with the contents of such a permit as hereinafter specified, unless it is found that:
(a) The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic or emergency vehicles
and equipment of the village of Northfield.
(b) The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the village to properly police
the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny reasonable police protection to the
village.
(c) Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade or motorcade for which a permit has been issued.
(2) Standards For Denial. The village manager shall deny an application for a parade or motorcade permit and notify the applicant of such denial
where:
(a) The village manager makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit as above specified.
(b) The information contained in the application is found to be false or nonexistent in any material detail.
(c) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all the contents of the permit and all ordinances of the village of Northfield and statutes
of the state of Illinois.
(3) Time For Issuance Or Denial. The applicant shall be informed of the issuance or denial of the permit within seven (7) days of the filing of the
application for same. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-64: CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
In each permit, the following shall be specified:
(1) The assembly area and time therefor.
(2) The starting time.
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds of any motor vehicle.
(4) The route of the parade or motorcade.
(5) What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such parade or motorcade.
(6) The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or fractions thereof.
(7) The disbanding area and disbanding time.
(8) The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit
prior to the commencement of such parade or motorcade.
(9) That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any wilful delay or wilful stopping of said parade or motorcade
except that which is reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade shall constitute a violation of the permit; all
conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably practical. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-65: APPEAL PROCEDURE.
Upon a denial by the village manager of an application made pursuant to section 13-62 of this article, the applicant may appeal from the determination of
the village manager within five (5) days thereafter to the village president and board of trustees by filing a written notice of the appeal with the village clerk
and such appeal will be placed upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled board meeting. The president of the village may, in his discretion, call a
special meeting to consider such appeal. Upon such appeal, the president and board of trustees may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the
determination of the village manager, and shall submit their decision to the applicant within five (5) days of the hearing. In the event the application is not
filed within the required time as specified in section 13-62 of this article and the village manager refuses to waive said request, the applicant may request
such a waiver of the president and board of trustees at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said president
and board of trustees to consider such a matter. The president and board of trustees, if they find unusual circumstances and in the exercise of their sound
discretion, may waive such requirement. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-66: OFFICIALS TO BE NOTIFIED.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the village manager shall notify the following persons:
(1) The president of the village of Northfield.
(2) The chief of police.
(3) The fire chief. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 213/377
Sec. 13-67: REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The village manager or president and board of trustees shall have the authority to revoke a parade or motorcade permit issued hereunder if, at any time,
facts are brought to the attention of the village manager or president and board of trustees which show that the parade, motorcade or similar activity does
not, or will not, comply with the requirements of the permit as therein set forth. (1986 Code)
Sec. 13-68: WAIVER OF PROVISIONS.
The corporate authorities may, with the consent of all members of the board present at any meeting thereof, waive any provisions of this article. (1986
Code)
ARTICLE X. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF CERTAIN VEHICULAR OFFENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 12-1509, 2-21-2102) See chapter 6 of this code.
ARTICLE XI. SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS
Sec. 13-72: PROHIBITION FOR SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
No person shall stand on any street or highway within the village for purposes of soliciting employment, business or contributions of any kind from the
occupant of any vehicle unless that person has received a permit from the village to do so. (Ord. 91-670, 2-25-1991)
Sec. 13-73: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
Such permit may be issued only on the following conditions:
(1) Such agency shall be registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 91-670, 2-25-1991)
(2) Solicitation by such agency shall be part of a statewide fundraising activity as indicated by written resolution of the state organization or other
satisfactory evidence:
(a) For purposes of this article, "statewide fundraising activity" shall mean a fundraising activity established at the state organization level authorizing
a certain type of activity at times certain. (Ord. 91-678, 5-29-1991)
(3) Solicitation may occur only at the following intersections and no other:
(a) Winnetka Avenue and Happ Road.
(b) Winnetka Avenue and Wagner Road.
(c) Winnetka Avenue and Sunset Ridge Road.
(d) Frontage Road and Tower Road.
(e) Frontage Road and Central Road.
(f) Old Willow Road and Happ Road.
and only at said intersections so long as all traffic is required to come to a full stop.
(4) The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property occurring during any solicitation activity which are causally related to
an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agency and shall sign a hold harmless and indemnification commitment as prepared by the village
attorney so indicating. Additionally, the soliciting agency shall provide the village with proof of public liability insurance in an amount of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per loss, naming the village as an additional insured.
(5) Persons engaging in the act of solicitation for such agency shall be at least sixteen (16) years of age and shall wear a high visibility vest.
(6) No more than six (6) such solicitations may be permitted within the village in any calendar year and no organization shall be permitted to hold more
than one such activity in any calendar year. (Ord. 91-670, 2-25-1991)
(7) No permit may be issued for more than one calendar day. (Ord. 99-961, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 13-74: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT; PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE PERMIT; APPLICATION; INSURANCE.
Application for the permit required by section 13-72 of this article shall be made in writing to the chief of police on a form as provided. No application for a
permit may be made prior to November 1 of the calendar year preceding the calendar year for which the permit is required. Such form shall provide for a
statement of the following facts, together with such other information as may be required:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the soliciting agency.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person signing the application or of another local representative of the soliciting agency. The
permit applicant must appear in person to request the permit at the times specified in the application form.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 214/377
(3) Proof that the soliciting agency is registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization.
(4) A statement by the applicant of the nature of the statewide fundraising activity of which the local solicitation is a part.
(5) A statement that the soliciting agency will accept liability for any injuries to any person or damage to any property occurring during any solicitation
activity which may be causally related to an act by the soliciting agency or by any soliciting agent on behalf of such agency. Additionally, the agency
shall execute the hold harmless and indemnification commitment set forth in subsection 13-73(4) of this article.
(6) The location or locations at which solicitation activities are proposed to take place.
(7) The days and times at which solicitation activities are proposed to take place.
The chief of police may cause the investigation of any applicant for a permit to conduct solicitation activities on the streets and highways of the village to
determine that said applicant has complied with all of the provisions of Illinois law and of this code regarding solicitation on highways. Upon a
determination that the applicant has fully complied therewith, the chief of police shall issue a permit stating the exact dates, times and locations for which
such permit shall be valid. Priority for permit issuance to qualified applicants shall be on the basis of date and time of receipt of application. (Ord. 91-670,
2-25-1991)
ARTICLE XII. OUTDOOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
Sec. 13-75: DEFINITIONS.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle which for any reason, including but not limited to mechanical or equipment problems or lack of
registration, title or other regulatory deficiencies, has been rendered incapable of being legally operated on Illinois roadways for at least seven (7) days.
This shall include but not be limited to a vehicle for which the motor, wheels or other parts have been removed or damaged making it incapable of being
driven under its own motor power.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Every vehicle or other transportation equipment designed to be used primarily for recreational purposes, including, but not
limited to the following:
(1) Boat. Any vessel used for water travel.
(2) Camping Trailer. A trailer constructed with partial side walls which fold for towing and unfold to provide temporary living quarters for recreational
camping or travel use and of a size or weight not requiring an over size permit when towed on a highway.
(3) Motor Home, Mini Motor Home Or Van Camper. A self-contained motor vehicle designed or permanently converted to provide living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk through access to the living quarters from the driver's seat. Such vehicles must include at least
four (4) of the following:
(a) A cooking facility with an on board fuel source;
(b) A gas or electric refrigerator;
(c) A toilet with exterior evacuation;
(d) A heating or air conditioning system with an on board power or fuel source separate from the vehicle engine;
(e) A potable water supply system that includes at least a sink, faucet, and a water tank with an exterior service supply connection.
(4) Off The Road Vehicle. A vehicle intended principally for recreational off road use, such as a dune buggy, go-cart, ATV or snowmobile.
(5) Racing Car Or Cycle. A vehicle intended to be used in racing competition, such as a race car, stock car or racing cycle.
(6) Travel Trailer. A trailer designed to provide living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, and of a size or weight not requiring an oversize
permit when towed on a highway.
(7) Truck Camper. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.
(8) Vehicle Trailer. A vehicle without its own motor power that is designed to transport another vehicle, such as a boat, motorcycle or snowmobile for
recreational or vacation use and that is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use.
(9) Other Recreational Equipment. Other wheeled items which are designed for recreational use but do not meet the exact definitions of items defined
in (1) through (8).
VEHICLE. Any motorized device for carrying passengers, goods or equipment including but not limited to, passenger automobiles, motorcycles, vans,
trucks, buses, recreational vehicles and vehicles used for commercial, business, or governmental purposes. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 13-76: APPLICATION OF THIS ARTICLE XII.
This article XII shall apply to the owner of any vehicle or any person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or
otherwise. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 13-77: SURFACE.
No vehicle or recreational equipment shall be parked or stored in the front yard except on a dustless stone, gravel, asphalt or concrete pavement surface.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 215/377
Vehicles or recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a grass or dirt surface in the side or rear yard. The ground under or surrounding the
location where a vehicle or recreational equipment is stored shall be free of weeds, debris and combustible material. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 13-78: RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
A. Residential Use Prohibited. No recreational equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes while in the village of Northfield
nor connected to any public utility except for required servicing.
B. Permanent Location Prohibited. Unless under repair pursuant to subsection D of this section, no recreational equipment, designed to have wheels,
shall have its wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its ready removal.
C. Unsafe Conditions. No recreational equipment shall be parked or stored in a manner that creates an unreasonable danger to persons or property.
D. Repairs Prohibited. No repairs shall be performed on any recreational equipment except within a completely enclosed building. However, the owner of
a residential lot may wash, change tires or perform minor routine maintenance on the owner's own recreational equipment while parked outside for an
aggregate of time not exceeding twenty one (21) days in any calendar year. In order to perform such functions all other regulations of this article must
be observed.
E. Must Be Moved. Recreational equipment parked or stored outdoors must be moved outside the village of Northfield boundaries for at least ten (10)
days during each calendar year. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied if the equipment is moved for portions of ten (10) different days provided
the moving was for bona fide maintenance or recreational purposes. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
F. Screening. Recreational equipment parked or stored outdoors shall be surrounded by a solid fence and/or evergreen vegetation. It is recognized that
plantings may not be effective in totally blocking such equipment from view. However, it is the purpose of this subsection to require, to the extent
practicable, that the equipment be screened from the street and adjacent residences. To accomplish this any vegetative screen must be evergreen and
at least five feet (5') in height at the time planted and shall be capable of growing to the height of the equipment within a reasonable time. This
subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring plantings to be done between October 1 and April 15 of any year. All regulations regarding fences
pursuant to chapter 18, article II of this code shall apply. (Ord. 92-747, 11-23-1992)
Sec. 13-79: INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
A. Parking Or Storage Prohibited. No person shall keep an inoperable vehicle on any premises within the village of Northfield except in an enclosed
building.
B. Gasoline Service Stations. Vehicles lawfully stored on the premises of a licensed automobile repair shop may remain for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days as set forth in chapter 11, article II, division IX of this code. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 13-80: PROPER LICENSES AND REGISTRATIONS REQUIRED.
(Rep. by Ord. 09-1437, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 13-81: TARPAULINS.
The covering of a vehicle or recreational equipment by or with any type of tarpaulin or covering of any nature shall not be a valid reason for noncompliance
with any provisions of this article. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 13-82: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
A condition constituting a violation of sections 13-75 through 13-81 of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to
chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
ARTICLE XIII. AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS AND
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATIONS
Sec. 13-83: ADOPTION OF THE AMENDED ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
Pursuant to the Illinois vehicle code, as recently amended by public act 94-0795, municipalities in the counties of Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, Madison,
McHenry, St. Clair and Will are authorized to provide by ordinance for "automated traffic law enforcement systems", as that term is defined in section 11-
208.6 of the vehicle code. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-84: PURPOSE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 216/377
It has been determined to be in the best interests of the village of Northfield to establish automated traffic law enforcement systems and to provide for
administrative adjudication of automated traffic law violations as specified in this article. Establishing automated traffic law enforcement systems at
specified intersections in the village at which traffic is controlled by signals exhibiting different colored lights or color lighted arrows will benefit the public
health, safety and welfare by deterring drivers from entering those intersections in violation of red light signals, thereby decreasing the potential for
personal injury and property damage due to vehicle collisions caused by red light violations. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-85: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
ADMINISTRATOR. The village's traffic control administrator.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. A device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal
to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light signal in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or
a similar provision of this article.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION. A violation described in section 11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code.
CERTIFIED REPORT. A report concerning five (5) or more unpaid fines or penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the village to the
secretary in accordance with section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code.
CODE OR ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq.
DETERMINATION NOTICE. A notice of determination of automated traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
FINAL DETERMINATION NOTICE. A notice of final determination of automated traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the
vehicle code and pursuant to the provisions of this article. This notice shall be issued after the period for judicial review has expired if judicial review has
not been sought or after the judicial review is completed.
RECORDED IMAGES. Images showing the time, date and location of an automated traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement
system on: 1) two (2) or more photographs, 2) two (2) or more microphotographs, 3) two (2) or more electronic images or 4) a video recording showing the
motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
SECRETARY. The Illinois secretary of state.
SUSPENSION NOTICE. A notice of impending driver's license suspension issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the vehicle code and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
SYSTEM. Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or, collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the village
pursuant to this article.
VILLAGE. The village of Northfield, Cook County, Illinois.
VIOLATION NOTICE. An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant to sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code and pursuant
to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-86: LOCATIONS OF AUTOMATED SYSTEMS.
The village hereby establishes systems at all of the following intersections to be implemented on the schedule devised by village staff located within the
corporate limits of the village:
Frontage Road and Tower Road
Willow Road and Happ/Central
Willow Road and Lagoon
Willow Road and Northfield Road
Willow Road and Sunset Ridge Road
Willow Road and Wagner Road
Willow Road and Waukegan Road
Winnetka Road and Hibbard Road
Winnetka Road and Waukegan Road (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-87: ESTABLISHING OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATOR.
There is hereby established the office of administrator, which shall be filled by appointment of the village president. The administrator or his designee shall
be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other notices required by section 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code, collect money
paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law violations and operate an administrative adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 217/377
administrator is also authorized to make a certified report to the secretary pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the vehicle code, and any such certified report
shall contain the information required under section 6-306.5(c) of the vehicle code. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-88: VIOLATION NOTICE.
A violation notice shall be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with
the secretary within thirty (30) days after the secretary notifies the village of the identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90)
days after the violation. Service of a violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The original or a
facsimile of a violation notice or, in the case of a violation notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the device showing the
facts entered on the violation notice, shall be retained by the administrator, and a record kept in the ordinary course of business. A violation notice issued,
signed and served in accordance with this article and section 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code, a copy of the violation notice or the computer generated
record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the violation notice. The violation notice,
copy or computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-89: DETERMINATION PRIOR TO CITATION.
Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law violation, a determination must be made by a law enforcement officer or retired law
enforcement officer employed or contracted by the village that based on inspection of recorded images generated by the system, the motor vehicle was
being operated in violation of section 11-208.6 of the vehicle code or a village ordinance or this code. If the law enforcement officer or retired law
enforcement officer determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield the right of way to an emergency
vehicle, a citation shall not be issued. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 11-1474, 1-18-2011)
Sec. 13-90: HEARINGS ON CITATIONS.
The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits of the
alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded the
registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the person
conducting the hearing on behalf of the administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at such a hearing may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008)
Sec. 13-91: DETERMINATIONS OF LIABILITY.
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty or failure to appear to contest the alleged
violation after requesting a hearing. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior
mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall become final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination,
or 2) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or
contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order, which is a final, appealable order. (Ord. 08-
1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-92: DETERMINATION NOTICE.
A determination notice shall be sent following a determination of automated traffic law violation liability. A determination notice shall be sent by first class
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database or, under section 11-1306 of
the vehicle code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office database. Service of the determination notice shall
be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-93: APPEALING DETERMINATION NOTICE.
A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for an automated traffic law violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a determination of such liability within
ten (10) days after service by the village of a determination notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same, together with any documentation in
support thereof, to the administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the administrator. The grounds for such a petition
shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued, 2) the person having
already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question, 3) the vehicle being in the possession and control of a person other than the person named in
the violation notice at the time of the violation, and 4) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. A hearing on such a petition shall
be held within thirty (30) days after the filing of same. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a showing of just cause, and the subject
determination of automated traffic law violation liability is thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that
violation. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
If more than ten (10) days has expired, a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty must file for judicial review pursuant to the administrative review law in
order to appeal a determination notice. (Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-94: FINAL DETERMINATION NOTICE.
A final determination notice will be sent following the conclusion of judicial review procedures or, if judicial review was not sought, following the expiration
of the time period to seek judicial review in accordance with section 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code. The notice shall contain the following information:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 218/377
(1) A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing to the village;
(2) A warning that a failure to pay the fine and penalty due and owing the village within fourteen (14) days may result in the village's filing a complaint in
the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with section 11-208.3(f) of the Illinois vehicle code; and
(3) A warning that a failure to pay the fine and penalty may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay the fine or penalties
for five (5) or more violations. (Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-95: SUSPENSION NOTICE.
A suspension notice shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more unpaid automated traffic law
violations. The suspension notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. Service of a
suspension notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-96: CHALLENGING CERTIFIED REPORTS.
If the administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle owner and subsequently makes a certified report to the secretary, the subject vehicle owner
may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the administrator a written statement under oath,
together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report: 1) that the
person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five (5) or more automated traffic law violations on the date or dates such
violation notices were issued, or 2) that the person already paid the fines or penalties for the five (5) or more automated traffic law violations indicated on
the certified report. Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand
delivered to the administrator within five (5) days after the person receives notice from the secretary that that person's driver's license will be suspended at
the end of a specified period of time unless the secretary is presented with a notice from the village certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing
have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-97: CONTESTING VIOLATION NOTICES BY NONRESIDENTS.
Nonresidents of the Village who receive violation notices may contest the merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a hearing
by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any supporting documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested,
within ten (10) days after service of the violation notice. Such a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be entered. The
Administrator shall rule on such a statement within ten (10) days after receipt of same, and shall inform the nonresident of his decision within ten (10) days
thereafter. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Sec. 13-98: PENALTIES.
The penalties to be assessed pursuant to this article shall be as set forth in appendix D, article III, "Penalties", of this Code. (Ord. 08-1368, 2-19-2008;
amd. Ord. 09-1405, 2-17-2009)
Footnote 1: See also appendix A, section 20-2A of this code.
Title Chapter 14
NUISANCES
Chapter 14
NUISANCES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1: ENUMERATION.
In addition to those actions which are elsewhere in this Code declared to be and constitute a nuisance, each of the following enumerated acts or omissions
is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village and within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits
thereof. In addition, it shall be a nuisance and shall constitute a violation of this Code to commit any offense or permit a condition or use of property which
is in fact a nuisance according to the common law, other ordinances of the Village, or the Statutes of the State of Illinois, or which deleteriously affects
public health, safety or welfare or greatly offends the public morals or decency. (Ord. 13-1564, 9-17-2013)
(1) To use any premises to create an offensive smell which taints the air and renders it unwholesome or disagreeable to other persons.
(2) To deposit, cause or allow the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noxious substance to be collected, deposited or remain in any place to the
prejudice of other persons.
(3) To render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, stream, pond or well to the injury or prejudice of others.
(4) To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any gutter, conduit, sewer, or the natural drainage of any public or private property.
(5) To construct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys or commons. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 219/377
(6) To keep or suffer to be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition any building, yard, cellar, barn, stable, ground or premises. (1986 Code;
amd. Ord. 03-1183, 12-2-2003)
(7) To own, keep or use any yard, pen, place or premises, in or upon which animals shall be confined or kept, so as to be offensive to those residing in
the vicinity, or cause annoyance to others.
(8) To bring in or transport through the Village the body or carcass of any unslaughtered dead animal, offal, blood, bones or any putrid or otherwise
offensive animal matter.
(9) To operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles.
(10) To cause or suffer any motor vehicle not in operating condition or current use, or any motor vehicle parts or components, or any pile or deposit of
offal, garbage, refuse, glass bottles or jars, broken glass or other trash or rubbish of any kind to collect, accumulate or remain upon any public or
private grounds, streets, yards, woods, fields, parks, parkways or elsewhere.
(11) To suffer to collect, to stand or remain on any premises, water which is or which may become stagnant, foul or offensive, or detrimental to the
health and comfort of persons residing in the neighborhood. (1986 Code)
(12) Reserved. (Ord. 19-1738, 2-19-2019)
(13) To cause, maintain or permit to remain on any premises abutting on any public highway, or public place, any open cistern, excavation, catch basin,
cesspool or vault, unless the same be provided with and completely enclosed by an adequate wall, fence or other barrier; provided, however, that the
foregoing shall not apply to excavations made for the purpose of and during a program of building construction while being carried on under a permit
or permits duly issued by Village authorities. (1986 Code)
(14) To allow to remain after the completion of each day of construction work, any dirt, mud, gravel or rock to collect, accumulate or remain upon any
public or private thoroughfares. (Ord. 88-542, 4-1988)
(15) To permit a dead tree that is over eight feet (8') in height to remain on any property for more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 94-804, 6-27-1994)
(16) To permit any animal (including birds), to be or remain on the property of a person not the owner, when the owner of the other property has given
notice that the animal is not permitted on the property. (Ord. 99-983, 5-24-1999)
(17) To stop or obstruct the passage of water in any street gutter, public sewer, drain, culvert, water pipe or hydrant laid or placed in the Village. The
property owner shall be responsible for keeping the culvert free of debris and maintaining the grass in the culvert area (i.e., similar to parkway areas).
(Ord. 02-1125, 9-24-2002)
(18) The keeping, depositing of, or the scattering of lumber, junk, trash or debris or abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers.
(19) The failure to keep structurally sound and in good repair the exterior of any main or accessory structure. Accessory structures shall include, but not
be limited to, attached garages, sheds, fences, walls, canopies, marquees, signs and metal awnings.
(20) Boarding up or covering with tarps any portion of a structure unless done temporarily because of fire or weather related emergency or while
completing work pursuant to a valid Village building permit. (Ord. 13-1564, 9-17-2013)
Sec. 14-2: DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
Whenever a building of any construction within the fire limits established in appendix C of this code has been damaged by any means to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) of its value, or when in the judgment of the building commissioner, it constitutes a dangerous or unsafe building, and the building
commissioner shall so report in writing, any such building shall be deemed a nuisance, and the president and the board of trustees shall direct that such
building be repaired or demolished, whichever they deem proper, and shall pursue appropriate statutory remedies to cause such repairs or demolition if
the owners or owner thereof, after at least fifteen (15) days' written notice so to do, shall have failed to commence actual work on such building to put it in
a safe condition or to demolish it. (Ord. 497, 4-28-1987)
Sec. 14-2.1: UNWARRANTED EMERGENCY ALARMS.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the imposition of fees to be charged to that portion of the village resident and business population
that maintains mechanically or electronically activated alarm systems, and to reduce the number of unnecessary responses by the department of public
safety to these alarms.
The inherent difficulties and malfunctions associated with such mechanically or electronically activated alarm systems result in unnecessary or nonbona
fide alarm activation and consequently require unnecessary responses by the department of public safety. Such unnecessary responses severely
endanger the safety and welfare of the residents of the village. In addition to the significant cost involved in responding to such alarms and the
concurrent loss of manpower and ineffective utilization of equipment, such alarms require emergency responses which may contribute to an increased
frequency in motor vehicle accidents.
A system of graduated fees for public safety department responses to alarms serves the dual purpose of encouraging the cessation of non-bona fide
alarms and of charging the cost of such alarms to that portion of the population wishing to use them.
B. Definitions.
ALARM OCCURRENCE. The activation of an alarm system for, or as a result of, any reason whatsoever which notifies or causes to be notified the
department of public safety to respond to the premises at which the alarm system is maintained.
ALARM OFFICER. The member of the police department designated by the chief of police to perform the functions specified in this section.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 220/377
ALARM SYSTEM. Any assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment devices (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into
a 110-volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of a fire, hazard, occurrence of an unauthorized intrusion or other activity normally requiring urgent
and immediate attention. The term "alarm system" shall include, but shall not be limited to, "automatic holdup alarm systems", "burglar alarm systems",
"holdup alarm systems", "direct dial systems", "fire alarm systems", "medical emergency alarm systems", "on premises alarm systems", "oscillator
systems", and "outside ringers". The following alarm systems are specifically excluded from the provisions of this section: motor vehicle alarm systems
and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a
premises, an attempted robbery or burglary at a premises, a fire or a medical emergency at a premises.
ALARM USER. The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization in possession or control of
any building, structure, facility or property in the village where an alarm system is maintained.
ALARM USER PERMIT. A permit issued by the village for the privilege and ability to operate an alarm system within the village. No person, entity or
alarm user shall be issued an alarm user permit unless: 1) an application is completed and submitted in a form satisfactory to the village manager, 2)
the applicable alarm user permit fee referred to below is paid, and 3) the alarm system complies with the alarm system requirements set forth below.
An alarm user permit shall be valid for a one year time period, and may be consecutively renewed upon the payment of the renewal fee referred to
below.
DELAY MECHANISM. An electrical or mechanical feature of an alarm system that: 1) provides a time delay between activation of the alarm system and
the annunciation of an audible alarm or the transmitting of a message or signal to the department of public safety.
DIRECT DIALER. A feature of an alarm system that utilizes a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone trunk line at the
department of public safety and then reproduces a prerecorded message to report an alarm occurrence. (Not permitted.)
OSCILLATOR SYSTEM. A feature of an alarm system that utilizes one telephone line for the connection of both a burglar alarm and a fire alarm to the
department of public safety. (Not permitted.)
OUTSIDE RINGER. A feature of an alarm system that, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual device to activate in, on or near the premises
within which the alarm system is maintained.
SERVICE CHARGE. The amount of money determined by the corporate authorities to be reasonable compensation for the services and liabilities
assumed by the village in responding to alarm occurrences.
C. Requirement Of A Valid Alarm User Permit.
(1) No person, entity or alarm user shall maintain or operate an alarm system in the village without a valid and effective alarm user permit.
(2) The maintenance or operation of an alarm system: a) without first applying for and securing an alarm user permit, or b) after the expiration or
revocation of an alarm user permit shall constitute an offense punishable in accordance with this code. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(3) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the village manager or his designate may take all necessary steps, including an action at law or in
equity, or an action to abate a nuisance in accordance with this code, to prevent the operation or effect the removal of such alarm system.
(4) Any alarm system maintained or operated in violation of this section is a nuisance.
D. Alarm System Requirements.
(1) No alarm user permit shall be issued for any alarm system that:
(a) Consists, in whole or in part, of an oscillator system;
(b) Is not equipped with a delay mechanism on ingress and egress doorways that allows at least thirty (30) second delay before the annunciation of
an audible alarm or, the transmitting of a message or signal to the department of public safety; provided, however, that no delay mechanism shall
be required for any fire or medical emergency alarm component of an alarm system;
(c) Consists, in whole or in part, of a direct dialer;
(d) Includes an outside ringer unless: 1) any audible sound emitted by the outside ringer is completely distinguishable from emergency vehicles of
the village or any other audible village alert system; and 2) is equipped with an automatic cut off mechanism that permits deactivation within fifteen
(15) minutes of the initial alarm. (Ord. 92-714, 3-23-1992)
E. Permit And Connection Fees.
(1) There shall be a one time nonrefundable connection fee and an alarm user fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. The fees shall be payable
with submission of the alarm user permit application.
(2) There shall be a biennial (every other year) alarm user permit renewal fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. However, when the calendar year
of the initial permit falls on an even year, a permit will be issued for that year or part of year at a fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. A two (2)
year renewal permit will be issued the following January at a fee as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 02-1132, 12-3-2002)
F. Connection Agreement Required. No alarm system shall be connected to the village's alarm panel unless and until the alarm user executes an
agreement with the person, firm or entity under contract with the village to provide and maintain the alarm panel.
G. Service Charges.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 221/377
(1) More than four (4) alarm occurrences in a calendar year from any alarm system in the village of Northfield shall result in the imposition of service
charges according to the schedule set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 92-714, 3-23-1992)
(2) After the department of public safety has recorded four (4) alarm occurrences within a calendar year from any alarm system, it shall invoice the
alarm user on a quarterly basis for the service charge which has been imposed. (Ord. 01-1055, 2-20-2001)
(3) All service charges must be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the invoice tendered pursuant to subsection G(2) of this section.
H. Waiver Of Service Charge/Nullification Of Alarm Occurrence.
(1) The alarm officer shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to waive any service charge and/or nullify the existence of any alarm occurrence
only after finding, based on evidence presented by the alarm user, that one or more of the following circumstances exist:
(a) Evidence of an actual intrusion, obvious intrusion attempt, fire, medical or other actual emergency;
(b) Evidence of utility outage conditions lasting four (4) hours or longer and affecting a general neighborhood area;
(c) Evidence of a tornado, earthquake or other violent or extreme conditions of nature or acts of God, excluding thunder, snow, ice and storms;
(d) Alarm occurrences during the thirty (30) day period following installation of an alarm system;
(e) Evidence, in a form satisfactory to the alarm officer that the alarm system in question has been satisfactorily serviced or repaired at some time
after the alarm occurrence in question. This circumstance shall not, however, constitute grounds for waiver or nullification unless the alarm officer
is completely satisfied that the service or repair will reduce or eliminate alarm occurrences similar to the one in question.
(f) Evidence that the alarm user of the alarm system in question has implemented a training program, satisfactory to the alarm officer, to instruct
involved persons (family members, employees and/or contractual personnel) in the proper use of the alarm system. This circumstance shall not,
however, constitute grounds for waiver or nullification unless the program will reduce or eliminate alarm occurrences similar to the one in question.
(Ord. 92-714, 3-23-1992)
(2) Requests for a waiver or nullification may be made by any alarm user to the alarm officer. Such requests shall be in writing and must be made
within seven (7) days of the receipt of invoice set forth in subsection G(2) of this section. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such written request,
the alarm officer shall review the alarm user's request in accordance with this subsection and shall issue a decision. The decision of the alarm officer
shall be final. (Ord. 92-714, 3-23-1992; amd. Ord. 01-1055, 2-20-2001)
I. Revocation Of Alarm User Permit.
(1) Authority Of Chief Of Police. The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke an alarm user permit on either of the following grounds:
(a) Failure To Pay Service Charge. The failure to pay any service charge imposed pursuant to subsection G of this section.
(b) Multiple Alarm Occurrences. Eleven (11) or more alarm occurrences for one alarm system in one calendar year (none of which having been
nullified pursuant to subsection H of this section) regardless of whether the service charge for any of said alarm occurrences has been paid.
(2) Notice And Hearing Prior To Revocation.
(a) The chief of police shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the revocation of an alarm user permit, notify the alarm user in writing, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by direct police service, on the grounds for revocation and of the village's intent to revoke the alarm user permit.
(b) Within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, the alarm user may submit a written request to the village manager for a hearing before the chief of
police, setting forth the reasons the alarm user permit should not be revoked. The submission of the request shall suspend the revocation of the
alarm user permit.
(c) If the alarm user fails to submit a request for hearing within the stated time period, the chief of police shall issue a written statement of revocation.
The written statement shall include an explanation of the consequences of revocation. The written statement shall be sent to the alarm user by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police service. Revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt by the alarm user of said
written statement.
(d) If a request for a hearing is submitted within the stated time period, a written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the
alarm user by the chief of police by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(e) At the hearing, the alarm user, or his authorized representative, shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses and to present evidence in
his own behalf. After the hearing, the chief of police may either order revocation or cancel the notice of revocation. In the event that the chief of
police orders revocation, he shall notify the alarm user, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police service explaining
the consequences of revocation. Revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt by the alarm user of the written notice. (Ord. 92-714, 3-23-
1992)
Sec. 14-3: NUISANCES DESCRIBED IN OTHER SECTIONS OF THE CODE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 222/377
(1) Dog bites Section 17-12
(2) Dead, diseased or infested trees Sections 10-11 and 10-12
(3) Dog kennels Section 17-26
(4) Improper signs Section 12-13
(5) Garbage and debris accumulation Section 8-59
(6) Air and water pollution Section 8-14
(7) Gambling Section 15-23
(8) Stormwater management Sections 7-61 through 7-74
(Ord. 04-1194, 3-16-2004; amd. Ord. 09-1432, 10-20-2009)
Sec. 14-4: BRINGING NUISANCES INTO THE VILLAGE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the village, or keep therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purposes whatsoever, any
animal, dead or alive, matter, substance or thing which shall be or which shall occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or shall be dangerous or
detrimental to health. (1986 Code)
Sec. 14-5: NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(Rep. by Ord. 13-1564, 9-17-2013)
Sec. 14-6: EXTERIOR STORAGE OF NONOPERATING VEHICLES.
(Rep. by Ord. 92-736, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 14-7: ABATEMENT OF COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
Those offenses which are known under the common law or the statutes of the state as nuisances may, if the same exist within the village limits or within
one-half (1/2) mile thereof, be treated as nuisances, and proceeded against as is in this chapter provided, or in accordance with any other law for the
abatement or prevention thereof. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. WEEDS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PLANT GROWTH
Sec. 14-8: WEEDS PROHIBITED - DEFINITION.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of ground to permit the growth of weeds of any height anywhere in the
village. The word "weeds" as used herein shall mean all rank vegetable growths which exhale unpleasant or noxious odors, that may conceal filthy
deposits or cause hay fever, as well as all plants declared by state statutes to come under the heading "weeds", and shall include, but not be limited to,
thistles of all kinds, cockleburs, yellow dock, Indian mallow, jimson, ragweed, sweet clover, wild mustard (including black mustard), burdock, yellow
mustard, may weed, lamb's quarters, beggar ticks, pigweed, wild lettuce, shepherd's purse, smart weed, sow-thistle, tumbleweed, poison ivy, poison oak,
and milkweed. (Ord. 507, 6-23-1987)
Sec. 14-9: HEIGHT LIMITATION OF GRASS.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of ground, to permit any grass or plants other than trees, bushes,
flowers or other ornamental shrubs to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village. (Ord. 507, 6-23-1987)
Sec. 14-10: FAILURE TO CUT.
In all cases where a person who controls property on which there are growths of plants prohibited in sections 14-8 and 14-9 of this article and shall fail to
cut same or cause same to be cut after ten (10) days from the date of mailing of a notice in writing to the owner, agent, lessee or occupant, having control
thereof, notifying him to cut such weeds, or grass, then the director of public works may cause the same to be cut and the reasonable cost thereof shall be
chargeable to such person who so controls such property, in addition to the penalty prescribed by section 14-17 of this chapter, and such reasonable cost
shall become a lien upon the real estate affected in accordance with the provisions of article IV of this chapter. (Ord. 507, 6-23-1987; amd. Ord. 98-928, 2-
23-1998)
Sec. 14-11: DISPOSITION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 223/377
Prohibited plants, when cut down, must be removed from the lot and disposed of in such manner as not to create a nuisance. (Ord. 507, 6-23-1987)
Sec. 14-12: WEEDS TO BE REMOVED FROM STREETS AND ALLEYS.
The director of public works, whenever he shall learn of or observe the existence of prohibited plants on the public streets and alleys of the village, is
authorized to cause the same to be cut down and removed. (Ord. 507, 6-23-1987; amd. Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
ARTICLE III. PARKWAY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
Sec. 14-13: PARKWAY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
Any property owner or tenant currently using the village parkway or whose property may in the future benefit from the use of a portion of a village parkway
for access to that property shall maintain all parkway that is adjacent to that property. This maintenance obligation shall confer no rights on the property
owner or tenant except that any third party shall be liable either in law, equity or as a trespass violation to the owner or tenant and the village for any
unpermitted use of such adjacent parkway. Nothing in this section shall be construed to compromise, in any manner, the absolute right of the village to use
any village parkway as it deems advisable with or without notice to the adjacent property owner or tenant. (Ord. 02-1125, 9-24-2002)
A. As used in this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
CARRIAGE WALK. A strip of walk located immediately behind the curb generally between the driveway apron and the service walk. Carriage walks
may not be greater than eighteen inches (18") in width.
SERVICE WALK. That part of any sidewalk providing access to private property from the sidewalk, if any, to the street.
B. All driveways, service walks, carriage walks and other appurtenances within public rights of way shall be kept in good repair by the owners or occupants
of the abutting property. Any repair work, whether done by the village or by the abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the director of public
works.
C. The owner of private property abutting a public street shall be responsible for maintaining drainage pipe (culvert) under the driveway apron and service
walk. If a drainage swale exists, the owner shall be responsible for maintaining the swale in such a way so as not to alter or impede the flow of water. It
shall be considered unlawful to enclose the drainage swale in pipe or otherwise fill in the swale with soils or other materials without a permit being
issued by the village engineer. (Ord. 15-1612, 3-17-2015)
D. The owner of private property abutting a public street shall be responsible for maintaining the frontage parkway free of growing weeds and other
obnoxious and unsightly vegetation which detracts from the beauty and cleanliness of the immediate neighborhood. When such parkway has been
improved to a lawn status, the property owner shall periodically mow and keep same free of rubbish and debris of all kind consistent with village
standards, and shall remove any obstacle or obstruction to the flow of water on the parkway.
E. The owner of private property which abuts upon a paved public sidewalk shall be responsible for keeping same clear of all debris and obstructions.
F. In the event the owners of private property are not also the occupants, the responsibilities set forth in this section shall apply with equal force and effect
to the tenants or those in actual possession or control of the private property.
G. This section is enacted solely for the purpose of promoting the preservation of proper drainage over and the attractive appearance of public rights of
way in the village, including parkways and public sidewalks. This section creates no duty on the part of any property owner in the village running to any
party other than the village, and this section does not create any right of action for the benefit of any private party against any property owner in the
village or against the village based on the failure of a property owner in the village to fulfill any obligation to the village imposed by this section. (Ord.
02-1125, 9-24-2002; amd. Ord. 15-1612, 3-17-2015)
H. In the event that village utility or street operations cause damage to a public right of way, the village shall repair the right of way according to village
standards. Lawn irrigation systems may be allowed in the parkway and their installation must be permitted through the public works department. The
village reserves the right to remove sprinkler systems and other obstructions from the right of way if deemed an obstruction by the village. In the event
that damage is caused by village utility or street operations to any unusual driveway materials, such as stamped or colored concrete or asphalt or
specialty material pavers, located within the public right of way, the driveway shall be repaired at the driveway owner's expense with the understanding
that the village may reimburse the owner for the normal cost of asphalt or concrete as determined by the village. In the event that damage is caused by
village utility or street operations to a property owner's improvements, such as sprinkler systems, fencing, electric fencing, landscaping, boulders, or
other material, which are located within the public right of way, the property owner is responsible for the repair or replacement of such improvements at
its expense. (Ord. 08-1380, 5-20-2008; amd. Ord. 15-1612, 3-17-2015)
I. Mailboxes shall be kept in a well maintained functioning condition, upright and well secured, or otherwise kept in good repair by the owners or occupants
of the adjacent private property. (Ord. 15-1612, 3-17-2015)
ARTICLE IV. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
Sec. 14-14: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 224/377
An abatement action under this chapter is a remedy cumulative to other remedies at law and equity. Injunctive relief may be sought to prevent or restrain
violations of this chapter. An abatement action in no way preempts, supersedes or bars civil or criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter or any other
applicable building, property maintenance, fire prevention, health or public safety regulation. The commencement of an abatement action is not a condition
precedent to the initiation of civil or criminal prosecution or any other remedy. Failure to adhere to the procedure prescribed in this section shall not bar
relief or remedy if such failure causes no prejudice and merely constitutes harmless error.
The following shall be the procedure for the abatement of nuisances within the jurisdiction of the village:
(1) Notice shall be given to the owner of the nuisance or of the property on which the nuisance exists. For purposes of this section, the person to whom
the last general tax bill on the property was sent shall be presumed to be the owner. Notice by regular mail and posting of notice on the front
entrance to the structure or similar location shall be deemed sufficient, legal notice to the owner and all other responsible parties. If there is no
structure on the property, a sign may be posted anywhere on the premises.
(2) The notice shall state the location and nature of the nuisance. It shall apprise the owner that if the nuisance is not abated within a specified number
of days, the village shall, at the expense of such owner, have such nuisance abated. Ten (10) days shall be such specified number unless otherwise
stated in this code, or the public health and safety require a shorter abatement period. The obligations of the owner are continuing obligations which
are effective for one year from the date of the notice, which date shall be the last date the notice was mailed or the date the notice was posted,
whichever comes last.
(3) If upon the giving of notice, the owner fails to abate said nuisance within the time and in the manner specified in the notice, the village may cause
the nuisance to be abated, as it deems appropriate. The cost of the abatement shall be assessed against the owner of the land upon which the
nuisance is located. The amount of such costs shall be paid by such owner to the village.
If the nuisance is of such threat to the welfare, safety and comfort of the community that it must be abated immediately, the village manager is hereby
authorized to take whatever steps are necessary to effect the abatement of same regardless of the requirements herein.
(4) In the case of nuisances involving animals or violations of chapter 17 of this code, and subject to the procedures of this section, abatement shall
include, without limitation, capture, impoundment, relocation or destruction of the animals by the Village, provided that no animal shall be destroyed
without approval of the Chief of Police unless the animal presents an immediate danger to personal health or safety. (Ord. 13-1564, 9-17-2013)
Sec. 14-15: ASSESSMENT OF LIENS FOR THE COSTS OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
The cost of such abatement shall constitute a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if,
within sixty (60) days after such cost or expense is incurred by the Village or person performing the service by authority of the Village, in his or the Village's
name, files notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, or in the Office of the Registrar of Titles of the real estate affected is
registered under the Torrens system.
The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service.
(3) The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the Municipality.
Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released
by the Village. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 02-1125, 9-24-2002)
Sec. 14-16: NUISANCES ORIGINATING OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE JURISDICTION.
Upon a reasonable showing that a nuisance from a source outside the Village jurisdiction is causing prejudice to a resident or residents of the Village,
authority is hereby vested in the Corporate Authorities to pursue all avenues, including the institution of court proceedings, to effect the abatement of such
nuisance.
If the Corporate Authorities determine that the health of Village residents is affected or may be affected, the Corporate Authorities may take the action
necessary to effect the abatement of such nuisance. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 02-1125, 9-24-2002)
ARTICLE V. PENALTY FOR NUISANCE VIOLATIONS
Sec. 14-17: PENALTY.
Any person causing any nuisance enumerated in this chapter shall be subject to a fine as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. Additionally, each
day such person shall continue a nuisance after being fined for the same, a new cause of action hereunder shall immediately accrue against such person.
(Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997; amd. Ord. 02-1125, 9-24-2002)
Title Chapter 15
OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 225/377
Chapter 15
OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1: BREACH OF PEACE PROHIBITED.
No person shall provoke a breach of the peace, or shall use any violent, threatening, profane or indecent language to the disturbance of or concerning any
person, tending to provide a breach of the peace. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
The following acts are hereby prohibited and persons committing them shall be guilty of disorderly conduct:
(1) Making, aiding, or assisting in making any noise, riot or disturbance which tends to provoke a breach of the peace within the corporate limits of the
village;
(2) Collecting in groups or crowds for an unlawful purpose, or for the primary purpose of disrupting others engaged in lawful pursuits, including
congregation with other persons to obstruct or interfere with free passage of persons entering or occupying any building or premises;
(3) Lodging or camping on public property;
(4) Threatening bodily harm to another or engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight or quarrel;
(5) Attempting to obtain or aiding in an attempt to obtain money or other valuable thing from others by trick or fraud;
(6) Carrying any pistol, switchblade, brass knuckles, or other dangerous weapon concealed on or about one's person, unless authorized by law. (1986
Code)
Sec. 15-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED.
No person shall discharge any firearm of any kind within the village limits. The only exceptions shall be as follows:
(1) A law enforcement officer in the line of duty, or
(2) A person who has been retained by the village or another governmental agency in cooperation with the village, to cull deer within the village. (Ord.
95-865, 12-11-1995)
For purposes of this section, "firearm" shall mean any device which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of a spring, expansion of
gas or compressed gas. This shall not apply to approved signaling devices and explosion riveters for building applications. (Ord. 15-1620, 8-18-2015)
Sec. 15-4: DISCHARGE OF EXPLOSIVE SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
In accordance with the Illinois fireworks use act1, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any display fireworks, flame effects or consumer fireworks as defined in the act except in accordance with a
permit for a pyrotechnic display issued by the fire chief. No person shall commit any act which violates any provision of the Illinois fireworks regulation act2
as amended. (Ord. 09-1410, 4-21-2009)
Sec. 15-5: FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED.
No person, except the fire department of the village for fire drills, shall wilfully make a false alarm of fire by outcry, or by using any bell, siren or other
sounding instrument; nor shall any person make any false alarm of any kind calculated to disturb the peace of the village or any individual therein. This
section shall include phone calls and any kind of residential or commercial fire or burglar alarm. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-6: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
No person shall damage, remove, destroy or deface in any way any public building or property including, but not limited to, any public building, sewer,
water pipe, hydrant, lamppost, curbstone, fence, wall, bridge, pavement, roadway, tree, bush or other landscaping, landscaping flower boxes and trash
containers, or any motor vehicle of the Village or any other public property, including the Village lockup facility while incarcerated therein. Any person
violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code, in addition to being liable for the actual damage done to the property. This
section includes damage done through wilfulness, recklessness or negligence. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-7: DEFACING NOTICES OR STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall wilfully and maliciously tear down, mutilate and deface or render illegible any notice, handbill, poster or traffic control sign lawfully
posted upon any street, avenue, alley or other place in the Village, unless so authorized by the Corporate Authorities.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 226/377
(2) No person shall write, print or paint with chalk, ink, paint or other material, any obscene words, language or expression upon any building, structure,
fence, wall or other place, or draw or paint on the same any picture or representation of anything of an indecent or vulgar character. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-8: DEFACING LIBRARY MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously injure or deface any materials belonging to or under the control of a public library. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-9: PUBLIC LEWDNESS OR INDECENCY PROHIBITED.
No person shall commit an act of open lewdness or act of public indecency tending to affect public morality. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-10: INDECENT EXPOSURE OR DRESS PROHIBITED.
No person, for the purpose of bathing or otherwise, shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity, or in any indecent and lewd dress, or make any
indecent exposure of his person. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-11: TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO PRODUCTS; SALE, PROCUREMENT AND PURCHASE.
(1) Sale To Or Procurement For Persons Under Eighteen Years Of Age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver or procure any cigarettes,
cigars, or other tobacco products, including those known as "smokeless tobacco", alternative tobacco products or hookahs and hookah paraphernalia
to or for any person under eighteen (18) years of age. For purposes of this Code, alternative tobacco products shall be defined as: "Any product or
device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing,
dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative tobacco products specifically include e-cigarettes as defined in this section.
The term alternative nicotine product excludes any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a nontobacco product for
sale as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose." It shall be
unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit any
person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell such products in any licensed premises. (Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
(2) Purchase Of Tobacco Products By Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase any
cigarettes, cigars, or other tobacco products, including those known as "smokeless tobacco", or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use false or
altered identification for the purpose of purchasing any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms.
(3) Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to possess any
cigarettes, cigars, or other tobacco products, including those known as "smokeless tobacco", within the Village.
(4) Vending Machines Selling Tobacco Products Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, deliver, or to keep any
tobacco products with the intention of selling, giving away, or delivering such products to any person by use of a vending machine. (Ord. 99-999, 9-27-
1999)
Sec. 15-12: MEDICINE SAMPLES, DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED.
No person shall pass out free samples of any drug or medicine, upon the streets or in any other public places or distribute such from house to house. This
shall not apply to items distributed by the U.S. Postal Service. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-13: OPERATIONAL DOORS ON UNUSED REFRIGERATORS AND DEEP FREEZERS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded refrigerator or deep freezer or one not in use to remain in any place accessible to children
unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door of the same has been removed, or unless the doors of the same are bolted and locked in such a
manner that it is impossible to open the same by the use of the hands. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-14: HUMAN OR ANIMAL FIGHTS PROHIBITED.
No person shall institute, cause, or procure any dogfight, prizefight, cockfight, nor any public or private fighting within the Village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-15: JUMPING ON OR ATTACHING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
No unauthorized person shall climb, jump upon, or cling to, or in any way attach himself to any railway train or any motor vehicle while the same is in
motion or standing still. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-16: OBTAINING TELEPHONE SERVICE WITHOUT PAYING THEREFOR PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert into a money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, or other material or to manipulate or
operate, in any manner whatsoever, any telephone instrument or any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to
obtain telephone service without paying therefor. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-17: EXTRACTING MONEY FROM PUBLIC TELEPHONES PROHIBITED.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 227/377
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to extract money from any public telephone or associated apparatus. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-18: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate a
situation within the Village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-19: OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED.
The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjoining a street or alley intersection in the Village upon which any trees, shrubs, bushes, or plants
are growing, shall trim, prune, or cut the same or cause the same to be trimmed, pruned, or cut so as not to obstruct the passage of light from any street
light or traffic signal light and so that the same shall not interfere with, nor obstruct the vision of persons using the alleys, streets, or highways. The
existence of any such obstruction is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of such premises to fail,
neglect, or refuse to abate the obstruction by removing, trimming, cutting, or pruning such tree, shrub, bush, or plant within ten (10) days after being
notified in writing to do so by the Superintendent of Public Works. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-20: RESERVED.
(Ord. 19-1738, 2-19-2019)
Sec. 15-21: KEEPING DISORDERLY HOUSES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to keep any house, store, shop, garage, or other place for the purpose of committing any act prohibited in this Code or by State law.
It shall likewise be unlawful to rent or lease such a place to one who is known by the owner or lessor or his agent to intend to use it for the purpose of
committing an act prohibited by this Code or any State law. (1986 Code)
Sec. 15-21.1: REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm other than a firm specifically designated by the Village to remove any item including, but not limited to,
newspapers; aluminum or bimetal cans; or glass bottles placed in or adjacent to Village recycling containers. (Ord. 89-604, 8-22-1989)
Sec. 15-21.2: SOLICITING, PEDDLING OR SELLING IN THE VILLAGE LIMITS.
Except as provided in chapter 11, article II, division VIII of this Code, no person shall solicit, peddle or sell any item or service in or on any public way in the
Village. Neither shall any person set up a temporary booth or structure for the purpose of doing the same. This shall not apply to special community events
officially approved by the village. (Ord. 94-810, 8-22-1994)
Sec. 15-21.3: LANDING OF HELICOPTERS RESTRICTED.
No helicopters (other than governmental craft such as coast guard craft or medical helicopters) may be landed or permitted to hover within the boundaries
of the village unless permission is secured in writing at least twenty four (24) hours in advance from the fire rescue chief. For purposes of this section,
"hover" shall mean flying at an altitude of less than three hundred feet (300') for more than two (2) minutes over the village. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
Sec. 15-21.4: LITTERING PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deposit or discard any litter or permit any accumulation of litter in any place within the village, except in
authorized garbage or trash receptacles. For purposes of this section, "litter" shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, garbage, trash, refuse,
junk, waste, paper, pulp, boxes, packing materials, containers, yard waste, grass clippings, compost and/or other like materials. (Ord. 99-998, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 15-21.5: ADVERTISEMENTS AND HANDBILLS.
(1) Advertising. It shall be unlawful to advertise within the village any unlawful business or any illegal article for sale or delivery, and it shall be unlawful
to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice within the village.
(2) Merchandise. It shall be unlawful for any person by himself or herself, or his or her agents, servants or employees, to disburse, distribute,
disseminate, cast, throw or place, or cause to be disbursed, distributed, disseminated, cast, thrown or placed, any article or material of any kind, in or
upon any street, alleyway, sidewalk or other public place located within the village.
(3) Medical Samples. No person shall place, in any manner, any samples of medicinal preparations upon the porches, driveways or yards of private
residences.
(4) Posting Prohibited In Certain Cases. No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any other
person, any commercial or noncommercial notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement, paper or other device calculated to attract public
attention, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, traffic control device or any other portion or part of any public way, place
or property, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the piers, columns,
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 228/377
trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of
the fire rescue department or police department communications systems, except as such may be authorized or required by the laws of the United
States, the state of Illinois or the ordinances of the village.
(5) Littering Or Throwing Handbills. No person shall throw, cast, deposit, discard, disseminate, distribute, lay, place or scatter in or upon any public
place, property or appurtenance any commercial or noncommercial placard, handbill, pamphlet, circular, book, notice, paper, trash, rubbish, refuse,
garbage or other such item.
(6) Distribution On Certain Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, disseminate, discard, deposit, place, throw, cast or
otherwise scatter any commercial or noncommercial placard, handbill, pamphlet, circular, book, notice, paper, trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage or
other such item in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, or upon any private property or premises
which contains or exhibits signs or other notices prohibiting such conduct, or upon any private property where the owner or owners thereof expressly
prohibit such conduct.
(7) Posting Of Objectionable Matter Or Material; Owner's Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any
premises to permit any person or entity, whether licensed or acting under the terms of this section or otherwise, to post, affix or otherwise attach to
any building, structure or fixture located upon such premises, whether such fixture be natural or artificial, any placard, handbill, pamphlet, circular,
book, notice, paper, trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage or other such item prohibited by the terms of this section.
(8) Handbills Offensive To Public Morals. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to post, distribute, disseminate, handout or otherwise transmit
any sign, or any commercial or noncommercial handbill:
(a) Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to, or the overthrow of, the government of the
United States or the state of Illinois, by means of any artifice, scheme or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or which encourages or
tends to encourage a breach of the peace or good order of the community; or
(b) Which is offensive to the public morals or decency, or which contains blasphemous, obscene, libelous, defamatory or scurrilous language. (Ord.
99-996, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 15-21.6: CURFEW.
Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in this code, the following shall apply with respect to curfew:
(1) It is unlawful for a person less than eighteen (18) years of age (the "child") to be present at any public assembly or in any public building, park,
sidewalk, street or highway or other public place between:
(a) Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day;
(b) One minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday; and
(c) One minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday.
(2) The curfew set forth in subsection (1) of this section does not apply to a child who is:
(a) Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
(b) Accompanied by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
(c) Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than eighteen (18) years of age to perform;
(d) Participating in, going to, or returning from:
1. An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
2. An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or article 1, sections
3, 4, and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or both, such as freedoms of religion and speech and the right of assembly, to include, but
not be limited to:
a. A religious event, including, but not limited to, prayer and vigil services;
b. A political event, including, but not limited to, observing or influencing a legislative session and attending a political rally or event;
c. An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision of
one or more adults; or
d. Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location outside Illinois to another location outside Illinois with the permission of a parent or
legal guardian.
(3) Prior to arresting or citing a child for curfew under this section, the police officer must make reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the
exceptions contained in subsection (2) of this section apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth in subsection (1) of this section. A
police officer shall issue a citation or make an arrest for curfew only if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the child has violated this
section and that no exceptions apply.
(4) It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his/her custody or control to violate this section. (Ord.
04-1203, 4-20-2004)
ARTICLE II. TRESPASSES
Sec. 15-22: TRESPASSES PROHIBITED.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 229/377
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this municipality upon either public or private property as hereinafter set forth in any of the
following ways:
(1) An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning, or protest given orally or in writing by any owner
or occupant thereof;
(2) The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning, or protest given orally or in writing by
any owner or occupant thereof;
(3) A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another after being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof;
(4) An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof,
or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE III. GAMBLING
Sec. 15-23: GAMBLING AND RELATED OFFENSES.
A. Gambling Generally. No person shall commit any act which violates or tends to violate any section of the Illinois gambling and related offenses act, as
amended, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq., and such article is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. (1986 Code; amd.
Ord. 09-1429, 9-15-2009)
B. Video Gaming, State License Not Effective In The Village. Video gaming, as that term is defined in the Illinois video gaming act3 is prohibited. A
video gaming license issued by the state of Illinois is not effective within the village of Northfield. (Ord. 09-1429, 9-15-2009)
ARTICLE IV. POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Sec. 15-24: DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CANNABIS. As used in this article, includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or
by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. This term shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/102, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials, as defined in section
10 of the Illinois methamphetamine control and community protection act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/10, and other than any equipment used for
any drug other than cannabis which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the state of Illinois or this
code. It includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
(2) Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
(3) Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or
controlled substances;
(4) Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
(5) Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human
body, including, where applicable, the following items:
(a) Water pipes;
(b) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(c) Smoking and carburetion masks;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 230/377
(d) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(e) Carburetor pipes;
(f) Electric pipes;
(g) Air driven pipes;
(h) Chillums;
(i) Bongs;
(j) Ice pipes or chillers; or
(k) Glass cocaine or crack pipes;
(6) Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this article. (Ord. 06-1306, 12-5-2006)
Sec. 15-25: POSSESSION AND SALE OR DELIVERY.
A. Possession Of Cannabis. It shall be deemed a violation of this section for any person to knowingly grow, possess, sell, give away, barter, deliver,
exchange, distribute or administer up to thirty grams (30 g) of cannabis in the village. (Ord. 15-1619, 7-21-2015)
B. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance
for that use. In determining intent under this section, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substances
to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
C. Sale Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person, business, corporation, place, premises, company or other legal entity to keep
for sale, offer for sale, sell or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 06-1306, 12-5-2006)
Sec. 15-26: EXEMPTIONS.
Section 15-25 of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
(2) Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited
to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and cigarette rolling papers.
(3) Items defined in section 15-24, "Definitions", of this article, under "drug paraphernalia", which are used for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section. In determining whether or not
a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
(a) The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
(b) Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
(c) Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
(d) Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
(e) Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
(f) The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
(g) Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as, a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
(h) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. (Ord. 06-1306, 12-5-2006)
ARTICLE V. PENALTIES
Sec. 15-27: PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount set forth in appendix D, article III, of this Code. For violations of article IV,
section 15-25 of this chapter, in addition to the fines and penalties set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code for general Code penalty, the Presiding
Judge may in each case exercise his/her discretion to issue and order such other corrective measures of the defendant as may be reasonable, equitable
and appropriate, including court supervision, drug abuse counseling or psychiatric or social service counseling. (A local ordinance citation should be
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 231/377
issued.) (Ord. 06-1306, 12-5-2006)
Footnote 1: 425 ILCS 35/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
Footnote 3: 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
Title Chapter 16
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Chapter 16
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 16-1: WORDS AND PHRASES.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ACTING IN THE COURSE OF BUSINESS. Any action taken by a person at a business premises in the village, or in furtherance of a business purpose in
the village.
ADULT. Any person who has attained his or her twenty first birthday.
ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING. Training, with respect to overserving of drinks, identifying intoxicated customers, proof of age and other safety
factors, provided by an accredited agency that is approved by the commissioner, for the purpose of educating persons who serve, deliver or provide
alcoholic beverages.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR LIQUOR.
(1) Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid intended as a beverage and containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
(2) Any beverage containing any scientifically detectable trace of alcohol and commonly known as "near beer", "nonalcoholic beer", or "nonalcoholic
wine", whose taste, color, odor and consistency are similar to the alcoholic beverages known as beer and wine and, except for the reduced alcohol
content, is marketed as being similar to beer or wine.
BANQUET FACILITY. A food service facility whose primary business is the hosting of parties, celebrations and events which are attended by specific
invitees of a specific host as opposed to "drop in" or reservation dining by the general public.
BAR. A barrier or counter, at and over which alcoholic beverages are opened, poured, prepared or served.
(1) Customer Bar. A bar on a licensed premises that is open for actual visiting by, seating for or service to the customer.
(2) Service Bar. A bar on a licensed premises that is not open for actual visiting by or seating for the customer, but is used solely as a drink preparation
area for servers.
BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation or infusion in a brew or concoction of barley or other grain, malt or hops, in water. This includes
beer, light beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and other similar brews.
BOTTLE CLUB. A type of service of spirits in which the spirits are purchased by the customer and then kept at a licensed premises for use or consumption
by the customer on subsequent visits.
CATERER. A person who, for compensation, provides food and service for a banquet, dinner or other special occasion where the recipients of the food or
service are specifically invited to each particular event. (See subsection 16-6(4) of this chapter.)
CERTIFICATION. That specific grant of the privilege and authority, pursuant to the exact requirements of this chapter, to a person for the service of
alcoholic beverages in the manner set forth in the text of a designated classification.
CONTROL OF PREMISES. The legal or beneficial ownership, rental, lease or licensure shall constitute control of property. Control may also exist where
none of the aforesaid legal relationships apply, but where an adult occupies or is otherwise in charge of or charged with the supervision of a particular
premises.
CORKAGE. The bringing of an alcoholic beverage by a patron, into a place of business for the purpose of consuming the alcoholic beverage on the
premises.
DRAMSHOP INSURANCE. That insurance required of a liquor licensee, the purpose of which is to insure the licensee against the statutory liability
imposed by the Illinois liquor control act.
DRINK PROMOTION PERIOD. Any period of the business day when an alcoholic beverage is offered to the public or segment of the public at a reduced
price.
ENTERTAINMENT. Any playing of prerecorded music or voices or any live act or performance whether or not using sound amplification.
FALSE IDENTIFICATION. Any document used for identification or proof of age that has been altered or that contains false or misleading information or
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 232/377
that contains a name that is not the actual name of the person using it.
FIGHTING. Any threatening or touching of another person which provokes or tends to provoke a breach of the peace. This shall include, but not be limited
to, any disputatious physical action between or among persons.
FLIGHT OF WINE OR BEER. Smaller individual glasses of a variety of wines or beers made available in one serving.
GENERAL PUBLIC. The whole body politic including the people of the neighborhood, the village, the state of Illinois, the United States Of America, and/or
persons at large traveling through the village, as distinct from the designation of a particular person or group of persons.
HOST LIABILITY INSURANCE. A typical business insurance coverage that protects an owner against claims that his or her business or premises caused
damage or injury or caused liability to accrue to a business invitee.
IMPAIRMENT. Any diminution or compromise of a person's physical, mental or perceptual abilities due to the consumption of an alcoholic beverage.
Impairment does not require that the blood alcohol content be in excess of any particular gram of alcohol to milliliters of blood or breath ratio.
LICENSE OR LIQUOR LICENSE. That specific grant of the privilege and authority, pursuant to the exact requirements of this chapter, to a person to
deliver alcoholic beverages in the manner set forth in the text of a designated classification. License, as used in this chapter shall, in applicable
circumstances, include any permit or certification pursuant to section 16-5 of this chapter.
LICENSE TERM. The time between the issuance or renewal of a license and its expiration date.
LICENSED PREMISES. The building and land at the address for which the license is issued. For purposes of determining parameters of the location
where an act is prohibited by this chapter, licensed premises shall include all off street parking, any public property immediately adjacent to the private
address and the entirety of the contiguous property owned by the same entity owning the licensed premises. For purposes of determining the parameters
of the location where an act is permitted by this chapter, licensed premises shall mean only the interior of the building at the licensed address unless an
outdoor or other permit specifically allows for activity on the exterior of the premises.
LICENSEE. That person who has been issued a liquor license, permit or certification by the commissioner. For purposes of actions required of or
prohibited of a licensee, this shall include the holder of a Northfield liquor license and any officer, principal, employee or agent of the license holder.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The office of the president of the village, including appropriate legal counsel. This may include such other
persons as the president may appoint, either by written policy or practice, to aid in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties of the
local liquor control commissioner. The local liquor control commissioner will be referred to as the "commissioner" in this chapter.
LOUNGE. That portion of a licensed restaurant or club that is not part of the main dining area, where a customer bar and other seating is located, and that
is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where alcoholic beverages may be consumed.
MAINTENANCE OF ORDER STANDARD. That standard by which it shall be determined whether a licensee has maintained order on the licensed
premises. It shall generally be stated as the establishment and maintenance of the optimum precautions and actions that are practical for deterring and
preventing "fighting" as defined in this section.
MANAGER. That sole natural person, on the licensed premises, who is charged with the supervision, oversight and management of the entire business
operation and physical premises.
MEAL PACKAGE. A special menu package where food and alcoholic beverages are included in a single price.
OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE. The operation or physical control of a motor vehicle anywhere in the village of Northfield, whether on private or
public property. To be in physical control, the person need not be actually driving the motor vehicle and the vehicle need not be running. If there is only one
person inside of a motor vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control regardless of the person's location within the vehicle. If there is
only one person in a front seat or front passenger area of a motor vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control regardless of the
person's location in the front passenger area. If there is more than one person in the vehicle, but none in the front seat area, the person in the vehicle who
is the owner of the vehicle or the person to whom permission was given to operate the vehicle, shall be presumed to be in physical control of the vehicle.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container that is used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic beverages to contain and to convey any alcoholic beverages. For purposes of the privilege of selling, original
package means that the container must not be or have been opened or unsealed.
PARENT. A natural, adoptive or foster parent or a court designated guardian.
PARTY PACKAGE. An offering by a licensee for private party functions or events for specific social or business occasion.
PERMIT. That specific grant of the privilege and authority, pursuant to the exact requirements of this chapter, to a person to serve alcoholic beverages in
the manner set forth in the text of a designated permit classification.
RESTAURANT. Any public place maintained, and held out to the public as a place primarily devoted to being a full service dining establishment at which
the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals. Limited food service, as typically provided by drive-in
restaurants, luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops, fast food operations and similar uses, does not satisfy the requirements of this definition.
SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR VALUE. The service of alcoholic beverages for any consideration of any nature. This shall include, without
limitation, the inclusion of alcoholic beverages in a single price of admission and/or in the price of a ticket and/or the price of a meal, a cover charge or
requirement of a purchase of a raffle ticket, even if for charitable or not for profit purposes.
SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (OR SERVICE). The sale, delivery, giving, service, providing or exchange of an alcoholic beverage from one
person to another. Service of alcoholic beverages is meant to include the provision of any alcoholic beverage by whatever means by one person to
another. This definition includes being an employee who actually serves alcoholic beverages or who is a cashier at a licensed premises. Service of
alcoholic beverages by any class P licensee shall generally be referred to as "delivery of alcoholic beverages".
SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (REGULATED). This is the type of service of alcoholic beverages that is regulated by this chapter. Regulated
service generally includes the following: Service at any location within the village: 1) to the public from a business venue; or 2) in the course of business; or
3) service of alcoholic beverages for value at any location. Also referred to as "regulated service". Not included as regulated service is service by:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 233/377
(1) A nonretail business owner of an unopened alcoholic beverage as a personal gift, to a specifically designated client or tenant; and
(2) Giving away of alcoholic beverages at a holiday party for employees of a business or commercial entity when:
(a) No member of the public is invited;
(b) Not more than two (2) such events are held each year.
SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other
spirituous beverages and such beverages when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person who has not attained his or her twenty first birthday.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY. That liability which is implied as a matter of law even though the person may not have directly caused an injury or property
damage.
WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or "spirits", as defined herein. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 15-1624, 9-15-2015)
ARTICLE II. LICENSING FOR REGULATED SERVICE
Sec. 16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to engage in regulated service of any alcoholic beverage without first having obtained a village liquor license. Every person engaged in
regulated service of alcoholic beverages in the village shall obtain the appropriate liquor license authorizing the service of the specific type and character
of alcoholic beverages and the specific type of business or activity at which it may be provided. The fee to be paid for such licenses shall be as set forth in
appendix D, article I of this Code. Except for certain temporary Village permits, there shall be no service of alcoholic beverage by the licensee until the
licensee has obtained a liquor license required by the State for the service of alcoholic beverages. All licenses, permits, certifications and/or placards
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place that is visible to patrons. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-3: APPLICATION FOR A LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE.
Application for a local liquor license shall be made to the Commissioner. The application shall be upon forms provided by the Village. Only fully completed
forms may be considered. Each application shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable application fee and the applicable license fee as set forth in
appendix D, article I of this Code. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Before a license may be issued to any applicant, background checks (which shall include the submission of fingerprints to appropriate agencies) shall be
performed with respect to the key individuals owning and/or operating the licensed business. The Liquor Commissioner will determine the individuals who
are subject to such background checks, and the Commissioner's decision shall be final. The Commissioner may accept fingerprints from another
jurisdiction for persons not residing or working within fifty (50) miles of the Village. A reasonable fee may be charged by the Police Department for each
person required to be fingerprinted. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner may require such documentation as he or she deems appropriate to
determine who must be fingerprinted, and the Commissioner's decision as to fingerprinting shall be final. An investigation will be performed to enable the
Commissioner to ascertain whether the issuance of a license will comply with all regulations of the Village. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 14-1580,
2-18-2014)
No license may be issued until all information and documentation required in the application has been provided. All of the reports from the various
departments and agencies with respect to background checks must be completed and all fees must be paid. The foregoing notwithstanding, the
Commissioner may, at the Commissioner's sole discretion, issue the license prior to the completion of a background check under the following
circumstances:
(1) The Police Department believes the background check will be completed within forty five (45) days.
(2) No information is currently available which would indicate that the applicant would be ineligible for a license.
(3) The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the immediate issuance is necessary to assure the viability of the
business.
(4) The Commissioner retains the absolute right to revoke the license, without a hearing, if subsequently discovered information would, in the sole
discretion of the Commissioner, have made the licensee originally ineligible for the license.
(5) The licensee executes a release and hold harmless statement that is satisfactory to the Village Attorney and absolutely absolves the Village, its
officers and employees of any liability if the Commissioner subsequently revokes the license based on completion of the background check.
By accepting a Village liquor license, the licensee consents to the service of process and the acceptance of any other document by or on any employee or
agent of the licensee or the posting of the process or document on any entrance to the licensed premises.
After issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide written notice to the Commissioner of any change in any information set forth in the application
within seven (7) days of the change.
If the applicant provides any false or misleading information, omits information for purposes of misleading or fails to properly and correctly identify
individuals whose background information is required; such action shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the license. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 234/377
A. Ineligibility. No liquor license may be issued to any of the following: 1) a partnership; 2) a sole proprietorship; 3) a corporation that is neither
incorporated in Illinois nor qualified and registered under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois. This limitation shall not
apply to a temporary permit.
B. Limitations. No liquor license may be issued to any entity:
(1) Whose business is conducted by a manager or agent who is not an actual employee of the licensee, unless such manager or agent possesses a
management entity certification.
(2) Which does not legally or beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
(3) Which is a limited liability company whose managing partner is not identified as a natural person, or has a member which does not have a manager
or partner who is an identified natural person or is a corporation which does not identify a president or chief executive officer as a natural person.
(4) Which does not hold a valid Northfield business license for the licensed premises as required by this Code. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
(5) Not eligible for a State retail liquor dealer's license. A copy of each renewed State liquor license must be provided to the Village Manager prior to
the expiration of the existing State license. Failure to do so will subject the licensee to an automatic daily fine as set forth in appendix D, article III of
this Code. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 15-1606, 1-20-2015)
(6) Which does not designate a manager for the premises.
(7) Which, upon review of the application taken as a whole by the Commissioner, is deemed by prior actions as indicated from the application or
background check, to be a substantial risk of not abiding by the regulations of the Village.
C. Commissioner Discretion. Unless the Commissioner issues a written determination to the Village Board that it is in the best interests of the Village
that the license be issued despite the circumstances and that such circumstances will not be a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the Village,
no liquor license may be issued where a manager, officer, director, managing partner, member, twenty percent (20%) or greater shareholder or member
share owner:
(1) Has been found guilty of:
(a) Any felony at any time; or
(b) Any offense, within the past two (2) years involving the sale, use or possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, including those
related to traffic offenses; or
(c) Any other crime, at any time, if upon due investigation, the Commissioner determines that such individual has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to
warrant the public trust; or
(d) Any violation, at any time, of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture of alcoholic beverages; or
(e) Any gambling offense as proscribed by subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of section 5/28-1 of, or as proscribed by section 5/28-3 of, the Criminal
Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as amended, or as prescribed by statute replacing any of these statutory provisions.
(2) Has previously had a liquor license revoked in this or any other jurisdiction.
(3) At the time of application for renewal of a liquor license would not have been eligible for a license upon a first application.
(4) Is an employee or elected official of the Village. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-5: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
A. Licenses. Liquor licenses in the Village shall be divided into the following classifications:
(1) Package licenses (P):
Class P-1 Supermarket package license
Class P-2 Wine and beer only package license
(2) Food service licenses (F):
Class F-1 Restaurant without lounge license
Class F-2 Restaurant corkage license
Class F-3 Restaurant with lounge license
Class F-4 Restaurant with bar license
Class F-5 Senior center license
Class F-6 Golf course license
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 235/377
Class F-7 Corporate headquarters license
(Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
(3) Specialty licenses (S):
Class S-1 Gourmet beverage shop license
Class S-2 License with special conditions
Class S-3 Governmental entity license
(Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 18-1716, 5-15-2018)
B. Temporary Permit Classifications.
(1) Permits not requiring an existing Northfield liquor license:
Class TP(1) Civic permit
Class TP(2) Government permit
Class TP(3) Non-Northfield caterer's permit
Class TP(4) Promotional permit
(2) Permits requiring an existing Northfield liquor license:
Class TP(5) Northfield caterer's permit (requires Class F license)
Class TP(6) Daily sampling permit (requires Class P or S license)
Class TP(7) Temporary outdoor entertainment permit (requires Class F license)
C. Certifications. Management entity certification. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-6: LICENSE DESCRIPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
The restrictions on a particular license, permit or certification classification shall be binding on the licensee and no premises or activity may be operated in
violation of the classification restrictions and regulations. No license, permit or certification may be issued unless the applicant's business is specific to one
of the following classifications and the fee defined in appendix D, article I of this Code is paid: (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
(1) Class P Licenses (Package).
(a) Restrictions Applicable To All Class P Licenses.
1. Consumption and/or allowing consumption on the premises where sold is prohibited. (See subsection (4)(b)2b of this section for daily sampling
events and Class P-1 supermarket package license below.)
2. The licensee is prohibited from selling or offering for sale single containers of refrigerated or chilled alcoholic beverages where the single
container has a capacity of less than seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 mL).
3. Except for duly permitted daily sampling and Class P-1 as set forth below, it shall be unlawful for the holder of any Class P license to deliver an
alcoholic beverage in any container other than its original sealed and unopened package.
4. Alcoholic beverages may be delivered only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
(b) Specific Class P Licenses.
1. Class P-1 Supermarket Package License. A Class P-1 license shall authorize the sale of all alcoholic beverages in original containers for
consumption off the licensed premises and shall authorize the sale of wine, spirits, and beer for consumption on the licensed premises.
Regulations specific to a Class P-1 license:
a. The sale of alcoholic liquor is authorized only at a grocery store of at least thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet of above grade interior
floor space.
b. The sale of wine, spirits and beer for consumption on the premises shall be limited to designated locations. The locations, whose site plan
shall be subject to approval by the Village, must include a barrier from the general shopping area. The designated areas shall be limited to not
more than five percent (5%) of the above grade interior floor space.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 236/377
c. There shall be seating and tables for customers in the area devoted to on premises consumption. The designated areas shall include an area
where food is prepared and regularly served on premises. Such food shall include hot or cold sandwiches, appetizers, tapas, sushi, baked
goods or other similar foods.
d. If, in any calendar year, the sale of wine, spirits and beer for on premises consumption exceeds five percent (5%) of the gross sales of the
licensee, the Village shall have the absolute right to limit such sales in any way it deems appropriate. No later than January 31 of each year,
the licensee shall submit evidence of the percentage of such on premises sales for the prior calendar year.
e. Hours for sales of wine, spirits and beer for on premises consumption and sampling as allowed pursuant to subsection (1)(b)1i of this section
shall be eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
f. No open wine, spirit or beer may be taken from one location of on premises consumption to another.
g. Unopened wine and beer may be displayed for sale throughout the store, but no more than a total of twenty percent (20%) of retail floor space
may be devoted to the display of wine and beer.
h. A single container of beer sold for off premises consumption must contain at least twenty two (22) ounces or 0.651 liters.
i. Individual samples of alcoholic beverages may be provided free of charge as permitted by state law1 and subject to the rules for a class TP(6)
daily sampling permit; except that such sampling may take place any day, without any additional permit.
j. It is intended that the service of wine, spirits and beer is merely adjunct to the operation of a grocery store and that the facility shall not be
advertised or otherwise held out to be a drinking establishment.
2. Class P-2 Wine And Beer Only Package License. Class P-2 for the delivery only of wine and beer in its original package. Regulations specific
to a class P-2 license:
a. The licensed premises must contain at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of interior floor space. (Ord. 14-1578, 1-21-2014)
(2) Class F Licenses (Food Service).
(a) Restrictions Applicable To All Class F Licenses.
1. The premises shall be primarily devoted to the preparation, cooking and serving of meals.
2. The premises must have a kitchen, dining room, staff and equipment as deemed adequate by the village health authority.
3. Spirits may not be sold, delivered or served by the bottle.
4. See subsection (4)(b)2a of this section for off site catering privileges and subsection (4)(b)1a of this section and section 16-18 of this chapter for
the holding of events for civic organizations.
(b) Specific Class F Licenses.
1. Class F-1 Restaurant Without Lounge License. Class F-1 for service of alcoholic beverages at a restaurant. Regulations specific to a class F-
1 license:
a. Consumption or allowing of consumption of alcoholic beverages at any place other than dining tables is specifically prohibited.
b. Service of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to those patrons dining in the restaurant.
c. Full food service including dinner and/or luncheon menus shall be offered at all times while alcoholic beverages are served.
d. Alcoholic beverages may only be served between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. unless more restrictive
hours are established in the special use ordinance governing the premises.
e. Up to twice annually the license holder may obtain a two (2) day concession permit for the sale of beer and wine only at an outdoor
community, civic or special event at a location away from the premises, but within Northfield. Such a license may not be issued for a location
within two hundred feet (200') of any residential zoning district, except for events held at a park district approved event on park district
property. A state of Illinois special permit liquor license shall also be required if the event is open to the general public.
2. Class F-2 Restaurant Corkage License. Class F-2 shall allow patrons to bring beer and wine into a restaurant establishment for the sole
purpose of consumption in that establishment. Regulations specific to the class F-2 license:
a. A corkage fee may or may not be assessed to the participating patrons.
b. Consumption of beer and wine shall be limited to those patrons dining in the restaurant and seated at a table.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 237/377
c. Alcoholic beverages may only be consumed on the premises between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
unless more restrictive hours are established in the special use ordinance governing the premises.
3. Class F-3 Restaurant With Lounge License. Class F-3, for providing of alcoholic beverages by restaurants maintaining a separate lounge
area. Regulations specific to the class F-3 license:
a. Alcoholic beverages may be served in the lounge portion of the premises to patrons of the restaurant who are either consuming their meal,
waiting for meal service or who have completed their meal.
b. The total lounge area shall be no more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the premises.
c. Alcoholic beverages served in the restaurant portion of the premises shall be limited to those patrons dining in the restaurant.
d. Full food service including dinner and/or luncheon menus shall be offered at all times while alcoholic beverages are served.
e. Alcoholic beverages shall only be served between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. unless more restrictive
hours are established in the special use ordinance governing the premises.
f. Up to twice annually the license holder may obtain a two (2) day concession permit for service of beer and wine only at an outdoor community,
civic or special event at a location away from the premises, but within Northfield. Such a license may not be issued for a location within two
hundred feet (200') of any residential zoning district, except for events held at a park district approved event on park district property. Any
applicable state of Illinois licensure, including a special use permit license shall also be required.
4. Class F-4 Restaurant With Bar License. Class F-4, for providing of alcoholic beverages by restaurants maintaining a separate bar area.
Regulations specific to the class F-4 license:
a. Alcoholic beverages may be served in the bar portion of the premises with or without the service of food.
b. The total bar area may be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the premises.
c. Alcoholic beverages served in the restaurant portion of the premises shall be limited to those patrons dining in the restaurant.
d. Alcoholic beverages may only be served between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. unless more restrictive
hours are established in the special use ordinance governing the premises.
e. Up to fifteen (15) daily concession permits may be obtained annually for the service of alcoholic beverages at an outdoor community civic or
special event at a location away from the premises, but within Northfield. Such a license may not be issued for a location within two hundred
feet (200') of any residential zoning district, except for events held at a park district approved event on park district property. Any applicable
state of Illinois licensure, including a special use permit license shall also be required.
5. Class F-5 Senior Center License. Class F-5, for the service of alcoholic beverages at a senior center. Regulations specific to the class F-5
license:
a. Service may take place only on the premises designated in the license.
b. Alcoholic beverages may be served only between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. through one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following
morning unless more restrictive hours are established in the special use ordinance governing the premises.
6. Class F-6 Golf Course License. Class F-6, for the service of alcoholic beverages at golf courses. Regulations specific to a class F-6 license:
a. Unless otherwise set forth in this subsection (2)(b)6, the regulations for the class F-4 license shall apply to the golf course's restaurant facility.
b. Alcoholic beverages may be served only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following morning.
c. Alcoholic beverages may be served in a clubhouse restaurant, a clubhouse lounge, from licensee owned carts on the premises, at any other
snack or food facility on the course and at events on the golf course grounds.
d. Alcoholic beverages may be sold on the club premises, to club members only, in cases and half cases of wine for consumption off the club
premises. Such sales shall be permitted not more than twice in any twelve (12) month period, and shall be limited on each occasion to one
day.
7. Class F-7 Corporate Headquarters License. Class F-7, for the service of alcoholic beverages at a corporate headquarters that has food
service and food preparation for employees. Regulations specific to the class F-7 license:
a. This license may be issued to the general manager of the headquarter facility or to a business licensed by the village to run the corporation's
food concession.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 238/377
b. Alcoholic beverages may not be served with employee lunches or other meals in the company cafeteria.
c. Service shall be permitted only for employees of the corporation or their guests for corporate sponsored or corporate approved special events
at the corporate headquarters.
d. Alcoholic beverages may be served only between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following morning.
(3) Specialty Licenses.
(a) Class S-1 Gourmet Beverage Shop License. Class S-1, allows for the delivery of beer and wine in its original package. Regulations specific to
the class S-1 license:
1. A gourmet beverage shop license shall be available only in the village center zoning district.
2. No "spirits", as defined by this chapter, may be delivered or served.
3. Glasses or flights of beer or wine may be served on the licensed premises under the following conditions:
a. Hors d'oeuvres or food must be available for consumption with the beer or wine.
b. Each glass or flight of beer or wine may contain no more than five (5) ounces.
c. No more than ten (10) ounces of beer or wine may be served to any individual during any day.
4. Off premises beer or wine tastings may be held upon securing a daily sampling permit and in accord with the regulations for such permit. On
premises samplings do not require a daily sampling permit, but must be conducted in accord with the regulations of subsection (4)(b)2b of this
section.
5. The licensee may serve beer or wine at a civic event away from the S-1 licensed premises, provided that the organization sponsoring the civic
event has obtained a temporary civic permit.
6. The licensee may serve beer or wine at a Northfield business which does not otherwise possess a Northfield liquor license under the following
conditions:
a. Service shall be at a promotional event inside the business premises.
b. The business must have obtained a temporary promotion permit.
c. No more than two (2) such events shall be held at any single business in any license term.
d. The licensee may not conduct more than a total of twenty (20) such events in any license term.
e. The licensee shall notify the Commissioner, in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days in advance of any such service event.
7. The restrictions governing Class P (package license) shall apply.
(b) Class S-2 License With Special Conditions. Class S-2, the Corporate Authorities may, from time to time, create conditional licenses which are
based on the license classifications set forth above, but which contain additional conditions and restrictions. These licenses with special
conditions, while created by the Corporate Authorities, shall remain subject to issuance by the Commissioner. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
(c) Class S-3 Governmental Entity License. A governmental entity annual license may be issued to any taxing body whose taxpayers include
residents of the Village of Northfield. A governmental entity license may be issued subject to the following conditions:
1. The Governing Board of the governmental entity shall, by resolution, designate an individual who is a full time employee of the governmental
entity as Coordinator of Alcoholic Beverage Sales. A current cellular telephone number and email address of the Coordinator of Alcoholic
Beverage Sales shall be filed with the Northfield Police Department and be updated as needed.
2. The Coordinator of Alcoholic Beverage Sales shall maintain a valid alcohol awareness certificate obtained through attendance at a duly certified
alcohol awareness course.
3. The Coordinator of Alcoholic Beverage Sales shall give at least thirty (30) days written notice to the Chief of Police of the location of any event
at which alcoholic beverages will be served.
4. Signs, approved by the Chief of Police stating that the sale or consumption by underage persons is prohibited and that no alcoholic beverages
may be consumed except on the premises of the event shall be posted at each point of sale.
5. The Governing Board of the governmental entity shall execute an unconditional release and hold harmless agreement, acceptable to the Village
Attorney, releasing and holding harmless the Village, its officers, agents and employees from any actions arising out of the issuance of the
license by the Village and the holding of the license by the governmental entity. (Ord. 18-1716, 5-15-2018)
(4) Temporary Permits.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 239/377
(a) Regulations Applicable To All Temporary Permits.
1. The Commissioner may attach such special conditions as are appropriate for a temporary permit.
2. The Commissioner, in his or her sole discretion, may accept host liability coverage in the amounts set forth in section 16-11 of this chapter as a
substitute for dramshop insurance.
3. The number of days for temporary permits shall be within the sole discretion of the Commissioner, but in no event may permits be issued for
more than three (3) consecutive days.
4. Up to twelve (12) such permit days shall be available to any one organization during a license term (except for temporary outdoor entertainment
permits which are limited to two 72-hour events per year).
5. Unless otherwise stated, there shall be a daily permit fee as set forth in appendix D of this Code.
6. If another party is serving the alcoholic beverages at the event; then that other party must also obtain a Northfield license or permit.
7. All other regulations of this chapter shall apply to the permit.
(b) Specific Temporary Permits. Temporary permits are divided into the classifications set forth below:
1. Permits Not Requiring An Existing Northfield Liquor License.
a. Class TP(1) civic permit. A permit for the service of alcoholic beverages by any nonprofit organization or club having a bona fide address
within the Village such as a church, fraternal order or lodge, veterans' organization, civic organization, foundation or other similar organization.
Regulations specific to the civic permit:
(i) The service of alcoholic beverages may be done only at a special event sponsored or given by the organization for the sole benefit of the
organization and where the attendance is by invitation only.
(ii) Each day of the event shall require a permit.
(iii) If the general public is invited to the event, the licensee will be required to obtain a state of Illinois special event retailer's liquor license.
(iv) See section 16-18 of this chapter for civic events held at a class F or S licensed premises.
b. Class TP(2) government permit. A permit for the village of Northfield, Winnetka/Northfield Library, or other local government entity board of
trustees for service of alcoholic beverages. Service may take place only on a premises owned or leased by the governmental entity.
c. Class TP(3) non-Northfield caterer's permit. A permit for the service of alcoholic beverages, at an otherwise unlicensed premises, by a caterer
not possessing a Northfield liquor license. Regulations specific to a non-Northfield caterer's permit:
(i) The caterer must possess a valid liquor license from another Illinois jurisdiction.
(ii) The caterer may serve alcoholic beverages only at a sponsored event, or at an event to which specific persons (not the general public)
have been previously invited.
(iii) The caterer may serve alcoholic beverages only if the sponsor of the event has also obtained a temporary permit.
d. Class TP(4) promotional permit; retail establishment. A permit allowing a retail establishment to serve alcoholic beverages at a promotional
event. Regulations specific to a temporary promotion permit:
(i) Alcohol may only be served on the premises owned or leased by the applicant.
(ii) All alcoholic beverage service and consumption must take place within the area specified in the permit.
(iii) There may be no charge of any kind for the alcoholic beverage.
2. Permits Requiring An Existing Northfield License.
a. Class TP(5) Northfield caterer's permit. A permit for the service of alcoholic beverages, at an otherwise unlicensed premises, by a Northfield
class F licensee. Regulations specific to a Northfield caterer's permit:
(i) The caterer must possess a valid Northfield liquor license.
(ii) The caterer may serve alcoholic beverages only at a sponsored event, or at an event to which specific persons (not the general public)
have been previously invited.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 240/377
(iii) A Northfield caterer may obtain an annual caterer's permit. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
b. Class TP(6) daily sampling permit. A permit allowing the holder of any class P or S license to serve alcoholic beverages, without charge, in
small and limited amounts, for sampling purposes only and in conjunction with sales promotional efforts occurring on the licensed premises.
Regulations specific to a daily sampling permit:
(i) The sampling shall be attended and supervised by a full time adult employee and may occur only in a designated area on the licensed
premises;
(ii) The actual amount of wine or spirits in any single sample may not exceed one ounce and the actual amount of beer in any single sample
may not exceed three (3) ounces;
(iii) The sample shall be served in a single use container which shall be disposed of following the sampling;
(iv) There shall be no signs or other materials that are advertising the availability of "sampling" visible outside the licensed premises; and
(v) Quantities may not exceed a total of ten (10) ounces per customer per day (3 ounces in the case of spirits). (Ord. 14-1578, 1-21-2014)
c. Class TP(7) temporary outdoor entertainment permit. A permit allowing outdoor live music for a class F licensee. Regulations specific to a
temporary outdoor entertainment permit:
(i) Each licensee shall be limited to two (2) events per year, not to exceed seventy two (72) hours in duration.
(ii) The application for such event must be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the event.
(iii) Live music may be played only between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
(iv) The commissioner may attach such other conditions to the permit as may be advisable to protect the peace and quiet of the surrounding
area.
(v) The commissioner, the village manager or a designee of either, shall have the absolute right for cause, and without the necessity of a
hearing, to order the immediate cessation of such live music.
3. Ad Hoc Temporary Permits. Notwithstanding the fact that an applicant for a temporary permit does not meet the precise criteria for one of the
specific temporary permit classifications set forth above, the commissioner shall have the authority to issue an ad hoc temporary permit subject
to conditions similar to those applicable to the specific classifications, where the commissioner determines that such permit is in the best
interests of the public.
(5) Management Entity Certification. A management entity certification allows for the certification of an entity that is retained to manage a licensed
premises. It is recognized that a licensee may, from time to time, desire to hire or retain, as an independent contractor, a management entity to
manage, generally operate and be responsible for the licensed premises. Regulations specific to a management entity certification:
(a) No licensee shall permit a management entity to perform such a function unless the management entity has been certified to do so by the
commissioner. In order to be certified by the commissioner, a management entity must execute a liquor license application. A management entity
must qualify for a management entity certification in the same manner and meet the same standards as a licensee.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in appendix D of this code, and no management entity may
be qualified unless a certification fee as set forth in appendix D of this code has been paid.
(c) The management entity shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the commissioner in the same manner as a licensee. If there is a violation on the
premises, the management entity and the licensee shall be jointly and severally responsible for all consequences of such a violation.
(d) An underlying village liquor license must previously have been obtained for the premises. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES AVAILABLE.
The corporate authorities shall determine, by ordinance, the number of licenses that are available in each classification. (This limitation shall not apply to
temporary permits and certifications, which documents shall be solely within the discretion of the commissioner.) Neither the commissioner nor any other
person or entity may issue liquor licenses in a number that is in excess of the number authorized by the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities
may increase or decrease the number of licenses available in any or all classifications within the village. If the number of licenses in any or all
classifications is decreased, the licenses shall be eliminated on the basis of seniority, so that the premises holding a license the least amount of time shall
be eliminated first. However, the commissioner may, with an accompanying written statement, eliminate licenses on the basis of quality of operation of the
premises, considering such matters as charges before the commissioner, the state liquor commission or other law enforcement issues and/or on the basis
of articulable benefit or lack of benefit to the village.
Upon the forfeiture, voiding or revocation of a license for any reason, the number of available licenses in that classification shall automatically and
immediately be reduced by one. When a licensee, for a period of thirty (30) days ceases to sell alcoholic liquors or engage in any other activity required for
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 241/377
that class of liquor license, including, but not limited to, the submittal of the annual renewal and fee as required by this chapter, that license shall
automatically terminate and the number of licenses available shall immediately and automatically be reduced by one. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-8: LICENSE TERM.
Each new license shall commence on the date specified on the license. Each renewal license shall commence on January 1 and shall terminate on the
December 31 following the date of issuance. (This limitation shall not be applicable to permits.) (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
Any licensee may apply to renew a license. This renewal privilege shall not be construed as a vested right, but shall be completely subject to the
commissioner's right of review of the licensee's background and history of operation in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-10: NATURE OF LICENSE; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
A license shall be a privilege that may be claimed only by the person set forth on the license. The license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. The license shall not be alienable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to lien or other encumbrance.
The license is not transferable either for consideration or not for consideration. Although regulations in subsections (1) through (6) of this section shall be
generally applicable, the commissioner shall have the sole discretion to determine whether the transfer of a business has occurred such that the transferee
must secure a new license.
(1) As to a closely held corporation an illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and void if there has
been a change in ownership of more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock.
(2) As to a public corporation, an illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and void if there has been a
buyout, a takeover or any other transaction involving the sale or transfer of more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock or assets of the corporation.
(3) As to a limited liability company, an illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and void if there has
been a change in the managing partner or change in ownership of more than twenty percent (20%) of the member shares or replacement of any
person of whom the commissioner had previously required fingerprinting.
(4) If a licensee is ordered into receivership or files for bankruptcy, the receiver or trustee may continue the operation of the business under the existing
license pursuant to a written order of the appropriate court until the expiration of the license or until the passage of six (6) months from the date of
appointment of a receiver or trustee whichever comes first.
(5) Upon the alienation, sale, transfer, assignment or donation of the business for which the license is issued to any person other than the licensee, the
liquor license shall automatically become void.
(6) Any licensed establishment that has discontinued the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or that has not been open for business at least four (4)
days per week for a period of thirty (30) days or more shall automatically forfeit its license. This forfeiture shall not apply in instances where the
licensee has previously notified the village manager, in writing, of intent to close the premises for a portion of a license term for remodeling or other
similar purpose. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
ARTICLE III. REGULATION OF LICENSES
Sec. 16-11: INSURANCE.
A. Every licensee or permittee shall be required to provide dramshop insurance in an amount not less than the maximum dollar amount set forth in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21 and general liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. If the person who owns the building or premises where alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed is not the licensee or permittee, then that
person shall be required to carry host liability insurance coverage or its equivalent in an amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 11-1493,
8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-12: LOCATION OF SERVICE.
A. Location Specified On License Or Permit. No liquor shall be served, offered, kept, displayed, advertised for sale or delivered to any person except at
the exact location described in the liquor license or permit. The location may be changed only upon written permission issued by the commissioner.
Approval of a change of location shall be within the sole discretion of the commissioner.
B. Specific Location Prohibition. No class P, F or S liquor license may be issued for any premises that are within one hundred feet (100') of any place of
worship or any school attended by underage persons.
C. Off Site Catering Privileges. No off site catering shall be permitted except pursuant to an off site catering permit as set forth in section 16-5 of this
chapter. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-13: CLOSING HOURS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 242/377
It shall be unlawful to engage in the service of any alcoholic beverages beyond the hours permitted for the specific license or permit obtained. All
unfinished drinks shall be cleared from the premises within ten (10) minutes after the closing time set forth for the license. It shall be a violation of this
section if after the passage of such ten (10) minutes there are alcoholic beverages in any container other than an unopened or corked or otherwise
properly reclosed original container that has been returned to the appropriate place of display or storage. A premises with any class F license may be kept
open during hours when service is prohibited, but no alcoholic beverages may be delivered, consumed or remain on tables or a bar during such hours.
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorize any licensed premises to remain open for business or to admit the public to the premises at
or during any hour when that premises is required to be closed by virtue of any other village regulation or restriction. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-14: ENTERTAINMENT.
No entertainment shall be permitted on any licensed premises if that entertainment is audible at any point beyond the boundaries of the licensed premises.
"Licensed premises", in this instance, shall not apply to a civic permit or a temporary outdoor entertainment permit so long as the permittee complies with
all other conditions of the permit and all other regulations of the village. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-15: PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
No licensee may engage in, advertise or promote in any way, whether within or outside of the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section. The following conduct is prohibited:
(1) Sale, Delivery, Service Or Giving Of Alcoholic Beverages. The sale, delivery, service or giving of any alcoholic beverages to any of the following:
(a) A person under twenty one (21) years of age.
(b) A person previously involved in a fight in the establishment.
(2) Entertainment Of A Sexual Nature.
(a) The performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts
which are prohibited by law.
(b) The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
(c) The actual or simulated display of the breasts, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
(d) The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals
or anus.
(e) The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, which if performed live, are prohibited by this section.
(3) Other Prohibited Acts.
(a) Every liquor licensee is prohibited from engaging in the following acts: (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
1. Providing a meal package or party package, except pursuant to the following rules:
a. Meal Package.
(i) Food service must be included.
(ii) Meal package privileges are available only to holders of an F license.
(iii) All other liquor code regulations shall apply including, but not limited to, over service of alcoholic beverages.
b. Party Package.
(i) A party package:
* Must be arranged by invitation or ticket sales;
* Must be open to a defined number of guests and not open to the general public;
* Must include food service;
* May not last for more than three (3) hours;
* Guests have identifiers such as wristbands, lanyards or tee shirts;
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 243/377
* Nonfixed price ticket holders must dine in a portion of the establishment that is discreet from the portion where the event is held;
* Is available only to holders of an F license; and
* Requires application of all other liquor code regulations including, but not limited to, over service of alcoholic beverages.
2. Conducting or allowing drink promotion periods or happy hours; except pursuant to the following rules:
a. Licensee must give notice of any drink promotion period: 1) by signs on its premises or 2) on its website; at least seven (7) days prior to the
drink promotion period.
b. Drink promotion periods are prohibited between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and closing time.
c. The aggregate of all drink promotion periods for a licensed premises may not exceed fifteen (15) hours in any seven (7) day period.
d. A single drink promotion period may not exceed four (4) hours.
e. All other regulations with respect to the delivery of alcoholic beverages shall apply. (Ord. 15-1624, 9-15-2015)
3. Increasing the volume of spirits content in a drink on a given day without increasing proportionately the price otherwise charged for such a drink
during the calendar week.
4. Encouraging or permitting any game or contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
5. Delivery of alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or to any person in such a quantity or number as to result in the person becoming
intoxicated.
(b) The prohibitions contained in this section shall not prevent a liquor licensee from:
1. Offering free food or approved entertainment.
2. Including a single drink as part of a meal package.
3. Offering free winetasting as allowed by a daily sampling permit.
4. Offering of wine, by the open bottle (exception applies to class F licenses only).
(4) Bars And Lounges. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license to allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to:
(a) Be seated at a bar; or
(b) Remain in or be seated in the lounge. This section shall not apply to seating at tables in the lounge when the establishment's full food menu is
available in that lounge and the minor is accompanied by a parent.
(5) Bottle Clubs. Bottle clubs, as defined in this chapter, are prohibited. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-16: FIGHTING PROHIBITED; LICENSEE'S CONDUCT.
A. Fighting at a licensed premises is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, "fighting" shall mean any threatening or touching of another person which
provokes or tends to provoke a breach of the peace. If self-defense is offered as a defense to a charge of fighting, that defense must be established by
the presentation of clear and convincing evidence. Any person violating this section shall be fined in an amount as set forth in appendix D of this code.
B. A summary of subsection A of this section shall be prominently displayed in all premises holding a liquor license. The notice shall further state and it
shall be a requirement of this chapter that any licensee, employee or agent of a licensee observing a fight shall immediately notify the village police
department. Such a sign shall be available from the village manager's office.
C. Each licensee shall maintain a peaceful and orderly business premises. This shall be accomplished by establishing and maintaining the optimum
precautions and actions that are practical to deter and prevent fighting. This is referred to as the "maintenance of order standard". The duty to prevent
fighting shall be applicable both to precautionary and training matters and to the steps taken once a fight breaks out or is in imminent danger of
breaking out. In determining whether a violation of this section has occurred, the commissioner may consider the following matters, among others:
(1) Prior incidents of reported or unreported fighting.
(2) Whether any fight participant was intoxicated and the extent to which the intoxication occurred on the premises.
(3) Whether any participant was served by the licensee after the participant's intoxication should have been evident to the licensee.
(4) Whether any participant was intoxicated and whether the licensee had an opportunity to effect that person's removal from the premises.
(5) The degree of expediency the licensee observed in calling the police when it should have been evident that a fight was imminent.
(6) The actions of the licensee in reacting to the fight.
(7) The extent and type of training given to the licensee's employees in such matters as recognizing intoxication, overserving and prevention of
altercations.
(8) Whether minors were involved in the fighting.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 244/377
(9) The sufficiency or number of persons on duty and employed by the licensee at the time of the fight.
Considering all of the circumstances, the commissioner shall make a determination of whether the licensee violated the "maintenance of order
standard". If it is determined that a violation occurred, the commissioner may impose any penalty up to and including license revocation and a fine as
set forth in appendix D of this code.
D. The following procedure shall be observed by a licensee with respect to the outbreak or threatened outbreak of a fight:
(1) The licensee shall notify the village police department immediately when the licensee knows or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should know
that such outbreak or threatened outbreak is occurring or imminent.
(2) In addition, within forty eight (48) hours of the occurrence, the licensee shall file with the local liquor control commissioner a report on a form
provided by the village containing the following information:
(a) The number of persons involved in the fight;
(b) The approximate amount of alcohol consumed at the premises by each person involved in the fight;
(c) What action, if any, was taken by the licensee to prevent the fight;
(d) What action, if any, was taken by the licensee subsequent to the start of the fight;
(e) The licensee's opinion as to why the fight occurred.
E. Failure by the licensee to give immediate notification to the police department of a fight on a licensed premises or failure to file a report as required in
subsection D of this section with the commissioner shall subject the licensee to a mandatory fine as set forth in appendix D of this code, and a possible
suspension or revocation of the liquor license. For purposes of this section the word "immediate" shall mean at the very moment that one party
threatens another, actually commences fighting with another or a breach of the peace is imminent. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-16.1: DRUG USAGE.
A. The following procedure shall be observed by a licensee with respect to the observation of any use, possession or transfer of a controlled substance
("drug transaction") as set forth in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act2:
(1) The licensee shall notify the Village Police Department immediately when the licensee knows or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should know
that a drug transaction is occurring or imminent.
(2) In addition, within forty eight (48) hours of the occurrence, the licensee shall file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner a report on a form
provided by the Village containing the following information:
(a) The number of persons involved in the drug transaction;
(b) What action, if any, was taken by the licensee to prevent the drug transaction;
(c) What action, if any, was taken by the licensee subsequent to the observation of the drug transaction.
B. Failure by the licensee to give immediate notification to the Police Department of the observation of a drug transaction on a licensed premises or failure
to file a report as required in subsection A of this section with the Commissioner shall subject the licensee to a mandatory fine as set forth in appendix
D of this Code, and a possible suspension or revocation of the liquor license. For purposes of this section the word "immediate" shall mean at the very
moment that the observation occurs. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-17: CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS; SUPERVISOR ON PREMISES.
A. Any act or failure to act of an employee or agent of either the licensee or a management company with respect to the licensed business shall be
deemed to be the act of the licensee. Any duty set forth in this chapter as a duty of the licensee shall also be the duty of any agent or employee of the
licensee.
B. No employee or other server of an alcoholic beverage may consume or be permitted to consume any alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises
while on duty or while performing any duties of employment.
C. No person, including any employee, manager, owner or agent of the licensee may consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises before or
after the permitted hours of operation. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
D. No person under twenty one (21) years of age may work as a bartender, deliver alcohol from behind a bar, serve alcoholic beverages or handle alcohol
in any manner. The foregoing shall apply in all instances, except that in the case of a Class F licensee, an employee who is at least eighteen (18) years
of age may bring an alcoholic beverage from the location at which it was dispensed to the table at which the customer is seated. (Ord. 15-1634, 10-20-
2015)
E. If the "manager", as defined by this chapter, is not physically present on the premises, there shall be one person who is designated, in writing, as the
supervisor for the premises for any period of time that the "manager" is not present. No person may be designated as a supervisor unless the licensee
has provided, in writing, the name, address and cellphone number of such person to the Village Manager prior to such designation. Failure to observe
this regulation shall subject the licensee to an automatic daily fine as set forth in appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011; amd.
Ord. 15-1606, 1-20-2015)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 245/377
F. The current alcohol awareness certificate for each person that delivers, serves or pours alcoholic beverages and all managers and supervisors of a
licensed premises shall be on the premises at all times and available for inspection by any Village official. The licensee and the employee shall be
liable for a violation of this regulation. This regulation shall not apply to civic, Village or promotional permits. (Ord. 15-1606, 1-20-2015)
Sec. 16-18: CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS.
The following shall apply to civic organizations and regulated service:
(1) A civic organization may hold a fundraising event at any Class F or S premises without obtaining a civic permit under the following conditions:
(a) The Commissioner is notified, in writing, at least seven (7) days in advance of the event.
(b) All food and alcoholic beverage service is conducted by the Class F or S licensee's staff and at licensee's menu prices, as in the normal course of
business for that license.
(2) If the Class F or S licensee intends to provide food or alcoholic beverage service other than from its regular menu at regular menu prices or if the
cost of the service of alcoholic beverages is part of a donation or ticket price, then the civic organization must obtain a civic permit pursuant to
subsection 16-6(4)(b)1a of this chapter.
(3) As to either subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the civic organization, but not the liquor licensee, may advertise for the event in any manner
permitted by law, and in either case, proceeds of the event may be shared with the civic organization. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-19: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS OF THIS CODE.
All licensed premises shall be maintained in full compliance with all other regulations of the Village, including, but not limited to, those relating to the
storage or sale of food, sanitary conditions, building and safety conditions. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-20: SEALING AND REMOVAL OF OPEN WINE BOTTLES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any Class F or S-1 licensee may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed
bottle of wine for off premises consumption so long as there is compliance with the following conditions: 1) the patron has purchased a meal (Class F) or
hors d'oeuvres (Class S-1) and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine on the licensed premises; and 2) the partially consumed bottle of wine that is to
be removed from the premises pursuant to this section is securely sealed by the licensee prior to removal from the premises; and 3) the bottle is placed in
a transparent onetime use tamperproof bag; and 4) the licensee has provided a dated and time stamped receipt for the specific bottle of wine to the
patron. It shall be the absolute duty of the licensee to assure that the type of "tamperproof" bag that is used is such that any removal or attempted removal
of the bottle from the bag will be obvious to any law enforcement officer.
The wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this section and not tampered with shall not be deemed an unsealed container for the
purposes of section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
ARTICLE IV. UNDERAGE PERSONS REGULATIONS
Sec. 16-21: CONSUMPTION, PURCHASE, ACCEPTANCE OR POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to consume, purchase, accept a gift of or have alcoholic beverages in his or her possession or in his or her
bloodstream. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply in the circumstances described in subsection 16-27C of this article. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-
16-2011)
Sec. 16-22: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN OR ON A MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
Unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, it shall be unlawful for any underage person to operate a motor vehicle when any alcoholic
beverage, whether sealed or unsealed, is in or on any portion or compartment of the motor vehicle. This is an absolute liability offense. It shall not be a
defense to this section that the operator did not know that the alcoholic beverage was in or on the vehicle. It shall not be a defense that the alcoholic
beverage belonged to or was in the possession of another person. It shall be the obligation of the operator to assure, by any means necessary, that no
alcoholic beverage is in or on the motor vehicle. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-23: OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IN A STATE OF IMPAIRMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway of the Village while in a state of impairment due to the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage or with any alcohol whatsoever in his or her system. For purposes of this section only, "operation of a motor vehicle"
shall have the definition ascribed to it in the Illinois Vehicle Code rather than the definition set forth in section 16-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-
2011)
Sec. 16-24: VIOLATION.
When any underage person operates any motor vehicle in violation of section 16-22 or 16-23 of this article, the following shall apply:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 246/377
(1) The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the Police Department.
(2) The following factors shall not be considerations in determining whether or not to impound the motor vehicle:
(a) Whether the alcoholic beverage is in an opened or an unopened container.
(b) Whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic beverage in the vehicle.
(c) Whether the operator had knowledge of the existence of the alcoholic beverage within the motor vehicle.
(3) Upon impoundment, the motor vehicle may be released only to another person showing proof of ownership or lease rights to the motor vehicle. If
the underage operator is the owner or lessee of the vehicle, then the vehicle may be released only to a parent or spouse of the underage owner. If
the underage person has no parent or spouse living in the immediate area, the vehicle may be released to the underage operator only after the
passage of twenty four (24) hours.
(4) The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a passenger in the motor vehicle at the time the alcoholic beverage or impairment
was found unless at least twenty four (24) hours have passed from the time of the finding.
(5) The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the release has paid to the Police Department, an administrative fee as set forth in
appendix D, article I of this Code plus any towing or storage costs.
(6) The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the penalties that may be assessed in a court of law for any charges incident to the stop.
(7) Any law enforcement officer, the Police Department and the Village and any of its officers or agents shall be absolutely immune from any liability or
exposure to liability of any kind or nature for the enforcement or implementation of this section. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-25: USE OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification card; use any identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card;
obtain an identification card by means of false information; or otherwise misrepresent age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Sec. 16-26: FALSE IDENTIFICATION NOT A DEFENSE.
It shall not be a defense to any action brought criminally, civilly or administratively against any liquor licensee or any other person charged with the service
of any alcoholic beverage to an underage person that the underage person used false identification or false proof of age. The person or persons hearing
and deciding the charges may consider such a claim when determining the penalty to be assessed or the apportionment of damages. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-
2011)
Sec. 16-27: FACILITATING THE USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
A. Service Of Alcoholic Beverage To An Underage Person. It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of relationship, age or circumstances, to
deliver any alcoholic beverage to any underage person, except as set forth in subsection C of this section.
B. Use Of Premises For Consumption Of An Alcoholic Beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or to knowingly or negligently
fail to immediately prevent or stop, on premises under his or her control, the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person. This
section shall apply to residential, public and commercial premises and to the private and regulated service of an alcoholic beverage. For purposes of
this section, if a person over twenty one (21) years of age is in a residence where underage drinking is occurring, negligence in either permitting or
failing to prevent the consumption shall be presumed and the burden of proving that such person was not negligent shall fall on such person.
C. Exceptions. Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances:
(1) The performance of a bona fide religious service.
(2) The service of an alcoholic beverage within the home to an underage person, by and under the direct supervision of that underage person's parent.
However, the following rules shall be applied to this subsection:
(a) In any prosecution of an underage person for the commission of any state or local offense, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds, may
request a ruling and the court shall rule as to whether the consumption of an alcoholic beverage, as permitted by the parent, was a contributing
factor to the commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then the penalty set forth in section 16-29 of this chapter shall
apply. For purposes of this subsection, the consumption of alcohol may be determined to be a contributing factor if it had the effect of substantially
causing an impairment to the person as "impairment" is defined in this chapter. It need not be shown that, but for the consumption of alcohol, the
offense would not have been committed.
(b) The parent shall remain vicariously liable as set forth in subsection D of this section.
D. Vicarious Liability Of A Parent Or Other Person Facilitating The Use Of Alcoholic Beverages. The following persons shall be liable to any
individual who has been injured by an alcohol impaired underage person when the impairment is a contributing cause of the injury:
(1) Any person who delivered or permitted the service of an alcoholic beverage to the underage person. For purposes of this subsection D(1), the
person making or permitting the initial service to an underage person remains liable to anyone injured by the same or different underage person
regardless of how many times the alcoholic beverage changed hands.
(2) Any person in control of a premises who knowingly or negligently fails to maintain supervision to such an extent that an alcoholic beverage is
consumed on the premises by an underage person as set forth in subsection B of this section.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 247/377
(3) Any person who knowingly or negligently allows the operation of a motor vehicle under his or her control by an underage person, when the person
knew or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that the underage person was either impaired or had consumed any amount of
alcohol within two (2) hours prior to when the driving occurred.
The vicarious liability established by this section shall not be subject to the limitations on damages as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
21. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
ARTICLE V. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
Sec. 16-28: POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSIONER.
A. The commissioner shall have all of the powers, functions and duties delegated to that office by this chapter and other ordinances of the village. This
shall include, but in no way shall be limited to, the power to require any licensee, at any time, to produce any and all records, that directly or indirectly
relate to the operation of the licensee's premises.
B. In addition to any other powers set forth in this chapter, the commissioner may immediately suspend, pending the exercise of the right to a hearing, the
privilege of service of alcoholic beverages of any licensee who does not display a currently valid state or local liquor license or who in the judgment of
the commissioner is operating the business in such a manner as to endanger the health or safety of patrons of the premises or of the community. Any
arrest for the sale or possession of a controlled substance pursuant to the Illinois controlled substances act2 on a licensed premises shall be deemed
an endangerment to the health and safety of the community and shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension pursuant to this subsection.
C. The commissioner may fine the licensee and/or suspend and/or revoke the liquor license of any licensee that the commissioner determines has violated
any village regulation or other law of any kind or nature if the violation is related to the operation of the licensed premises. In addition, the commissioner
may fine any individual that the commissioner determines has violated any provision of this chapter even if that individual is not a licensee. The
procedure for declaring and enforcing such fine, suspension or revocation shall be as follows:
(1) The village manager, the chief of police or the village attorney may file a written charge of a violation, supported by affidavit, with the commissioner.
(2) Upon review of the charge and upon such further investigation as the commissioner may deem appropriate, the commissioner shall issue an order
either sustaining or not sustaining the charge.
(3) If the commissioner sustains the charge or any portion of it, the commissioner may, by written order, suspend or revoke the liquor license and/or
may fine the licensee. The fine may be in addition to a revocation or suspension. If the commissioner decides to suspend the license, the term of the
suspension shall be within the discretion of the commissioner. If the commissioner elects to fine the licensee, the amount of the fine shall be as set
forth in appendix D of this code.
(4) The order shall be served on the licensee. The order shall inform the licensee that the licensee has a right to a hearing for the purpose of presenting
evidence to dispute the order. Such a hearing will be held only upon the filing of a written request with the village manager within ten (10) days of the
date of the order. The matter shall be set for a hearing to take place not less than seven (7) nor more than twenty one (21) days after the receipt of
the request for hearing. No continuance shall be granted except in the case of emergency. The requirement of filing for a hearing within ten (10) days
is absolute and no person or entity shall have jurisdiction to accept a filing or other request for such a hearing once the ten (10) days have elapsed.
(5) The affidavit attached to the charges shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation or violations. It will be the burden of the licensee to go
forward with any evidence to be presented.
(6) If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the commissioner finds the licensee to be guilty of any charges, the licensee will be responsible for all costs
incurred for the hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, witness fees and attorney fees. This shall be in addition to any other
penalties assessed against the licensee.
(7) All proceedings before the commissioner shall be recorded and placed in a certified official record of such proceedings taken and prepared by the
certified court reporter.
(8) In the event of any appeal from an order or action of the commissioner, the appeal to the state liquor commission shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the proceedings before the commissioner. The only evidence which shall be considered in the review by the state commission shall
be the evidence found in the certified official record of the proceedings of the commissioner.
At such time as the commissioner receives notice of an appeal, the commissioner shall file with the state liquor commission the certified official
record of the proceedings. The state commission shall review the propriety of the order or action of the commissioner on the certified official record
as provided by law.
D. Upon a finding of endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of citizens or property, the commissioner may fine, suspend or revoke any license
pursuant to this section, even if such endangerment is caused by persons other than the licensee or the licensee's agents or employees.
Such endangerment may include, but not be limited to, excessive noise by patrons while visiting the licensed premises, consumption of alcoholic
beverages in areas immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, littering or destruction of neighboring property by patrons, traffic violations by
patrons of the licensed premises, use of any illegal or controlled substance on or adjacent to the licensed premises, the necessity of police or other
village services at the licensed premises or the necessity of police services caused by patrons after being served alcoholic beverages at the licensed
premises.
No action may be taken against a licensee by the commissioner in circumstances described by this subsection unless it is shown that the
commissioner or the village, by any of its various departments, has given the licensee written notice of the endangerment activities on at least two (2)
occasions, and, in the opinion of the commissioner, after a reasonable time period, such endangerment has not been sufficiently cured or remedied.
The power of the commissioner to act in those situations is a recognition of the principle that the holding of a liquor license is a special privilege and not
a right and that such a privilege, irrespective of the good intentions of the licensee, remains absolutely subordinate to the welfare of the community.
(Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 248/377
ARTICLE VI. PENALTIES
Sec. 16-29: GENERAL PENALTY.
A. Fine. Unless another penalty is set forth below, every person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
as set forth in appendix D of this code, for the first offense and for each subsequent offense. Any fines set forth in this chapter shall be assessed
regardless of whether the violator is convicted or placed on supervision by the court. If the court is of the opinion that the ends of justice would be better
served by requiring community service of the violator or a combination of a fine and community service, the fine may be mitigated as set forth in
appendix D of this code. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under twenty one (21) years of age, the court may, in
lieu of any mandatory fines, assign the offender to a chemical abuse counseling program that is licensed by the Illinois department of alcohol and
substance abuse which includes a certified evaluation program and not less than four (4) hours of counseling. Fines assessed by the court against any
offender may be in addition to any penalty assessed against a licensee in any administrative proceeding.
B. Specific Penalties. Certain specific penalties shall be set forth in appendix D of this code under the sections or subsections that correspond with the
text.
C. Separate Offense; Alternatives. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 11-1493, 8-16-2011)
Footnote 1: 720 ILCS 570.
Footnote 2: 720 ILCS 570.
Title Chapter 17
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Chapter 17
ANIMALS AND FOWL
ARTICLE I. GENERAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 17-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
No person shall cruelly beat, ill treat, torture, mutilate or cruelly kill any animal or knowingly allow the same to be done, and no person shall abandon any
animal within the village. Ill treatment shall include failure to feed or water an animal or the keeping of an animal in filthy quarters. (1986 Code)
Sec. 17-2: KILLING OR WOUNDING ANIMALS, ETC.
No person shall hunt game, or shoot at, kill, or wound by the use of firearms, bow and arrow, slingshot, blow airgun, pelting with stones, or by any other
weapon or means, any animal or bird within the village, or enter upon any private enclosure or public grounds in the village for the purpose of doing any
act prohibited in this section. This section shall apply to pestiferous rodents and vermin, except that said animals may be exterminated by means other
than those described in this section; provided, that such means are not in violation of statute or municipal ordinance and are not dangerous to humans or
other animals. Such pestiferous rodents and vermin may also be exterminated under the supervision of the health officer, or police department, in a
manner that such officials may deem expedient. (1986 Code)
Sec. 17-3: DISEASED ANIMALS.
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or be exposed in any public place whereby the health
of man or beast may be affected, within the village, nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of its owner, except under
the supervision of the health officer or a licensed veterinarian. The health officer is hereby authorized to obtain such disposition of any diseased animal
and such treatment of affected premises as in his judgment shall prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection. (1986 Code)
Sec. 17-4: KEEPING NOISY ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1986 Code)
Sec. 17-5: SWINE GENERALLY.
No person shall keep or permit to be kept any swine in the village. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 249/377
Sec. 17-5.1: KEEPING OF PIGEONS, RACING BIRDS AND LOFTS PROHIBITED.
No person may keep or maintain in the village for business or hobby, any loft, roost, cages or other housing for any pigeons or any other similar birds
which may be used for racing or homing. This shall not apply to pet birds such as canaries, parakeets or parrots kept inside the house. (Ord. 99-983, 5-24-
1999)
Sec. 17-6: DANGEROUS ANIMALS DEFINED.
A "dangerous animal" is hereby defined to be any animal which has bitten any person in such a manner as to cause an abrasion of the skin of such
person, or which shall cause annoyance or reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening to attack a person or other animals,
including dogs in any manner. (Ord. 09-1430, 9-15-2009)
Sec. 17-7: ALLOWING ANIMALS TO RUN AT LARGE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal to run at large within the village. (1986 Code)
Sec. 17-8: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
Any member of the police department may kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. (1986
Code)
Sec. 17-9: DEAD ANIMALS.
No person shall allow any dead animal to remain for more than twelve (12) hours within the Village. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. PETS
Sec. 17-10: CONTROL OF DOGS AND CATS AND OTHER PETS AND DOMESTICATED ANIMALS ("PETS").
A pet shall be deemed to be running at large when off the premises of its owner and not on a leash or tether held by a person. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2014;
amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
It shall be unlawful: (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2014)
(1) To permit any pet to run at large.
(2) To permit any pet to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any other public building or hall; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to any blind person using a trained seeing eye dog, to veterinary offices or hospitals, or to animal shows or
exhibitions where at least twenty four (24) hours' advance notice has been given to the Health Department.
(3) To permit any pet to trespass on private property without the consent of the property owners.
(4) To permit any pet to chase, run after or jump at vehicles using the public thoroughfares.
(5) To permit any pet to snap, growl, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk.
(6) To allow any pet to deposit any excretions upon any public right-of-way, public park, forest preserve pathway, sidewalk or private property other than
the pet owner's property without removing such deposit immediately. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004; amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
Sec. 17-11: POLICE REPORTS AND DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of every police officer to report any dog or cat which is found wandering off the owner's premises. Members of the Police Department or
other persons designated by the Chief of Police shall impound, in an approved animal shelter, any dog or cat found to be wandering. If any dangerous,
fierce or vicious dog or cat cannot be safely captured and impounded, such dog or cat may be destroyed by any police officer. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-12: DOG AND/OR CAT BITES, FINES.
The owner, keeper or possessor of any dog or cat that is found to have caused an abrasion to the skin or bitten any person shall be guilty of a violation of
this article. Additionally, upon such owner or keeper's third finding of guilty involving the same dog or cat, the dog or cat shall be deemed a nuisance; and,
unless the owner or keeper permanently removes such dog or cat from the Village, such dog or cat shall be impounded and destroyed. This section shall
not apply to the biting of an immediate member of the owner's family. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-13: PENALTIES FOR NONBITING OFFENSES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 250/377
Any owner or keeper who is found guilty of any violation of this article for any offense other than those specified in section 17-12 of this article may be
fined pursuant to section 1-13 of this Code and in accordance with appendix D, article III of this Code. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-14: REGISTRATION APPLICATION AND RABIES INOCULATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or cat in the Village unless that person procures a registration from the Village. This provision shall
not apply to puppies or kittens until they attain the minimum age required for rabies inoculation pursuant to regulations of the Cook County Rabies
Commission. The owner or keeper of any dog or cat that is required to be registered shall apply to the Village for a registration tag. The application of such
owner or keeper shall include the name, address and telephone number of the owner or keeper, the name, breed, color and sex of each dog or cat owned
or kept by such person. Also, any dog or cat owned, kept, maintained or harbored within the Village shall have a current rabies inoculation and dogs shall
wear a neck collar to which a rabies inoculation tag issued by the county of Cook and the Illinois department of agriculture has been attached. Evidence
showing the date of the inoculation and the name and address of the veterinarian who administered the inoculation shall also be maintained by the owner
and presented to the village upon registration and upon future request. No registration tag shall be issued for less than the full fee, as prescribed in
appendix D of this code. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-15: DOG AND CAT TAGS.
The village shall furnish to the applicant a tag for each dog or cat for which application has been made and for which the prescribed fee has been paid.
The tag shall contain the following information: "Northfield", the registration number, the dog's or cat's name, and the owner's address and telephone
number. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-16: DOG AND CAT REGISTRY.
The village shall keep a complete list of all registered dogs and cats, including the name of the dog or cat, the name, address and telephone number of the
owner or keeper as given, and the number of the village registration tag for each dog or cat. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-17: DOG COLLARS.
The dog owner or keeper shall provide every dog with a collar made of leather, metal or other substantial material to which the registration tag required
under section 17-15 of this article and the rabies inoculation tag required under section 17-14 of this article shall be securely fastened. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-
16-2004)
Sec. 17-18: DOGS AND CATS WEARING REGISTRATION TAG; REDEMPTION FEES.
Any dog that is captured while wearing a current registration tag may be redeemed by the owner or keeper of such dog or cat upon payment of the fee set
forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-19: DOGS AND CATS NOT WEARING A REGISTRATION TAG; REDEMPTION FEES.
Any dog or cat that is captured while not wearing a current registration tag may be redeemed by any person upon payment of the fee set forth in appendix
D of this code. Whenever the fee is paid by the person desiring to redeem such unregistered dog or cat, such person shall be entitled to possession of
such dog or cat. However, no dog or cat may be redeemed unless the current registration tag for the dog or cat is first procured and shown. If an
unregistered dog or cat is not redeemed within seven (7) days after being impounded, the dog or cat may be, otherwise, put up for adoption or euthanized.
(Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-20: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES; APPROVED ANIMAL SHELTERS.
The operator of an approved animal shelter shall, immediately upon receiving any dog or cat at the shelter, make an entry into a log, stating the breed,
color, sex and registration status of such dog or cat. If registered, the name and address of the owner or keeper and the number of the registration tag
shall also be entered. Registered dogs or cats shall be kept separate from unregistered dogs or cats. When any registered dog or cat is impounded, the
owner or keeper shall be immediately notified of such impoundment. The owner or keeper shall be advised that if the dog or cat is not redeemed within
seven (7) days of the date of such notice, the dog or cat may be given to any person who pays the required fees or may be otherwise disposed of in
accordance with this article. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-21: CONFINEMENT OF DOGS AND CATS FOR RABIES CHECK.
When notified that a dog or cat has bitten or injured any person or animal so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, the owner or keeper of the dog or cat
shall immediately:
(1) Have the biting dog or cat examined by a veterinarian on the first, fifth and tenth day following a bite if the biting dog or cat does not have a current
inoculation with rabies vaccine.
(2) Have the biting dog or cat examined on the first and tenth day following a bite if the biting dog or cat is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine.
(3) During the time from the first to the tenth day following a bite, the dog or cat shall be confined in a cage or building in isolation from other animals
and humans. The dog or cat shall never be let out of the building or cage.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 251/377
(4) Any dog or cat that bites any person about the face or neck shall be impounded by a veterinarian for a period of not less than five (5) days and
examined by a veterinarian on the tenth day following such bite.
(5) The remains of any dog or cat which dies within ten (10) days of biting any person or animal shall be delivered to a registered veterinarian for
examination and proper disposition.
(6) The chief of police shall have the authority to order impoundment of any biting dog or cat, whenever in his or her judgment, such action is necessary
to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-22: RABID DOGS AND CATS.
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat known to be suffering from rabies, or of any dog or cat bitten by an animal known to be suffering from rabies, shall
immediately notify the police department and surrender the dog or cat to any police officer upon demand. Every dog or cat declared to be suffering from
rabies may be destroyed by any police officer. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-23: VETERINARIAN TO REPORT RABID DOGS AND CATS.
Every veterinarian or other person who discovers an apparently rabid animal, shall report such fact immediately to the Northfield police department. The
report shall include the name and the place of residence of the person owning or harboring such animal and the place where the animal was last seen.
The animal shall be impounded as provided in this article and kept securely until the veterinarian can make or cause to be made an examination of the
animal. If upon such examination, it shall be determined that the animal is rabid, the animal shall be treated in accordance with regulations of the Cook
County rabies commission. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-24: SURRENDER OF AN ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF BEING RABID.
The owner or custodian of any animal suspected to be rabid shall, upon demand of any Northfield police officer, either surrender the animal to the officer or
provide reasonable proof that the animal is currently being held by a veterinarian. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
ARTICLE III. DOG KENNELS AND CATTERIES
Sec. 17-25: DEFINITION.
Any person, firm or corporation maintaining or keeping more than four (4) dogs and/or six (6) cats of more than six (6) months of age upon any premises
within the village of Northfield, shall be considered as having established or maintaining a dog kennel or cattery. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-26: DOG KENNELS AND CATTERIES, COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain a dog kennel or cattery within the village of Northfield. (Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
Sec. 17-27: RESERVED.
(Ord. 04-1200, 3-16-2004)
ARTICLE IV. HORSES AND OTHER LARGE DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Sec. 17-28: REGISTRATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a horse or other large domestic animal in the village unless he shall cause such horse or animal to be
registered by the village. Applications shall be on forms provided by the Village Finance Department. The registration required hereunder shall include a
one time fee as prescribed in appendix D of this Code, which fee shall be paid to the Village Finance Department. (Ord. 97-913, 10-27-1997)
No person shall keep a total of more than six (6) horses (see appendix A, "Zoning Ordinance", of this Code) within the Village of Northfield and no person
shall keep a horse in violation of the Northfield zoning ordinance. (Ord. 03-1150, 2-18-2003)
It shall be unlawful:
(1) To permit any horse to trespass on private property without the consent of the property owner.
(2) To allow any horse to deposit any excretions upon any public right-of-way, public park, sidewalk, or private property other than the horse owner's
property without removing such deposit as soon as practical. (Ord. 97-913, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 17-29: REGISTRY.
The Finance Department shall keep a complete registry of all horses and other large domestic animals in the Village, describing the same by name, and
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 252/377
also shall enter the name, address and telephone number of the owner or keeper. Each such animal shall be registered with the Finance Department by
the owner or keeper. (Ord. 97-913, 10-27-1997)
ARTICLE V. PENALTIES
Sec. 17-30: PENALTY.
Any person violating the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to section 1-13 of this Code, and in accordance with appendix D, article
III of this Code. (Ord. 97-915, 10-27-1997; amd. Ord. 03-1144, 2-18-2003)
Title Chapter 18
APPURTENANT STRUCTURES
Chapter 18
APPURTENANT STRUCTURES
ARTICLE I. SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 18-1: DEFINITIONS.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. A swimming pool maintained in a single-family residential zoning district intended for the use of a single family and their
nonpaying guests.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool maintained for the use of more than one family.
SWIMMING POOL. A manmade rigid or semirigid receptacle for water having a depth at any point greater than eighteen inches (18"), used or intended to
be used for swimming, wading, soaking or bathing, and constructed, installed, or maintained in or above the ground outside any building. This shall also
include installations commonly known as "hot tubs/spas". (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-2: FENCES REQUIRED.
Every person in possession of land within the village, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which a swimming pool
is situated shall at all times maintain a fence completely surrounding such pool. Such fence shall be not less than four feet (4') in height and designed so
as to obstruct entry of persons other than the occupant of the property, his family and guests, to the area enclosed by the fence. All gates or doors
providing entry into the enclosed area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed and capable of keeping such doors or gates
securely closed at all times when not in actual use and to prevent children from opening said door or gate; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling
forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be equipped with such devices. (1986 Code)
Prior to erecting any such fence, the plans therefor shall be submitted to the village community development director or his/her designate who shall review
them to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and applicable provisions of other chapters. No fence shall be erected until the plans
therefor have been approved by the village community development director or his/her designate. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-3: REGULATIONS.
Every person in possession of land on which a swimming, wading or bathing pool is situated or will be built shall conform with the following regulations:
(1) No swimming pool in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons' capacity shall be installed or operated without a recirculating and filtering
system.
(2) Unless all regulations promulgated by the metropolitan sanitary district of greater Chicago have been complied with, no connection shall be made
between any storm drain, sewer, drainage system, dry well, or subsoil irrigation line and any line connected to a swimming, wading, or bathing pool,
nor shall water from a pool be discharged by any means into the sanitary sewer system.
(3) Every swimming pool shall be operated in such manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times.
(4) Every swimming pool shall be constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with article 680, national electrical code, 1984, or the same or
similar provisions of any subsequent edition of the national electrical code, as set forth in appendix C of this code.
(5) In order to prevent back siphoning, the water supply connection from a public water supply to a swimming pool, if by means of a pipe, shall have an
air gap delivery connection, located not less than six inches (6") vertically above the flood rim of the pool. If the water supply connection from a public
water supply shall be by means of a hose, the end of the hose at the point of flow shall always be above the surface of the water in the pool.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to store within the village any liquid or gaseous fuel for the purpose of heating a swimming pool. This shall
include, but not be limited to, liquefied petroleum gas and propane. It shall not include fuel oil.
(7) No portion of a private swimming pool, including pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations and any paved or concrete area
on the immediate perimeter of said pool, shall be located at a distance less than ten feet (10') from any side or rear property line. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 253/377
(8) It shall be unlawful to discharge water from any swimming pool onto any village property or onto any private property other than that of the owner.
Any person including the owner or a contractor violating this subsection shall be liable, in addition to any other penalties, for the replacement value of
any vegetation destroyed by such discharge. "Village property" as used herein shall not include storm sewers or other designated storm drainage
routes. (Ord. 88-551, 5-24-1988)
Sec. 18-4: PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall hereafter construct, cause to be constructed, operate, or maintain a public or private swimming pool without first obtaining a building
permit therefor from the village. Written application for such permit shall be filed with the community development director or his/her designee and shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of whether the proposed swimming pool complies with the
requirements of this article. No such permit for an existing swimming pool shall be granted by the community development director or his/her designee
until there is total compliance with this article. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-5: ENFORCEMENT.
The community development director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. For this purpose he/she is hereby
authorized to enter upon any premises in the village to investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not any such pool
complies with the requirements of this article. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-6: DIVING BOARDS, DEPTH REQUIREMENTS.
Where a swimming pool has a diving board or diving apparatus for the purpose of diving into the swimming pool, there shall be a clear area of not less
than an eight foot (8') radius ahead of the farthermost projection of the diving board with a clear vertical depth of water of at least seven feet (7') throughout
such clear area. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-7: FILTERS.
No filter may be installed for a public swimming pool unless approved by the National Sanitation Foundation. (1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. FENCES, WALLS OR OTHER ARTIFICIAL BARRIERS
Sec. 18-8: FENCE, DEFINITION.
Whenever the word "fence" is used in this article, it shall include fences, walls, and other structural or artificial barriers. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-9: HEIGHT AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS, GENERAL.
No fence shall be built, erected, or installed the bottom of which is more than four inches (4") above grade or which has any portion of the fence more than
six feet four inches (6'4") above grade, except for the rear or side lot line of a residential parcel which is adjacent to a nonresidential use. In such cases the
height limitation shall be eight feet (8'). No fence may be built, erected or installed by any party on property belonging to the village, the county, or the
state, unless the proof has been submitted to the building commissioner that appropriate permission has been granted by the proper government
agencies. (Ord. 99-978, 4-26-1999; amd. Ord. 03-1143, 2-18-2003; Ord. 04-1216, 9-21-2004; Ord. 06-1280, 4-18-2006)
Sec. 18-10: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, FRONT YARD.
No fence more than four feet (4') in height shall be built, installed, or erected anywhere within that portion of any lot or parcel of land which lies between
the front lot line and the building line established by ordinance of the village, except that if such fence, wall, or artificial barrier be composed of such
materials and built, installed, or erected in such manner that not more than twenty percent (20%) of its entire surface area prevents penetration of light or
constitutes a barrier to view, it may be not more than five feet (5') in height. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-11: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, RAISED GROUND.
No fence shall be built, installed or erected on any ground or surface that has been raised, filled or landscaped for the purpose of circumventing the height
restriction of section 18-9 or 18-10 of this article. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-12: STREET CORNERS, VISION REQUIREMENTS.
No fence shall be built, installed or erected within thirty feet (30') of the intersection of lot lines adjacent to a street corner unless seventy five percent
(75%) or more of each vertical surface of such structure is open to vision. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-13: TRAFFIC HAZARD PROHIBITION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 254/377
No fence shall be so located on a corner lot or built of such height that by reason of the topography of the site vision will be obstructed and a traffic hazard
thereby created. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-13.1: PROHIBITED FENCE MATERIALS.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain anywhere within the Village a fence having razor wire, barbed wire, spikes or any similar device, or any electric
charge. For purposes of this section, "barbed wire" shall mean any pointed metallic protrusion from fencing material, the purpose of which is to discourage
entry to any premises. "Electric charge" shall not include a low voltage, buried and insulated wire installation, the purpose of which is to transmit a signal to
a control device worn by a pet. (Ord. 97-921, 11-24-1997)
Sec. 18-14: SIMILARITY REQUIREMENTS.
A fence which differs in appearance from one side to the other, and which is built, installed, or erected along a boundary line bordering adjacent property,
must comply with the adjacent property owner's written designation as to which side will face the adjacent property. This section shall be inapplicable
whenever such adjacent property owner refuses to make said written designation. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-15: PERMITS; REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING FENCES.
No fence shall be built, installed or erected unless a building permit is applied for and obtained through the Community Development Director or his/her
designate. The written designation of an adjacent property owner, or the certificate of the applicant that such designation was requested and refused,
when either is required by this article, shall be submitted with the application for a fence permit and shall be kept as a part of the permit file.
All fence permit applications shall be on forms provided by the Village and shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development and Building.
Permission shall be granted only when it is clearly demonstrated that the applicant has met the requirements set forth in this article, and received approval
from the Community Development Director or his/her designate. Replacement fencing which conforms to this article and is identical in height, structure
and design to that being replaced shall also require a permit, but shall not require a fee or approval of the Architectural Commission. (Ord. 88-542, 4-1988;
amd. Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998; Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-16: HEIGHT AND LOCATION VARIANCES.
A. Application; Standards. Any person desiring a variance from the requirements of this article, with respect to issuance of a permit for a new fence or
alteration of any existing fence, may apply in writing to the Northfield Architectural Commission. The application must be accompanied by a list of the
names and addresses of persons owning or occupying property adjacent to the subject property. The Architectural Commission shall determine
whether strict compliance with the requirements of this article will result in undue hardship to the applicant. In making its determination, the commission
shall consider, among other facts, the following: (Ord. 99-994, 9-27-1999; amd. Ord. 18-1715, 5-15-2018)
(1) Whether there exists hardship on the part of the property owner which would substantially limit or restrict such owner's use and enjoyment of the
property. Such hardship, however, shall not result from a self-imposed condition created by the owner;
(2) Whether the granting of the variance requested will create a traffic safety hazard by reducing visibility on the part of the drivers and/or pedestrians;
and
(3) Whether granting of the variance requested will be compatible with the area in which it is situated with regard to its location, height, construction
material, landscaping and impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
B. Drawings. The petitioner shall provide seventeen (17) copies of drawings, plans and specifications relating to the site, the specific location of the
proposed fence, its length and its impact on the surrounding landscaping and a variation application fee as required in appendix D of this Code. These
shall be provided in sufficient time to permit meeting the notice requirements in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 99-994, 9-27-1999)
C. Notice Requirement. The petitioner shall be required to provide all persons occupying property adjacent to the subject property with written notice of
this request for a variance. Such notice shall be in writing and copies shall be provided to the commission. The notice must be delivered to the above
parties not less than fifteen (15) days or more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing of the petition before the commission. All notices pursuant to this
section shall be delivered by first class mail, accompanied by a certificate of mailing. (Ord. 18-1715, 5-15-2018)
D. Dilatory Applications. If an applicant applies for a variation after that applicant, or the applicant's predecessor, acted in violation of Village regulations
or a previously granted variation, then no other variation may be granted, unless as a condition of the requested relief, the applicant pays for all Village
costs associated with the violative activity, including, but not limited to, staff time, engineering and legal fees and costs associated with the Village's
enforcement and review efforts.
E. Finality Of Determination. The determination of the Architectural Commission shall be final and appeal must be pursued according to the Illinois
Administrative Review Act. (Ord. 99-994, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 18-17: RESERVED.
(Ord. 99-994, 9-27-1999)
Sec. 18-18: VIOLATIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 255/377
In all cases where a fence shall hereafter be erected contrary to the provisions of this article, the Community Development Director or his/her designee
shall forthwith notify the owner or agent or lessee of the land on which same is located, or the contractor engaged in erecting same, and shall specify in
such notice in what manner same violates the provisions of this article, and the said Community Development Director or his/her designee shall require the
person so notified to forthwith make same conform to and comply with the provisions of this article, specifying in such notice the time within which such
work shall be done. Said notice shall also include a statement for the purpose of making the violator aware that he may petition the Architectural
Commission for a variance according to section 18-16 of this article.
If, at the expiration of the time set in the notice provided for in this article, the person so notified shall have refused, neglected, or failed to comply with the
request made in such notice, and shall not have torn down or changed said fence, wall, or similar structure or other artificial barrier so as to conform to and
comply with the provisions of this article, or properly petitioned the Architectural Commission, the Community Development Director or his/her designee
shall have the authority to proceed forthwith to tear down, or cause to be torn down, such fence or so much thereof as is being maintained or shall have
been erected and constructed in violation of the provisions of this article, and the cost of such tearing down shall be charged to and recovered from the
owner thereof or from the person for whom the same has been or is being erected. The violator shall also be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-
13 of this Code. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
ARTICLE III. ANTENNAS
Sec. 18-19: DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
ANTENNA. Any structure, mast, pole, tripod, parabolic dish, meshwork or framework, used for the purpose of transmitting or receiving microwave, radio or
television signals, or any other electromagnetic signals, but not a satellite earth station antenna that is two meters (2 m) or less in diameter which is
located or proposed to be located in the O/R, VC, B-1, B-2 or M-1 Zoning Districts, or a satellite earth station antenna that is one meter (1 m) or less in
diameter in any zoning district. An "antenna" as herein defined shall include all mounting structures and electrical connections therefor.
BUILDING MOUNTED ANTENNA. Any antenna mounted or affixed to the exterior roof, walls or other exterior part of a building.
FRONT YARD. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line
and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed porches and unenclosed balconies. On double frontage lots, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street
side of a corner lot.
GROUND MOUNTED ANTENNA. Any antenna which is mounted on the ground and not supported in any way by a building.
REAR YARD. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall
be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at
the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
SIDE YARD. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot and the side of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches.
(Ord. 474, 8-26-1986; amd. Ord. 04-1195, 3-16-2004; Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 18-20: INSTALLATION.
A. Building Mounted Antennas.
(1) No antenna shall be mounted on a building if the antenna creates more than seventy (70) pounds of resistance to winds having a velocity of eighty
(80) miles per hour except as provided in subsection D of this section.
(2) All building mounted antennas shall be installed in all respects in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications, instructions and standards. As
evidence of such compliance, a certificate in form specified by the village shall be executed by the installer and delivered to the village.
(3) The height of a building mounted antenna shall not exceed the height limitation for structures for the zoning district in which the antenna is located
under the Northfield zoning ordinance.
B. Ground Mounted Antennas.
(1) No antenna shall be ground mounted if the antenna creates more than three hundred (300) pounds of resistance to winds having a velocity of
eighty (80) miles per hour except as provided in subsection D of this section.
(2) All ground mounted antennas shall be installed in all respects in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications, instructions and standards. As
evidence of such compliance, a certificate in form specified by the village shall be executed by the installer and delivered to the village.
(3) All parts of the antenna, including attachments and wires, shall be located within the required setback lines specified in the Northfield zoning
ordinance.
(4) All guy or support wires shall be marked and protected to reduce the possibility of personal injury and property damage.
(5) All electronic cables leading from a ground mounted antenna to any building shall be underground.
(6) All ground mounted antennas must be bonded to a grounding rod.
(7) The location and quality of the proposed installation of the antenna must be amenable to safe maintenance. The location and quality of the
installation must not present an attractive nuisance to children.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 256/377
C. Aesthetic Considerations. The village is desirous of maintaining the rural atmosphere so highly valued by its residents and strives to promote a
harmonious relationship with the environment. Further, the village endeavors to minimize the impact of antennas upon adjacent properties. Therefore,
the following regulations and aesthetic review guidelines are established for antennas placed within the village corporate limits:
(1) The installation of either a ground or roof mounted antenna should strive to be compatible with the appearance and character of the neighboring
properties in the village.
(2) All antennas shall be erected and designed so as to reduce to the greatest degree practicable the visual impact upon surrounding property as
viewed by an observer at street level on adjacent properties and on village streets in the vicinity of such property.
(3) All antenna installations must comply with all other provisions of this code.
(4) No ground mounted antenna shall be installed in a front yard. No roof mounted antenna shall be on a wall, side, or roof of a building which faces the
front yard of the property.
(5) No antenna, except as provided in subsection C(6) of this section, shall exceed the height limitations for structures within the zoning district in which
the antenna is located; nor shall the lowest point of any ground mounted antenna, exclusive of its base, be more than two feet (2') above the average
elevation of the yard in which such antenna is located. No ground mounted antenna shall be installed or erected on any ground or surface that has
been raised, filled or landscaped for the purpose of circumventing the height restrictions of this section.
(6) Exceptions to subsection C(5) of this section shall be granted up to seventy feet (70') in height for antennas owned and operated by amateur radio
operators holding valid federal communications station licenses, but only during such time as such license remains in effect and said antenna is
owned and operated by such licensee. Any antenna which is not owned or operated by a valid licensee for more than ninety (90) days is no longer
exempt from this provision and shall conform with all sections of this code.
D. Antennas Exceeding Wind Resistance Limits Of Subsections A(1) And B(1) Of This Section.
(1) General. All ground mounted antennas which will create more than three hundred (300) pounds of resistance to winds having a velocity of eighty
(80) miles per hour and all roof mounted antennas which will create more than seventy (70) pounds of resistance to winds having a velocity of eighty
(80) miles per hour shall require a permit from the architectural commission prior to installation. All permit applications for the installation of an
antenna covered under this subsection D shall be on forms provided by the village and shall be submitted to the village building department
accompanied by the following: (Ord. 474, 8-26-1986)
(a) Seventeen (17) sets of plans showing:
1. The proposed location of the antenna;
2. All structures on the subject lot;
3. All structures on lots contiguous to the subject lot;
4. All existing and proposed landscaping; and
5. Manufacturer's specifications for the proposed installation.
(b) All applications must be made in writing and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee required in appendix D of this code.
No permit application shall be acted upon by the architectural commission until it has held a public hearing following not less than fifteen (15) days' or
more than thirty (30) days' public notice, thereof, published by the village in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, together with written
notice served by the petitioner upon the owners or all properties within a radius of two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property for which the
application has been filed. All notices pursuant to this section shall be delivered by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
Permits shall be granted only when it is clearly demonstrated that the applicant will meet the requirements set forth above in this section and the
following additional requirements: (Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
(2) Roof Mounted Antennas.
(a) A roof mounted antenna permitted under this subsection D shall be inconspicuous from the view of a ground observer from any viewing direction
because of existing architectural or structural features of the building, or modifications which will be made to the existing building.
(b) A registered structural engineer shall certify that the building is capable of supporting the antenna and building modifications under subsection
D(2)(a) of this section and that such structure is designed and mounted so as to safely withstand wind and other stresses to which it may be
subjected.
(c) In order for the village engineer to review the proposed roof mounted antenna, the applicant must supply the village with three (3) copies of the
following information:
1. Wind loading calculations;
2. Details of the bracket and base configuration of the antenna;
3. Size of the proposed antenna, including its height from the base and its maximum width;
4. Weight of the proposed antenna;
5. Complete drawings of the structure on which the antenna is to be mounted;
6. A letter from a registered structural engineer certifying that the roof will withstand torque loading at one hundred (100) mile per hour winds.
(d) The highest point of any roof mounted antenna, including mounting structure, shall not be higher than the highest point of the roof upon which the
antenna is to be mounted.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 257/377
(e) No antenna shall be installed which produces a flat plane load of greater than two thousand one hundred (2,100) pounds of resistance in an
eighty (80) mile per hour wind.
(f) No antenna shall be attached to or supported by a chimney which creates more than seventy (70) pounds of resistance to winds having a velocity
of eighty (80) miles per hour except as provided in subsection D of this section.
(3) Ground Mounted Antennas.
(a) A registered structural engineer shall certify that the antenna is designed and mounted so as to safely withstand wind and other stresses to which
it may be subjected. In order for the village engineer to review the proposed ground mounted antenna, the applicant shall supply the village with
three (3) copies of the following information:
1. Wind loading calculations;
2. Details of the bracket and base configuration of the antenna;
3. Size of the proposed antenna, including its height from the ground and its maximum width;
4. Weight of the proposed antenna;
5. Complete drawings of the mounting and foundation structure on which the antenna is to be mounted;
6. Topographical drawing showing the location of the antenna on the property and the elevations of the property;
7. Data establishing the average elevations of the property;
8. A letter from a registered structural engineer certifying that the strength of the mounting and foundation structure will withstand torque loading on
the antenna in one hundred (100) mile per hour winds.
(b) The installation of an antenna will be such as to minimize its overall visibility from neighboring properties and public ways during all seasons of
the year. In order to minimize the visibility of ground mounted antennas, the architectural commission may require that a natural screen or fence be
erected. The natural screen should be a minimum four feet (4') tall, with the plantings spaced two (2) to three feet (3') apart. A fence should also be
a minimum of four feet (4') tall. However, a natural screen or fence may not interfere with the antenna's ability to send and/or receive signals.
(c) No antenna shall be installed which produces a flat plane load of greater than two thousand one hundred (2,100) pounds of resistance in an
eighty (80) mile per hour wind.
(4) Limit On Number Of Antennas. In considering whether to grant permits for antennas which exceed the resistance limits of subsections A(1) and
B(1) of this section, the architectural commission shall take into account the number of existing antennas on the subject property. In order to control
the proliferation of duplicate antennas upon the community, the architectural commission shall also consider minimizing and coordinating antennas
that perform similar functions. (Ord. 474, 8-26-1986)
Sec. 18-21: MOBILE ANTENNAS.
A mobile dish antenna may be utilized in any nonresidential zoning district of the village for no longer than twenty four (24) hours under the following
conditions:
(1) The antenna shall be immediately movable and not affixed to the ground or improvements in any way.
(2) The written approval of the owner of the property on which the dish is to be located must be provided to the village seven (7) days in advance of its
utilization. (Ord. 474, 8-26-1986)
(3) The location of the antenna must be approved in advance by the Northfield community development director or his/her designate, who shall take
into account aesthetic and public safety factors. (Ord. 474, 8-26-1986; amd. Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
(4) The owner of the property and the owner of the antenna shall jointly execute a release and indemnity agreement in form satisfactory to the village,
releasing the village from and holding it harmless against any claims or liabilities that might arise out of the use of the antenna. (Ord. 474, 8-26-1986)
Sec. 18-22: VARIATIONS.
Variations from the provisions of section 18-20 of this article may be applied for by petition to the Northfield architectural commission, which commission
shall have full and final authority to grant or deny the petition. All petitions for variation shall be accompanied by seventeen (17) sets of plans and
manufacturer's specifications as required under subsection 18-20D(1) of this article and a variation application fee as required in appendix D of this code.
No variation petition shall be acted upon by the architectural commission until it has held a public hearing to consider such petition following not less than
fifteen (15) days' nor more than thirty (30) days' public notice, thereof, published by the village in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, together
with written notice served, by the petitioner, upon the owners of all properties within a radius of two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property for which the
petition has been filed. The petitioner shall be required to provide adequate evidence of legal or equitable title to the property prior to consideration of the
merits of the petition. All notices pursuant to this section shall be delivered by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
Variations shall be granted only when it is clearly demonstrated that a satisfactory signal cannot be obtained with the antenna in full compliance with
section 18-20 of this article. The granting of any variations may be made subject to such reasonable aesthetic considerations and safety conditions as the
architectural commission shall deem appropriate. (Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-23: VIOLATIONS.
Persons erecting an antenna contrary to the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that the violation continues may be considered a separate offense. In addition, any illegally erected antenna
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 258/377
shall be deemed to be a nuisance (subject to abatement) in accordance with chapter 14, article IV of this code.
The following persons may be charged, jointly or severally, for violating the provisions of this article:
(1) Any person requesting or ordering the installation of the illegal antenna.
(2) Any contractor, other person, or business installing the illegal antenna.
(3) The legal or beneficial owner of the property on which the illegal antenna is installed.
Additionally, the above persons shall be jointly or severally liable for costs incurred by the village in the abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 88-533, 2-23-
1988)
ARTICLE IV. TENNIS AND SPORT COURTS
Sec. 18-24: PERMITS REQUIRED.
Tennis and sport courts shall not be built, installed, erected, or modified without first obtaining a building permit. Applications for such permits shall be
obtained from the building department of the village, and shall be issued according to the provisions of this article. The fee for such permit shall be
according to appendix D of this code. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-25: SUBMISSION OF PLANS, DRAINAGE.
Plans for the building of a tennis or sport court shall be submitted with a permit application. These plans shall include a plat of survey showing the
proposed location on the lot, the length and height of any fence to be erected along the borders of the court and must show the proposed drainage of
water runoff from the surface of the tennis or sport court. The surface runoff must be diverted in such a manner so as not to increase the drainage onto
neighboring properties. Seventeen (17) copies of the landscaping and fencing plans must be provided. All applications must be made in writing and shall
be accompanied by the applicable fee required in appendix D of this Code. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-26: LIGHTS.
Artificial lighting of tennis and sport courts shall not be permitted. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-27: LOCATION.
Tennis and sport courts or tennis and sport court fences shall not be built, installed or erected within ten feet (10') of lot lines, as defined in the zoning
ordinance, as amended, of the Village. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-28: TENNIS AND SPORT COURT FENCES.
A ten foot (10') high chainlink or wire mesh fence may be erected along the edges of the court, provided that the portions of the fence parallel to the
sidelines shall not extend more than twenty feet (20') from each corner. The links or mesh in the fence shall not be interlaced with strips of wood, metal or
fabric. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-29: PLANTINGS.
A compact hedge or similar planting shall be planted in such a manner as to screen the fence and the court from immediately adjacent residential
properties. When planted, the hedge must be at least five feet (5') in height and capable of growing higher. A cloth wind screen may be used only in
conjunction with plantings ten feet (10') or more in height and of sufficient density when foliated to effectively shield the court and the court fence from the
view of neighboring property owners. This spacing of aforesaid planting shall be determined by the Architectural Commission. Such wind screens must be
removed when plantings have no foliage. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-30: ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION REVIEW.
The plans for the fence and the planting hedge must be submitted to the Architectural Commission of the Village for review and approval. (1986 Code)
Sec. 18-31: MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
A tennis or sport court shall not be erected on a lot less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-32: HOURS OF USE.
A tennis or sport court within the Village may be used only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and dusk, Monday through Saturday, and
between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and dusk on Sundays. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 259/377
Sec. 18-33: COMPLIANCE WITH FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS.
A tennis or sport court or tennis or sport court fence shall be deemed to be a structure as such term is used in the floodplain ordinance of the Village and
shall be subject to all the requirements of the floodplain ordinance. (Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
Sec. 18-34: VARIATIONS.
The Architectural Commission after public notice and hearing, may pursuant to section 4-21 of this Code, grant a variation in the location, fence
requirements, planting requirements, and lot size of any tennis or sport court as to which it is found that: 1) the variation will not alter the essential
character of the locality, 2) the variation will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, and 3) the variation will not affect public
safety. (Ord. 18-1715, 5-15-2018)
ARTICLE V. PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT
Sec. 18-35: DEFINITIONS.
PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT, CHILDREN'S. Any appurtenant structure intended primarily for recreational or athletic use by children such as, but not
limited to, playhouse, sandbox, swing set, trampoline and jungle gym of the type generally constructed or manufactured for residential yard use. (Ord. 92-
716, 4-27-1992)
Sec. 18-36: HEIGHT AND LOCATION REGULATIONS.
No portion of any playground equipment shall be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to any other building on the same lot, shall not be located in the
front yard, shall not be located within ten feet (10') of the rear lot line, and shall not be more than fifteen feet (15') in height. (Ord. 03-1151, 2-18-2003)
Sec. 18-37: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, RAISED GROUND.
No playground equipment shall be built, installed or erected on any ground or surface that has been raised, filled or landscaped for the purpose of
circumventing the height restriction of section 18-36 of this article. (Ord. 92-716, 4-27-1992)
Sec. 18-38: NO MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT.
Motorized recreational or playground equipment requiring any track, treadway or permanent attachment to the ground shall not be permitted in a
residential zoning district. Except however, train tracks of a G scale or smaller may be installed in any residential zoning district provided they comply with
the following standards:
(1) No person shall hereafter install, construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a train track without first obtaining a building permit
therefor from the village. Written application for such permit shall be filed with the community development and building director or designee and
shall be accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of whether the proposed train track complies with the
requirements of this article. The fee for such permit shall be according to appendix D of this code for electrical permits. No such permit shall be
granted until there is total compliance with this article.
(2) Train tracks shall only be placed in the rear yard and must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line.
(3) No portion of the train or track shall exceed a height of three feet (3') from the ground elevation.
(4) Trains shall only be operated on the track between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on weekdays, nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on Saturdays, and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Sundays and national holidays.
(5) Noise generated by the train or related equipment shall not be audible beyond the lot lines of the property on which it is operated. (Ord. 02-1119, 6-
17-2002)
Sec. 18-39: VARIATIONS.
The zoning board of appeals, after public notice and hearing, may, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5, grant a variation in the location and
height of any children's playground equipment as to which it is found that: 1) the variation will not alter the essential character of the locality, 2) the
variation will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, and 3) the variation will not affect public safety. (Ord. 92-716, 4-27-1992)
ARTICLE VI. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
Sec. 18-40: DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ANTENNA. Any device or array that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals for voice, data or video communication purposes including, but not
limited to, television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone, personal wireless services and similar forms of communications.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 260/377
COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT BUILDING. A structure for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more
antennas, where access to equipment is gained from the interior of the structure.
COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT CABINETS. A casing or console used for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one
or more antennas, where direct access is provided from the exterior.
FREESTANDING ANTENNA POLE. A freestanding monopole design structure that is constructed solely for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas. This definition does not include towers that require additional support, such as guyed towers or lattice towers.
IMPACT FACILITY. A personal wireless service facility that is not a "no impact" facility shall be considered an "impact" facility.
NO IMPACT. The term "no impact" personal wireless service facility shall be defined as a facility which is:
(1) Designed so as to completely conceal all components of the personal wireless service facility within a new or existing structure that is architecturally
compatible with its surroundings; including, but not limited to, an antenna behind louvers, or in a false roof on a building, or inside a steeple, clock
tower, flagpole, campanile or bell tower; or
(2) Camouflaged so as to blend into its surroundings to such an extent that it is no more obtrusive to the casual observer than the structure on which it
is: a) placed, such as a rooftop, lighting standard or existing tower; or b) replacing, such as a school athletic field light standard, or other similar
structure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE/PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. Shall be defined in the same manner as in title 47, United States
Code, section 33(c)(7)(C), as amended now or in the future.
ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNA POLE. Any structure that supports one or more antennas, and is designed and constructed to be attached, at its base, to
the roof of an existing building. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 18-41: PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND PROCEDURE.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless telecommunications
facilities. The provisions of this article are not intended and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provisions of personal
wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this article be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between the various different
companies that provide personal wireless services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this article are inconsistent or in conflict with any
other provision of this chapter, the provisions of this article shall control.
B. In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this article made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install
personal wireless service facilities, the board of trustees shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the village, taking
into account the nature and scope of the request. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record.
C. Should the application of this article have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal wireless service to all or a portion of the
village, such provider may petition the board of trustees for an amendment to this article. The board of trustees, upon receipt of such a petition, shall
promptly undertake review of the petition, taking into account the nature and scope of the petition. Any decision to deny such a petition shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
D. All requests for approval of a personal wireless service facility will be reviewed by the architectural commission. Those personal wireless service
facilities that require special use permits will be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission, in addition to the architectural commission. For
architectural commission review, seventeen (17) copies of the plans shall be submitted along with the required application fee as required in appendix
D of this code. (Ord. 99-963, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 18-42: PLACEMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES.
A personal wireless service facility may be erected or installed only in accordance with this article. The personal wireless service facility shall conform to all
minimum setback, yard and height requirements (except where otherwise noted in this section) of the village zoning ordinance and to all applicable federal
laws and regulations concerning its use and operation. Any personal wireless service facilities, whether "impact" or "no impact", that are not attached to an
existing principal structure shall be permitted on a single lot with that existing principal structure provided that: 1) the existing principal structure was not
constructed for a personal wireless service facility; and 2) the personal wireless service facility being proposed is a maximum of twenty five feet (25') from
the nearest part of the existing principal structure (this may extend to 50 feet upon the written concurrence of the village engineer); and 3) no more than
one structure carrying a personal wireless service facility or facilities that is not attached to an existing principal structure is permissible on a single lot. No
freestanding antenna poles shall be permitted except in the M1 or O/R zoning district. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
If the proposed use is to be located within a residential district, the applicant must demonstrate the necessity for locating in the residential district, and
explain why the applicant is unable to locate the personal wireless service facility in an M1, B1, B2, V/C or O/R district. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997; amd.
letter dated 3-13-1998)
Any request for installation of a personal wireless service facility at a location that is not owned by a public taxing body must have attached to it an
explanation of why a public property location is not suitable for this facility. A personal wireless service facility may be created or installed only in the
following zoning districts and only according to the accompanying standards:
A. M1 Or O/R. A personal wireless service facility may be erected or installed in the M1 or O/R zoning district, but only under the following conditions:
(1) No Impact Facility. A personal wireless service facility that is a "no impact" facility may be installed in the M1 or O/R zoning district. A personal
wireless service facility that is affixed to an existing structure, and meets the definition of a "no impact" facility in the M1 or O/R zoning district will not
require a special use permit.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 261/377
(2) Impact Facility. An impact facility may be installed in the M1 and O/R zoning district, but only as a special use, and only in the side or rear yard of
the lot.
B. B1, B2, V/C And R6. A personal wireless service facility may be erected or installed in the B1, B2, V/C and R6 zoning districts. A personal wireless
service facility in these zoning districts must meet the definition of a "no impact" facility. A personal wireless service facility that is affixed to an existing
structure does not require a special use permit. All other personal wireless service facilities in the B1, B2, V/C and R6 zoning districts will require a
special use permit. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
C. R1, R2, R3, R4 And R5. A personal wireless service facility may be erected or installed in the R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5 zoning districts only as a special
use. A personal wireless service facility may not be located on a lot improved with a structure used as a residence or on a vacant lot and must meet the
definition of a "no impact" facility. No variation or special use may be granted to allow such a facility on a lot improved with a structure used as a
residence. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997; amd. per letter dated 3-13-1998)
Sec. 18-43: COLLOCATION OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES.
A. In considering a request for approval of a special use to allow the installation of personal wireless service facilities, the plan and zoning commission or
the board of trustees, as the case may be, shall, in addition to the other standards set forth in sections 18-44 and 18-45 of this article, also give due
consideration and weight to whether the plans submitted will provide for collocation of other personal wireless service equipment on the same
structure, so as to minimize the proliferation of antenna-supporting structures. An inventory of all existing personal wireless service facilities within one
thousand feet (1,000'), as measured from the property line on which the personal wireless service facility is proposed, shall accompany any request to
locate a new personal wireless service facility.
B. Due consideration shall also be given as to whether the applicant has sought and been denied the opportunity to collocate its personal wireless service
facility on an existing antenna supporting structure.
C. In considering a request for approval of a special use or variations to permit the installation of a personal wireless service facility, the village may by
express condition, require that the applicant allow, on a commercially reasonable basis, other providers of personal wireless telecommunications
services to collocate additional personal wireless services facilities where such collocation is technologically and structurally feasible. (Ord. 97-917, 10-
27-1997)
Sec. 18-44: DESIGN STANDARDS.
A. Communications Support Buildings Or Cabinets. These support structures shall, whenever practical, be located within a lawfully preexisting
structure. If this is not possible, then these structures shall have an exterior finish compatible with the natural or built environment surrounding the site.
B. Screening. The village may require any combination of existing and additional vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features to
achieve the goal of minimizing the visual impact of the site. All requirements for screening shall apply to ground mounted antenna poles, support
structures and rooftop facilities.
C. Fencing. All fencing shall be in compliance with the requirements of article II of this chapter. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 18-45: OTHER STANDARDS.
A. Signage. The following signage is permitted: 1) signage mandated by federal or state law or regulations; 2) a single sign, per antenna structure, erected
at eye level or below, which provides only the name of the company and an emergency phone number. The maximum permitted size of this sign is two
(2) square feet; and 3) a single "No Trespassing" sign on each elevation of the structure. Such signs shall not exceed one square foot, unless a larger
sign is mandated by federal or state regulations.
B. Lighting. No lighting of any towers shall be allowed, other than that which is specifically mandated by federal or state law or regulations.
C. Compliance. All personal wireless service facilities must maintain compliance with the plans and specifications approved by the corporate authorities. If
the personal wireless service facility becomes noncompliant with approved plans and specifications due, but not limited to: discoloration, cracking,
missing components, rusting, settling, damage or general disrepair; then the owners of the personal wireless service facility or property on which it is
located will be jointly and severally responsible for the immediately remediable of the specific nonconformities. Failure to do so will subject such owners
to the penalties set forth in appendix D to this code.
D. Protection. Every personal wireless service facility shall be protected against unauthorized climbing or other access by the public.
E. Storage. Vehicular and outdoor storage associated with personal wireless service facilities is prohibited on any site containing the facilities.
F. Interference. In considering a request for approval of a special use or variation to permit the installation of a personal wireless service facility, the plan
and zoning commission or the board of trustees, as the case may be, may require that the applicant demonstrate that the proposed personal wireless
service facility will not interfere with any existing village public safety communication system, or residential or commercial application including, but not
limited to, television and radio broadcast signals.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 262/377
G. Engineering. No personal wireless service facility may be located within the village unless the applicant has provided to the village the written
certification of a professional engineer licensed by the state that the structure upon which the facility is located is sufficient from a structural engineering
standpoint to bear the additional load. In instances of freestanding structures, this shall include a certificate that the foundation upon which the structure
is built is engineered to take into account the existing soil conditions. The engineer shall also certify that in the event of a fall or collapse, the facility is
designed and manufactured to fall entirely within the boundary lines of the lot on which it is located and has been erected in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications. Therefore, the owner of the facility shall provide to the village, every three (3) years, an engineer's certification that the
freestanding facility remains structurally sound.
H. Height. The height of a personal wireless service facility may not exceed the height permitted in the zoning district in which it is located except as set
forth below:
(1) Height Exceptions Of Less Than Fifty Percent. A height exception varying the height standards set forth in the village of Northfield zoning
ordinance shall be granted by the corporate authorities for nonresidential zoning districts upon the filing of a certificate of necessity executed by an
engineer licensed by the state and not in the employ of the applicant. The certificate of necessity shall clearly state, upon the engineer's own
knowledge, that the relief requested is the minimum necessary to accomplish the applicant's purpose and that unless the relief is granted, the signals
to be sent or received by this facility will be substantially obstructed by other higher structures or vegetation within the transceiving cell or service
area. The certificate of necessity shall also state that there is not another location reasonably available for which similar relief would not also be
required.
(2) Exceptions Of Fifty Percent Or Greater. Exceptions of greater than fifty percent (50%) of the height standards set forth in the village of Northfield
zoning ordinance may be granted for nonresidential zoning district only upon the holding of a public hearing before the plan and zoning commission
and approval by the corporate authorities. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner required for other zoning variations. No such
exception may be granted unless the applicant shall prove by clear and convincing evidence that another location that would require a lesser degree
of exception is not reasonably available to the applicant. The applicant must also provide proof by clear and convincing evidence that signals to be
sent or received by this facility will be substantially obstructed by other higher structures or vegetation within the transceiving cell or service area if
the relief is not granted. For purposes of this subsection H(2), a mere differential in the cost of one location over another shall not by itself meet the
standard of not being "reasonably available"; although a difference in cost may be considered along with other factors.
No exceptions may be granted pursuant to this subsection H(2) unless the village is provided with a certificate of necessity as set forth in subsection
H(1) of this section, along with a survey showing the exact location and height of the obstructing structures or vegetation. The applicant must also
provide to the village a written affidavit detailing the efforts made by the applicant to fulfill the need for this antenna with a structure requiring less
than a fifty percent (50%) exception. Any facility requiring an exception pursuant to this subsection H(2) shall also require the approval of the
architectural commission. The architectural commission in arriving at its recommendation shall not consider the height of the structure but only its
appearance.
I. Insurance. The provider must tender to the village, on an annual basis, proof of public liability insurance covering the facility in an amount not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
J. Road Rights Of Way. A distance of one thousand feet (1,000') must be maintained between personal wireless service facilities located in a road right of
way, whether local, state or federal. The applicant will be required to demonstrate that this requirement has been satisfied. Personal wireless service
facilities in road right of ways will be required to conform to the regulations of subsection 18-42C of this article. All such right of ways will be regulated
as though they are in single-family residential districts, and will comply with all applicable sections of this article. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 18-46: TEMPORARY FACILITIES.
Temporary personal wireless service facilities shall conform to all of the setback and yard requirements of the district in which they are located, as well as
subsections 18-45A and B of this article relating to signage and lighting. A temporary personal wireless service facility shall not exceed the height of the
facility previously approved for the property, or one hundred feet (100') in the case of a special event. Only one temporary personal wireless service facility
will be allowed per site at any one time, and a temporary personal wireless service facility must be located behind the front plane of any principal structure
that is on the lot. A temporary personal wireless service facility may be allowed in single-family residential areas only in conformance with the restrictions
in this section and those in subsection 18-42C of this article.
A request for a temporary personal wireless service facility may be granted only by the village manager, with such conditions as the manager may deem
appropriate. Any request for additional time beyond that set forth in subsections A and B of this section shall be subject to the approval of the village
board.
A. Special Events. A temporary personal wireless service facility shall be permitted for special events (temporary sporting or entertainment events) for a
period of not to exceed twelve (12) weeks in a three (3) year time period.
B. Repairs And Equipment Upgrading. If a permanent personal wireless service facility is under repair or equipment is being upgraded, a temporary
facility shall be permitted for a period of up to ninety (90) days. The owner of the facility must certify in writing the necessity for the repair or equipment
upgrade. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
Sec. 18-47: ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.
When a personal wireless service facility and related equipment is not operated for the provision of personal wireless services for a continuous period of
six (6) months or more, such personal wireless service facility and related equipment may be deemed by the village to be abandoned. The owner of such
personal wireless service facility and related equipment shall remove such items within forty five (45) days following mailing of written notice that removal
is required. If the facility is not removed as specified, it shall be deemed a nuisance and will be abated pursuant to chapter 14 of this code. Such notice
shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, by the village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. If two (2) or
more providers of personal wireless services use the personal wireless service facility or related equipment to provide personal wireless services, then the
period of nonuse under this provision shall be measured from the cessation of operation at the location of said personal wireless facility and related
equipment by all such providers. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 263/377
Sec. 18-48: NONCONFORMITIES.
Any personal wireless service facility installed and operating prior to the enactment of this article, which would be prohibited under this article, shall be
considered a legal nonconforming use and/or a legal nonconforming structure, as the case may be, and shall be subject to the rules on nonconformities
provided in appendix A, article XXI of this Code. (Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997)
ARTICLE VII. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Sec. 18-49: PURPOSE.
Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased
demand for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to adopt
the Code amendments set forth in this article in order to establish generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location, construction,
deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the Village so as to, among other things:
(1) Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village;
(2) Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small wireless facilities are installed;
(3) Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are installed;
(4) Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to small wireless facilities;
(5) Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic landmarks or districts within the Village; and
(6) Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not negatively impact public safety and the Village's public safety technology. (Ord. 18-
1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-50: INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.
A. Other Code Provisions. The provisions of this article are intended to supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this Code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in chapter 11, article III and appendix B, subsection B-3.3(8) of this Code and the Community
Facilities Plan of the Comprehensive Plan. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of this article shall control in all matters involving small
wireless facilities, as defined below.
B. State And Federal Laws. In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating such Federal or State laws or regulations.
(Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-51: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT. Means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
ANTENNA. Means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES. Means Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT. Means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION. Means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
AUTHORITY. Means the Village or other unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois
Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION. Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole, whether existing or new.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Means cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. Means a cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as
defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 264/377
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. Means that person appointed to the position of the Director of Public Works of the Village of Northfield, or his or her
designee.
FCC. Means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE. Means a one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK. Means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW. Means a Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. Means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT. Means a written authorization required by the Village or other permitting authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON. Means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. Means the functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district
located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services
to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-105.
RATE. Means a recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. "Right-of-way" does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. Means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. Means a person licensed under the laws of the State of Illinois to practice structural engineering.
UTILITY POLE. Means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE. Means the Village of Northfield, Illinois.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. Means a utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
WIRELESS FACILITY. Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities.
"Wireless facility" does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Means any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider
but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER. Means a wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any
person who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
WIRELESS SERVICES. Means any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. Means a person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-52: ZONING.
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning district,
or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts that are exclusively commercial or industrial:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 265/377
B-2 Service Commercial District
O/R Office/Research District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
In all other zoning districts, the Village's normal zoning approvals, processes and restrictions, which do not conflict with the provisions of this article, shall
apply. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-53: PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this article, a permit to collocate a small wireless facility within the Village is required in all cases. Permits are
subject to the following:
(1) Permit Applications. Permit applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the following
information:
(a) Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in
section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
(b) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and
after" views demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities on the surrounding environment;
(c) Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
(d) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
(e) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
(f) Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the collocation complies with the written design standards established by the Village,
and with the various other requirements set forth in this article and Code;
(g) Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from the Village (i.e., zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
(h) In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity other
than the Village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
(2) Means Of Submission. Permit applications, along with all supporting information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be submitted
by personal delivery or by other means approved by the Village.
(3) Multiple Applications For Same Location. Multiple applications for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
(4) Permit Application Fees. All applications for collocation of small wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the
following amounts:
Request to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support
structure
$1,000.00 per small wireless
facility
Request to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure $650.00
Request to collocate multiple small wireless facilities on existing utility poles or wireless support structures
addressed in a single application
$350.00 per small wireless
facility
(5) Permit Review Timelines.
(a) Completeness Of Application. Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements
of the Act, this article, and other applicable provisions of this Code. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village must determine
whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing
information. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends a notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the
missing information.
An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
(b) Existing Pole Or Wireless Support Structure. Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within ninety (90) days of submission of a
completed application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days,
subject to the following: If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the ninetieth (90th) day after submission of the completed application, or the
tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not preclude
the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 266/377
(c) New Utility Pole. Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within one hundred twenty (120) days of submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days, subject to the
following: If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth (120th) day after submission of the completed
application, or the tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village
shall not preclude the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
(6) Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of applications shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as set
forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
(7) Pole Replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's sole
cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the requirements of this article or Code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public safety.
(8) Denial. The Village shall deny an application that does not meet the requirements of this article. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial
is based.
(9) Resubmittal After Denial. In the case of a permit denial, an applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within thirty (30) days after the notice of denial is sent without payment of an additional application fee. The Village shall
have thirty (30) days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved, if the applicant has notified the Village of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a
resubmitted application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This subsection does not apply if a revised application is not
resubmitted within thirty (30) days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review of a new location, new or different structure
for collocation, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such cases, a new application and
application fee are required.
(10) Consolidated Applications. Consolidated applications for small wireless facilities for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of
structure. Each consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this article for each small wireless facility at each location. If
such an application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless
facilities that do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the Village may remove such collocation requests from the
application and treat them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation approved in a consolidated application.
(11) Alternate Locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a new utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the small wireless
facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation. The
applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location
based on the foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form of a written certification, under oath, describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location from being utilized.
(12) Exemptions. No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-ofway
when the work in question is for:
(a) Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless facilities if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
(b) The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies
the Village in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications, including: 1) equipment type
and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and 2) information sufficient to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
(c) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from Village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane
closures are required. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-54: CONSTRUCTION.
Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees
to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services,
and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Permits that are not
completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in writing by the Village. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-55: PERMIT DURATION.
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this article shall be for a period of five (5) years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the five
(5) year permit period for a successive five (5) year term so long as the installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time of
renewal. A finding by the Village at the time of a request for renewal that an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at the
time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits granted by the
Village under this article shall terminate at the end of their current term. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 267/377
Sec. 18-56: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
A. Antenna Installations. The maximum permitted height of a small wireless facility is ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
B. New Poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
(1) Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the
application is submitted, and that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and
that is in the same right-of-way within the Village. The Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
(2) Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
C. Variance Process. A wireless provider may receive a variance from the Director of Public Works, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 11-151
of this Code from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set forth in this section if, in addition to demonstrating the conditions of section 11-151 of
this Code have been established, the wireless provider can establish that:
(1) Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created by the wireless provider; and
(2) Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this section
cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
(3) The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by
this section, is not technically feasible. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-57: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
A. Public Safety Technology. A wireless provider's operation of a small wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate
the interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to
establish the good faith effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the Village all information necessary to demonstrate its
efforts to resolve the interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited above. Failure to remedy the interference as required
herein shall constitute a public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the procedures for abatement of such nuisances set
forth in this Code.
B. Restrictions. A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small wireless facility that:
(1) Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-way;
(2) Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
(3) Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violates or conflicts with chapter 11, article III of this Code, or other applicable regulations set forth in this Code or otherwise adopted by the Village,
except to the extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions of this article; or
(5) Violates the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 USC section 12101 et seq.).
C. Contractual Requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with all requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
D. Ground-Mounted Equipment. Wireless providers shall comply with the ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set
forth in chapter 11, article III of this Code.
E. Undergrounding.
(1) Compliance. The wireless provider shall comply with Village Code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, including
those provisions or regulations that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way,
including but not limited to subsection 11.145F, and appendix B, subsection B-3.3(8) of this Code and the Community Facilities Plan of the Village's
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Variance. A wireless provider may receive a variance waiver from the Director of Public Works to allow a small wireless facility to be located above
ground in an area where Village ordinances or regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can, in addition to
demonstrating the conditions of section 11-151 of this Code have been met, establish that:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 268/377
(a) Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-way; and
(b) An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
and
(c) An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety hazard; and
(d) An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
(e) Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location; and
(f) An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will not create a safety hazard; and
(g) The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
(h) In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
(3) Screening For Ground Mounted Facilities. Where a ground-mounted facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter
in accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape architect. Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and
coniferous planting materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance of all landscaping as provided in the approved
landscape plan.
(4) Future Undergrounding. The Village may, from time to time, make a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type generally,
such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of the Village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small wireless facility in
place at the time of such a decision, the Village shall either:
(a) Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of the small
wireless facility; or
(b) Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can
maintain service from that location.
F. Collocation Limits. Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and
on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
G. Code Compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. (Ord. 18-
1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-58: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following standards:
(1) General Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards. Installations shall comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards
applicable to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth in chapter 11, article III of this Code, as well as any written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise
identified by the Village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village Board of Trustees, in the Village's comprehensive plan, or in a written
design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
(2) Historic Districts And Landmarks. For areas designated as historic districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks, in
addition to the stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced above, the following additional restrictions/conditions apply to the
installation of small wireless facilities:
(a) Small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with any
buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a designated historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the
surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
(b) Small wireless facilities shall not be mounted upon a historic building or structure.
(3) Historic District Or Landmark Limitations.
(a) Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic district or on a historic landmark, including restrictions on a specific category of utility
poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not be considered a
part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.
(b) This section shall not be construed to limit the Village's enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements adopted
pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 USC section
300101, et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-59: RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE.
The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future public safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 269/377
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-
21-2018)
Sec. 18-60: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
A. Existing Installations. Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a wireless
provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
B. Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 And June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this article and the Act received after June 1, 2020, whichever is later.
C. Applications Received After June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until receipt
by the Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this article. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-61: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
A. Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
(1) Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per small wireless facility; or
(2) The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the pole.
B. Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on Village-owned utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the rate limitations
in this section.
C. Attachment Agreement. An attachment agreement in a form approved by the Village is required for any collocation upon any Village owned utility pole
or wireless support structure. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-62: NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.
A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the Village, provide
written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer of control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-63: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE AND ABANDONMENT.
A. A wireless provider shall advise the Village of any discontinuance of use of a small wireless facility and shall remove the facility within ninety (90) days
of such discontinuance.
B. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is
not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may remove or
cause the removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for Village
utility poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this Code.
C. In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may send the
wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless facility is
operational and still being used within thirty (30) days, and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small wireless
facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless facility at the wireless provider's cost. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-64: DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
The Circuit Court of Cook shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at
annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 18-
1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-65: INDEMNIFICATION.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 270/377
Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall indemnify
and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in
part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure or improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider
proceeding under this article waives any claims it may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however
caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-66: INSURANCE.
At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the wireless
provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following insurance coverages:
(1) Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
(2) Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by law; and
(3) Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage
for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less than:
(a) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(b) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(c) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide certificates of
insurance and proof of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy to the Village prior to the collocation of any small wireless
facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion on file with the Village at all times that the provider maintains small wireless
facilities within the Village.
(4) A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limits required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures
is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement that the Village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self-insures shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the Village. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-67: MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
A. A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the safety, integrity and aesthetics
of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such facilities, the Village shall
notify the wireless provider, in writing, who shall have thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not corrected within such period,
the Village reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance and replacement of small
wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
B. In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at the
wireless provider's expense. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-68: REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
A. A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
(2) The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless facility in accordance with the approved plans.
(3) The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition of a permit issued.
(4) The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village.
(5) The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this article.
(6) A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
(7) The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian use of the public right-of-way.
(8) The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless facility is
located.
(9) The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the small wireless facility as required by this article.
(10) The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR
90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 271/377
(11) The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless provider has failed to remove the small wireless facilities as provided in this
article.
B. Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider setting forth the basis
for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within fourteen (14) days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the Director of Public
Works setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the wireless provider
determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the Director of Public Works shall be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the notification
of written notification and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Director of Public Works shall render findings and a decision within
twenty one (21) days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
C. If the Director of Public Works revokes the permit, the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within twenty one (21)
days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of the Director of Public Works. The Village Board
shall hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Sec. 18-69: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
A. Nothing in this article authorizes the collocation of small wireless facilities on:
(1) Property owned by a private party without the written consent of the property owner;
(2) Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of local
government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled by
the local government or located within rights-of-way to the same extent the local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial
projects or uses);
(3) A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure, without the consent of the property owner;
(4) Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code1; or
(5) Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code2, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act3, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility;
B. The provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1) Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with
the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act; or
(2) Small wireless facilities owned by the Village. (Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
ARTICLE VIII. PENALTIES
Sec. 18-70: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
In addition to any other remedies available to the Village, persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
section 1-13 of this Code. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 97-917, 10-27-1997; Ord. 18-1724, 8-21-2018)
Footnote 1: 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/18c-7201.
Footnote 3: 220 ILCS 5/16-102.
Title Appendix A
ZONING ORDINANCE
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter
ZONING ORDINANCE
Preamble
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 272/377
ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, ILLINOIS
COMPRISING AN ORDINANCE OF MAY 13, 1943, AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 18 OF THE VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, KNOWN AS THE ZONING
ORDINANCE, AND ALL AMENDMENTS ADOPTED THERETO.
Preamble
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Northfield, Illinois have determined the following: It is necessary to secure adequate light,
pure air and safety from fire and other dangers. The taxable value of land and buildings throughout the municipality must be conserved.
Congestion in the public streets shall be lessened or avoided. The public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare shall otherwise be
promoted, in accordance with a well-considered and comprehensive plan for the use and development of all property throughout the Village.
The foregoing shall be accomplished while making due allowance for existing conditions, the conservation of property values, the direction of
building development to the best advantage of the entire municipality and the uses to which the property is devoted.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF NORTHFIELD, ILLINOIS:
That the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Northfield shall hereafter be read as follows:
Article I. Introduction
Sec. 1-1: INTERPRETATION.
The provisions of this appendix A shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort,
morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this appendix A to interfere with, abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or
permits which are not in conflict with the provisions of this appendix A. Nor is it intended by this appendix A to interfere with, or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this appendix A imposes a greater restriction, this appendix A shall control. All
property owners or users of property must comply with the requirements of this appendix A and shall be required to apply for any zoning approvals,
permits, variances, or exceptions in order to bring any land, use of land, buildings, structures, or improvements into conformance with this appendix A.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply:
(1) The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the zoning map appear to be
bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
(2) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the zoning map appear to be bounded approximately
by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
(3) For unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined according to the scale appearing on the map. (Ord.
03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 1-2: SEPARABILITY.
Should any section, clause or provision of this appendix A be declared by the courts to be invalid, such partial invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
appendix as a whole or any other part of the appendix. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 1-3: SCOPE.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict are repealed. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 1-4: ENFORCEMENT.
The director of community development shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this appendix A through the proper legal channels. An appeal
from the decision of the director of community development or his or her designee may be made to the zoning board of appeals as provided in chapter 4,
article IX of this code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article II. Purpose And Standards
Sec. 2-1: GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
This appendix A is established pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13 of the Illinois municipal code to meet specified goals and objectives.
These goals and objectives shall be considered when interpreting or amending this appendix A and are as follows:
(1) To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air and open space.
(2) To zone all properties with a view to conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the village.
(3) To minimize congestion on public streets.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 273/377
(4) To facilitate the provision of adequate transportation and other public services such as water, sewerage, schools and parks.
(5) To avoid hazards to persons and damage to property from inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage, curbing of
erosion and reduction of flood damage.
(6) To avoid and to prevent the undue overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring proper living and working conditions and preventing the development of
blight and slums.
(7) To foster a rational relationship between residential, business, commercial and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all.
(8) To protect residential, business, commercial and industrial areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land
allocated to a class of uses shall not be usurped by inappropriate uses.
(9) To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses.
(10) To establish reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform, but also to encourage innovative development design.
(11) To provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, lots and uses.
(12) To prevent such additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed by this appendix A.
(13) To define the powers and duties of administrative and enforcement officers and bodies.
(14) To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this appendix A.
(15) To implement the objectives of the Northfield comprehensive plan, enhance quality of life and protect all appropriate existing structures and uses.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 2-2: APPLICABILITY.
A. General Prohibition. No land or structure on land and no lot of record or zoning lot shall be established, built, altered, moved, divided or maintained
except in accordance with the provisions of this appendix A.
B. Private Agreements. This appendix A is not intended to nullify or enforce any private agreement or covenant. The village shall not be obligated to
recognize or enforce a private covenant or agreement, but may, in its sole discretion, choose to do so.
C. Other Laws And Regulations. Unless otherwise specifically provided, this appendix A shall control over less restrictive laws of any statute or other
ordinance and a more restrictive statute or other ordinance will control over the provisions of this appendix A. In addition to the provisions of this
appendix A, all other provisions of this code shall be applied. The corporate authorities may grant an exception to any of the requirements of this
appendix A or from any village policy or practice in order to avoid violating a person's rights which are based in the exercise of religious freedom
afforded by any federal or state law. Such an exception may be granted only after due notice and a public hearing.
D. Existing Structures. Existing structures that do not comply with the regulations of appendix A are subject to the nonconformity provisions of article
XXII of this appendix A.
E. Existing Variations And Special Use Permits. Existing variations and special use permits (including planned developments) which were validly
granted shall remain valid.
F. Applicability To Building Permits Issued Before Effective Date. Structures for which building permits were issued before the effective date of this
appendix A may be completed under the terms of the regulations in existence at the date of issuance and shall be deemed to be conforming uses or
structures. However, if a structure does not comply with the provisions of either this appendix A or the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of issuance
that structure shall be subject to the nonconformity provisions of this appendix A.
G. Applicability To Pending Applications. If a required public hearing has been held with respect to a pending application the zoning provisions in effect
on the first date of the public hearing shall apply. The provisions of this appendix A shall apply to all other applications which are pending on its
effective date. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 2-3: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
At such time as property is annexed to the village it shall be zoned, R-1 countryside residential, unless an annexation agreement with the village
prescribes otherwise. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 2-4: ZONING LOTS.
Only one principal structure is permitted on a zoning lot. The division of zoning lots shall be regulated as described in appendix B, "Subdivision
Regulations", of this code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article III. Definitions
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 274/377
Sec. 3-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this appendix A, the rules and definitions contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise. For clarity of interpretation and determination of context, the following rules of word usage shall apply:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
(2) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(3) The word "may" is permissive.
(4) The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "plots".
(5) The words "building and structures" includes all structures of every kind, it is intended that it have the broadest application possible.
(6) The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
(7) Words contained but not defined in this article shall assume definitions as prescribed in "Webster's Unabridged Dictionary". (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Sec. 3-2: TERMS DEFINED.
ACCESS. A means of vehicular or pedestrian approach, entry to or exit from a property or structure.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE/BUILDING. A detached subordinate structure or building, the use of which is incidental to and located on the same lot as that
of a principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental to and customarily associated with the specific principal use that is located on the same lot or parcel.
ACRE. An area of forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, adult retail establishments and/or other similar uses as set
forth in chapter 11, article VI of this code.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Any housing that has a sales price or rental amount that is within the means of a household that may occupy moderate income
or low income housing. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing that is affordable means housing in which mortgage, amortization, taxes, insurance
and condominium or association fees, if any, constitute no more than thirty percent (30%) of the gross annual household income for a household of a size
that may occupy the unit. In the case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is affordable means housing for which the rent and utilities constitute no more
than thirty percent (30%) of the gross annual household income for a household of the size that may occupy the unit.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. 1) Any housing that is subsidized by the federal or state government or 2) any housing in which at least
twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units are subject to covenants or restrictions that require that the dwelling units be sold or rented at prices that
preserve them as affordable housing for a period of at least fifteen (15) years, in the case of for sale housing, and at least thirty (30) years, in the case of
rental housing.
AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, content or substance of a text or a map.
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT. A facility providing for public shows, theatricals, musicals, dances, concerts, movies, circuses, carnivals, exhibitions,
arcades, pool or billiard halls, bowling alleys, video establishments and similar places offering public entertainment for which an admission or use fee may
or may not be charged.
ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams or joists of the topmost habitable story and the underside of the roof rafters.
ATTIC, HABITABLE. An attic which has: 1) a code compliant stairway as a means of access; 2) a floor area of not more than one-third (1/3) the area of the
next lower floor; 3) a ceiling height of at least seven and one-third feet (71/3') above the attic floor. If such area is greater than one-third (1/3) of the next
lower floor, it shall be considered to be another story.
AWNING. An overhead cover, often of fabric or metal designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which
projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door or the like.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building, which has one-half (1/2) or more of its floor to ceiling height below grade. The foregoing notwithstanding, if more
than 3.5 feet of basement height (clear floor to ceiling) is above grade than it shall be considered a floor. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise or fulfill other purposes.
BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot after subtracting the minimum yard and open space requirements of this appendix A. Additionally,
buildable area shall not include any floodplain, wetland or similarly designated unbuildable areas.
BUILDING. Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of a building, including chimneys and structural or architectural features and
appurtenances. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
BUILDING PERMIT. An official document issued by the building official which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion,
reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.
BUSINESS. Any commercial engagement in the manufacture, purchase, sale, lease or exchange of property or goods and/or the provision of services.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 275/377
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single-family dwelling unit occupied by persons with disabilities or impairments. As used herein, a "person with disabilities"
is any individual with one or more mental or physical impairments which: 1) are likely to continue indefinitely or for a significant period of time; and 2) result
in functional limitations in the capacity for independent living in one or more of the following areas of major life activities: self-care, receptive or expressive
language, learning, mobility or self-direction; and 3) reflect the person's need for a combination of special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or
other services. (See section 3-3 of this article.)
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE CLASS I. A community residence occupied on a relatively permanent basis by a group of four (4) or fewer unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional staff, living together as a single housekeeping unit for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family like
atmosphere.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE CLASS II. A community residence occupied on a relatively permanent basis by a group of five (5) to eight (8) unrelated
persons with disabilities, plus paid professional staff, living together as a single housekeeping unit for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family
like atmosphere. (See section 3-3 of this article.)
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE CLASS III. A community residence occupied on a relatively permanent basis by a group of more than eight (8) unrelated
persons with disabilities, plus paid professional staff, living together as a single housekeeping unit for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family
like atmosphere. (See section 3-3 of this article.)
CONTIGUOUS LOTS. Two (2) or more lots that are abutting or touching and have a boundary or portion of a boundary which is common or coterminous.
CONTRACT PURCHASER. A person who has executed a bona fide contract to purchase property within Northfield at a date certain, subject only to a
specified action on the part of the village and typical real estate contract exceptions.
CONVENT. Residential buildings and grounds used by a religious order. (See section 3-3 of this article.)
DAYCARE CENTER. A care facility receiving four (4) or more individuals for daytime care during all or part of the day.
DAYCARE HOME. A dwelling, other than a daycare center, in which a permanent occupant provides for the care of not more than three (3) individuals who
are not related to each other by blood or marriage and are not legal wards or foster children of the attendant adults.
DECK. A platform structure, either freestanding or attached to a building, open to the sky and supported by pillars or posts.
DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment, which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities and impairs their ability to live
independently where the impairment is likely to continue indefinitely or for a significant amount of time. This term does not include impairments relative to
substance abuse, communicable diseases or incarceration.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. A structure or part of a structure designed and operated to serve a patron who is seated in an automobile.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential building, containing only one dwelling unit, which is unattached to any other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, MULTIPLE. A residential building containing or designed to contain two (2) or more dwelling units. This shall include
apartments, condominiums, row houses and duplexes.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of one family maintaining a household or a community residence.
EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner, for the use by another, of a designated part of his or her own property for a specified purpose. Easements
may also come into existence by operation of law.
EXCEPTION. The exempting from compliance with a particular village policy, practice or regulation set forth in this code based on criteria set forth in the
specific policy, practice, regulation, ordinance or code provision.
FAMILY. Either of the following: 1) two (2) or more persons, related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption, together with domestic servants, all living
as one housekeeping unit using common kitchen facilities; or 2) four (4) or fewer persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit using common
kitchen facilities.
FENCE. A barrier of wood, masonry, stone, metal or manufactured material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate outdoor
areas. This term shall include fences, walls and other structural or artificial barriers that function as a wall or a fence.
FITNESS CLASS STUDIO. An establishment holding classes dedicated to improving the overall physical condition of its clientele by instruction in
exercises that are designed to improve cardiovascular endurance, increase flexibility, enhance strength and aid in restoring muscle tone.
FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of common walls separating two (2) buildings.
Floor area shall exclude the following specific areas:
Chimneys.
Decks and patios.
Exterior steps and ramps.
Unenclosed porches.
Uninhabitable attic floors.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 276/377
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The floor area of the building or buildings on a lot divided by the total land area of the lot. For the purpose of figuring floor area
ratio, floor area shall include, without limitation, the following:
Bay windows.
Enclosed accessory structures including gazebos.
Floor spaces and shafts used for mechanical, electrical and plumbing equipment, except equipment located in a basement, roof or uninhabitable
attic.
Garage space.
Habitable attic floors.
Porches enclosed on three (3) or more sides.
FOOD STORE. A grocery store, butcher store, delicatessen store, confectionery store, bakery store, butter and egg store, fruit and vegetable store, fish
store, ice cream store or any combination of the foregoing or any place where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored, offered for sale or sold at
wholesale or retail.
GARDEN APPURTENANCES. Accessory objects, such as statues, containers, fountains, ponds, birdbaths, etc., that are an element of a garden design.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any premises utilized for the dispensing, sale or offer for sale of automobile fuel or oil. (See chapter 11 of this code.)
GRADE (For Height Determination). The average (mean) of elevation measurements of the finished surface of ground taken at a distance of three feet (3')
from the exterior wall of the structure along all sides of the structure. The elevation datum must be tied to an established village bench mark. "Average
(mean)" is defined as the arithmetic sum of a series of elevation measurements taken at a maximum of three foot (3') intervals three feet (3') from the
exterior wall of the structure divided by the sum of the number of measurements taken.
HABITABLE SPACE. Any area or room lawfully designed and/or used for living or sleeping.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or business carried on in a dwelling unit. (See section 19-6 of this appendix.)
LOT, CORNER. A lot having frontage on two (2) intersecting streets. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a site that is impervious, i.e., will not absorb water. This includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by buildings,
parking structures, driveways, roads, sidewalks, decks or patios and any other paved area.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams," of this article.)
LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the property line along a public or private street.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
LOT LINE, FRONT. A lot line that abuts a street line. For purposes of establishing setbacks, all sides of a corner or double frontage lot with street frontage
shall be treated as a front lot line. If the lot does not abut a street, then the front lot line shall be determined by the director of community development
using accepted planning standards. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular lot, that
portion of the perimeter of the lot which is at least ten feet (10') long and is most parallel to and most distant from the front lot line. (See section 3-2.1,
"Diagrams", of this article.) For purposes of establishing setbacks on corner lots the rear lot line shall be considered as parallel to the front lot line which
has the least dimension.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line on a particular lot, which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
LOT LINES. The lines forming the plane geometric perimeter of a lot.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been separately recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
LOT, ZONING. A single parcel of land used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Every zoning lot must have access to a
public street either by having frontage on a public street or by a private road. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MASSAGE THERAPY. Nonmedical or nonsurgical manipulative exercises or devices that are practiced on the human body by a massage therapist. (See
chapter 11, article II, division XIV of this Code.)
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis, or as further defined by
the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act and/or rules promulgated thereunder, as amended.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients, or as further defined by the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act and/or rules promulgated thereunder, as amended.
MODEL/SHOWCASE HOMES. A single-family home temporarily open to the public for the purpose of displaying the work of interior designers, landscape
architects and/or architects. (See chapter 11, article V of this Code.)
MUNICIPAL USES. Village owned and operated land and facilities.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 277/377
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any building or structure or portion of a building or structure, lawfully existing at the time of its construction, which by
annexation, map amendment or subsequent regulation does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE. A use that lawfully existed at the time the use was established, but by annexation, map amendment or subsequent regulation
does not meet the use requirements of the district in which it is located.
OFF STREET PARKING. Space designated on a portion of a private premises for parking of the automobiles of patrons, residents or employees.
OFFICE. A room or group of rooms used for the practice of a profession, or the conduct of business or government agency work where no sales,
assembly, manufacture or storage of products takes place. This definition, likewise, does not include other more intensive uses that may be ancillary to the
office use such as warehouses, showrooms, storage of goods to be sold, outdoor storage or parking of company delivery or service vehicles.
OFFICE, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. An establishment where human patients, not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by licensed,
certified or registered healthcare professionals, including, but not limited to: physicians, dentists, chiropractors and optometrists.
OPEN SPACE. Land and/or water areas retained for use as active or passive recreation areas or for resource protection in an essentially undeveloped
state. Open spaces shall not include any paved areas.
OTHER PUBLIC USES AND STRUCTURES. A use or structure, not set forth in these definitions that has been determined to be a public use with
significant public benefit as determined by the Corporate Authorities upon recommendation of the Plan and Zoning Commission.
OUTDOOR SEATING. An outdoor use accessory to a restaurant located in an adjacent courtyard or between the restaurant and the public right-of-way.
OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of any material of any kind, including, but not limited to, items for sale, lease, processing or repair (including vehicles)
when not in a fully enclosed building.
PARK DISTRICT SPECIAL COMMUNITY AND CIVIC EVENTS. Events sponsored by the Park District or the Park District in cooperation with another
government or civic entity; the objective of which is to enhance the sense of community in the Village. Such events might include, among others, seasonal
youth activities, food tasting, food preparation competitions, musical concerts, theatrical performances, markets and outdoor movies.
PARKING LOT. An area specifically set aside for the parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING STRUCTURE. A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking that is fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck of a building.
This definition includes parking garages, deck parking and underground or under building parking areas.
PATIO. A paved, masonry, stone or other decking surface at finished grade without a permanent roof.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A standard of operation associated with a particular use or activity, which limits noise, air pollution, emission, odor,
vibration, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazard, waste, traffic or visual impact.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE. The officially adopted plan of the Village. The comprehensive plan is different from the official zoning map.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A contiguous area of minimum size to be planned and developed as single development under single ownership or
control, which includes one or more principal buildings and is processed under the planned unit development provisions of this appendix A.
PORCH, OPEN. A roofed structure attached to a building and open on two (2) or more sides. A screened in porch shall not be considered open.
PRESCHOOL. A school for children primarily between the ages of three (3) and five (5), providing preparation for elementary school.
PRIVATE LEISURE CLUB. A club devoted primarily to outdoor activities such as swimming, tennis and neighborhood picnics. (See section 3-3 of this
article.)
PSYCHOSOCIAL REHABILITATION. The providing of supportive care, counseling and training to persons with social, psychological, mental or
developmental disabilities.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY CENTER. A not for profit indoor and/or outdoor recreational and meeting facility that is owned and operated by either: a) a
governmental agency or b) a social service agency whose primary purpose is to provide programs and support for senior citizens. Such a center shall be
available for the following social and educational activities only:
Accessory recreational.
Fitness facilities.
Food service concessions.
Governmental and social service agency offices.
Gymnasiums.
Office and storage uses.
Public meeting rooms.
PUBLIC NECESSITY. A need for the good of a significant portion of the community at large, rather than a need for a particular individual or special
segment of the community.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land under the control of a public agency that is dedicated for public use to accommodate a transportation system and/or public
infrastructure.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 278/377
RECREATION CENTER. A facility intended for sports and leisure activities, operated by a park district or similar not for profit agency.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A facility, including accessory structures and uses, intended for assembly of persons for religious purposes. Religious
institutions may include churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, chapels, cathedrals and similar designations, but shall exclude convents and other
similar structures whose primary use is residential.
RESTAURANT. An eating place open to the public or accessible only to members of such eating place; where food and beverages are prepared to be
consumed at counters or tables and are served by a waiter or waitress primarily in or on nondisposable dishes or containers and where such consumption
is intended to take place within the building or at outdoor seating where such food and beverages are prepared and served.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. An interior loading facility used for the storage of personal property where individuals lease or otherwise control individual
storage spaces.
SENIOR HOUSING. Housing built in conformance with the definition of housing for older persons as stated in the "Federal Register".
SERVICE ORGANIZATION. A corporation or association organized for a social, educational or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for
participation.
SETBACK. The minimum distance as set forth in this appendix A establishing a required yard to separate a building or other structure from a public rightof-
way for motor vehicles, an access easement for motor vehicles or lot line. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
SHORT TERM DWELLING RENTAL. A single room, dwelling, or portion of a dwelling offered or advertised for rent or other consideration for a period of
less than sixty (60) consecutive days.
STABLE. A building for the shelter of horses, which is incidental to the primary residential use of the site.
STORY. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the top surface of any flooring and the top surface of the flooring above it or if
there is no other flooring above it, then the space between the surface of the topmost flooring and the next ceiling above such surface. Habitable attics
shall be considered a one-half (1/2) story. (See section 3-2.1, "Diagrams", of this article.)
STREET. Any vehicularway that: 1) is an existing State, County or Municipal roadway; or 2) is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law; or 3) is approved
by official action for other uses such as private ingress, egress or easement. Unless otherwise indicated, the term street shall refer to both public and
private streets.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, headers, columns, beams, joists or girders or
any substantial change to the roof, floor or walls.
STRUCTURE. Except for lighting fixtures, anything that is constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location and affixing to on the
ground.
TRANSITIONAL YARDS. The minimum land area, established by code, to buffer residential districts from adjacent commercial or manufacturing uses.
(See section 3-3 of this article.)
USE, PERMITTED. A use permitted in a district, upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of this appendix A, without the need for a public
hearing before a board or commission.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary use of any lot or structure.
USE, PUBLIC. A use conducted by or a facility or structure owned or managed by a unit of government.
USE, SPECIAL. A use that is specifically set forth in this appendix A, but not permitted without special administrative review, a public hearing and approval
by the Corporate Authorities.
USE, TEMPORARY. The use of property for a limited period of time for a special event, sale, gathering or similar use.
VARIATION/VARIANCE/EXCEPTION. Any departure from the strict application of any provision of this appendix A.
VETERINARY CLINIC. A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. (See section 3-
3 of this article.)
WAREHOUSE. Facilities characterized by extensive storage or materials, frequent trucking activity, but not involved in manufacturing or production.
YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the lot lines on which the building is located. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall
be used.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the front of a lot, the depth of which is the minimum permissible horizontal distance between the
public right-of-way for motor vehicles, the street line, or a private access easement for motor vehicles and the front of the main building as specified by this
appendix A for that zoning district.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the rear of a lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the rear of the main building as specified by this appendix A for that zoning district. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from
the front yard.
YARD, SIDE. A yard extending across the side of a lot, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side
lot line and the side of the main building excluding steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches as specified by this appendix A for that zoning
district.
ZONING MAP. A map adopted by the Village that delineates the extent of each district or zone.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 279/377
ZONING ORDINANCE. An ordinance enacted by the Corporate Authorities that sets forth regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of
uses of land and structures. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005; Ord. 06-1312, 12-5-2006; Ord. 13-1546, 3-19-2013; Ord. 14-1592,
6-17-2014; Ord. 19-1737, 1-15-2019; Ord. 19-1738, 2-19-2019)
Sec. 3-2.1: DIAGRAMS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 280/377
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 281/377
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 282/377
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 3-3: REGULATIONS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN DEFINED TERMS.
A. Community Residence. Any community residence must be staffed by supervisory personnel who provide care, education and/or assistance in
developing and exercising the residents' basic skills for daily living. As used here, impairments shall not include the current illegal or addictive use of a
controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the controlled substance act (21 USC 802). Further, such homes shall not include any person whose
residency would constitute a direct and demonstrable threat to the health or safety of other individuals. Such homes shall not include foster homes,
nursing homes, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts or housing facilities as an alternative to incarceration.
B. Community Residence II And III. No community residence II or III may be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of another community residence.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 283/377
C. Convent. A convent may include the following: necessary office facilities for the members residing in the convent and for their provincial activities,
dining, recreational facilities, chapel, visitor guestrooms, necessary staff housing and storage areas. A convent shall be dedicated solely to use and
occupancy.
D. Private Leisure Club. A private leisure club must be supported only by dues paying members, be in existence prior to the adoption of this appendix A
and not exceed two (2) acres in size.
E. Transitional Yard. Transitional yards shall be landscaped open spaces, free of buildings or site improvements.
F. Veterinary Clinic. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short term boarding associated with medical treatment within the principal structure. (Ord. 03
1155, 3 18 2003)
Article IV. Zoning Districts
Sec. 4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
In order to achieve the following objectives, the village of Northfield shall be divided into zoning districts which shall be set forth on the zoning map: 1) to
regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings; 2) to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of
open spaces, within and surrounding such buildings; 3) to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings
designed for specified industrial, business, residential and other uses; 4) to divide the entire municipality into districts of such number, shape, area and of
such different classes (according to use of land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of the lot area, area of open spaces or other
classification) as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this appendix A; 5) to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform; 6) to prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts; and 7) to prevent additions to and alteration or
remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed under this appendix A.
The village of Northfield is hereby divided into zoning districts as follows: (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
(1) Conservation And Residential Districts.
R-1 Countryside residential district
R-2 Single-family residential district
R-3 Single-family residential district
R-4 Single-family residential district
R-5 Single-family residential district
R-6 Multiple-family residential district
(2) Commercial Districts.
NC Neighborhood commercial district
B-1 Community commercial district
B-2 Service commercial district
VC Village center district
(3) Employment Districts.
O/R Office/research district
M-1 Light manufacturing district
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 4-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the zoning map. The districts and all notations, references and other information shown on the map are a part
of this appendix A and have the same force and effect as if the zoning map and all the notations, references and other information were fully set forth in
this appendix A. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 284/377
Sec. 4-3: VACATIONS.
Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance or plat of vacation, whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the President and Board of
Trustees, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all
areas included in the vacation shall then be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 4-4: ESSENTIAL SERVICES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS.
Essential services of underground utility companies (including the Village) in the construction of such utilities may be exempted by the Corporate
Authorities from the zoning requirements. In emergency circumstances such special exemptions may be granted by the Village Manager. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-
18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 4-5: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USE TABLE.
The following table indicates whether a particular use is a permitted or a special use within the Village. If any use is not designated as a permitted use or a
special use within a particular district, then such a use is prohibited in that district. Further, any use of any kind or nature, whether a defined term pursuant
to article III, section 3-2 of this appendix A or not, that does not appear on this permitted and special use table, is prohibited in all zoning districts.
Adult uses X
Affordable housing development X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
Amusement establishment S
S
Animal grooming X X
X
Antique store X X
X
Apparel store X X
X
Appliance repair X
X
Appliance store X
X
Art galleries S
Art gallery/studio X
X
Automated teller machine (ATM) S S
S S
Automobile leasing (no trucks) X
Automotive dealer S
S
Automotive repair X
Bakery S S
S
Bank/other financial institution X X
X
X X
Barber/beauty shop X X
X
X X
Bicycle shop X X
X
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 285/377
Bicycle stores: sales, rental and repair X
Books and periodicals shop X X
X
Cabinet sales I (less than 2,500 square feet) X
X
X X
Cabinet sales II (more than 2,500 square feet) X
X
Camera and photography equipment store X X
X
Carpet and rug store X
X
Carpet and upholstery cleaning S
Catalog sales office X
X
X X X
Catering establishment S S
S
S
Cellular/digital telephone sales X X
X
China or glass sales X
X
Clubs S S
S
Clubs and lodges: private, fraternal or religious X
Coffee shop S S
S S
Commissary kitchen (commercial kitchen for lease) S
Community center S
Community center (in existence as of January 1, 2003) X
S S
S S S
Community residence class III S
S
S
S
S
S
Community residence classes I and II X
X
X
X
X
X
Consumer electronics sales X
X
Convent S
X
Copy shop (paper graphics) X X
X S
Daycare (center) S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
S S S
Daycare (home) X
X
X
X
X
X
Department store X
X
Dressmaker/tailor X X
X
Drive-through facility S S
S
S S S
Drugstore/pharmacy S X
X
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 286/377
Dry cleaner X X
X
Dry cleaning establishments, without drive-through X
Dwelling unit, above first floor commercial X X
X
Event personal services (wedding planning, personal shopping, party planning) X
Fabricating, processing, packing, etc. (nonperishable) X
X
Fitness class studio S S
Fitness facilities with 15,000 square feet or more of floor area, including one on one
personal fitness training facilities and fitness class studios
S
Fitness facilities with less than 15,000 square feet of floor area, including one on one
personal fitness training facilities and fitness class studios
X
Florist X X
X
Food store (specialty) S S
S
Funeral homes and funeral services, excluding cemeteries S
Furniture/home furnishings store X
X
Garage >600 square feet (residential) S
S
S
Garage >900 square feet (residential) S
S
Garage >1,200 square feet (residential) S
Garden center and supply store S S
S
Gas station (only on Willow Road) S
Hardware store S X
X
Health/fitness club S S
S S
Home occupation - class I X
X
X
X
X
X
Home occupation - class II S
S
S
S
S
S
Hospital/24 hour emergency clinic S S
Housewares/kitchen store X
X
Ice cream/dessert shop S S
S
Interior decorating shop X X
X
Jewelry store X X
X
Leather goods store X
X
Light assembly manufacturing S
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 287/377
Manufacturing X
Massage therapy X
X
S X
Medical cannabis cultivation center1
Medical cannabis dispensing organization S
Medical/dental office S S
X
S S S
Multiple-family dwelling S
Municipal use X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X X X
Music, dance or athletic school X
S
Music/musical instruments store X X
X
Music or dance school X X
X
Musical instrument sales and repair X
Nail salon X X
X
Office X X
X
X X X2
Office supply store X
X
Optician and optometrist offices, including laboratories X
Other public uses and structures S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
X
S S S
Outdoor seating S S
S
Paint and wallpaper store, retail X
X
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use) S S
S
S S S
Parks and playgrounds (including Northfield Park district offices) X
X
X
X
X
X
Passenger car rental S
Personal services (such as barbershops, beauty salons, spas) X
Pet store X X
X
Photocopying and duplicating services X
Photography studios X
Picture framing shop X X
X
Planned unit development S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
S S S
Preschool S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S S
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 288/377
Printing establishment (commercial) X X
Printing trades S
Private leisure club S
Professional/higher education academy S
Professional higher education school S
Psychosocial rehabilitation S
S
Radio and television broadcasting studios X
Real estate and rental and leasing offices X
Recreation center (in existence as of January 1, 2003) S
S
S
S
S
S
Religious institution X
X
X
X
X
X
Research and laboratory X
X X
Restaurant S S
S S
Retail sales of merchandise manufactured on site X
X
School (public or private K - 12) X
X
X
X
X
X
School supply store X
X
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A) S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
S S S
Self-storage (interior loading and storage) S
S S
Senior housing X
S
Service organization S S
X
S
Sewing and craft store X X
X
Shoe store X X
X
Single-family dwelling X
X
X
X
X
X
Sporting goods store X X
X
Stable X
X
Theater (indoor) S
S
Toy, hobby and game store X X
X
Travel agency X X
X
X X
Veterinary clinic S S
S
S S S
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 289/377
Video sales or rental X X
X
Warehouse storage X
X
Wholesale sales X
X
Wholesale trade S
Wine shop S S
S
X = Permitted use in district
S = Special use in district
Notes:
1. A medical cannabis cultivation center is not permitted within the Village due to the distance requirements contained in the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq.
2. Ancillary to other M-1 uses.
The above table is for reference only. One must refer to the specific zoning district article for additional regulations. If there is any conflict or ambiguity
between the table and the text of this appendix A, the text shall prevail. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1207, 5-18-2004; Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-
2005; Ord. 10-1444, 1-19-2010; Ord. 13-1546, 3-19-2013; Ord. 14-1592, 6-17-2014; Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016; Ord. 19-1737, 1-15-2019)
Article V. R-1 Countryside Residential District
Sec. 5-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-1
Countryside Residential District. The R-1 District is intended to preserve those residential areas which are best suited for very large lot development and to
maintain the character of very low density, single-family neighborhoods. The locations of R-1 Zoned areas shall be in general accord with the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 5-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Community center (in existence as of January 1, 2003).
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Single-family dwelling.
Stable; as accessory to a residence.
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, class III.
Convent.
USES R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
R-
5
R-
6
NC
B-
1
B-
2
VC
O/R
M-
1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 290/377
Daycare center.
Garage, greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, class II.
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development (solely residential).
Preschool.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 5-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area in the R 1 District is forty thousand (40,000) square feet except for public parks which have no minimum requirement and planned
unit developments which must be at least five (5) acres.
Lots containing at least three (3) acres may be considered for planned unit developments if they meet the following criteria:
(1) The property is bounded on at least two (2) sides by arterial streets with an intersection having traffic control signals;
(2) The property abuts an R 1 residential neighborhood;
(3) The property will be developed with detached single-family residences which will have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land
area per home; and
(4) The property is located on the perimeter of the Village. (Ord. 13-1542, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 5-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
40 feet 15 feet 40 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 5-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All nonresidential developments not subject to planned unit development or special use
review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 5-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article VI. R-2 Single-Family Residential District
Sec. 6-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-2
Single-Family Residential District. The R-2 District is intended to preserve those residential areas which are best suited for somewhat larger lot
development and to maintain the character of existing low density single-family neighborhoods. The locations of R-2 zoned areas shall be in general
accord with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 291/377
Sec. 6-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Single-family dwelling.
Stable.
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, Class III.
Daycare center.
Garage, greater than nine hundred (900) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, Class II.
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development (solely residential).
Preschool.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 6-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the R-2 District is twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet except for public parks which have no minimum lot size and
planned unit developments which must be at least five (5) acres. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 6-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
37 feet 13 feet 37 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 6-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All nonresidential developments not subject to planned unit development or special use
review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 6-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 292/377
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article VII. R-3 Single-Family Residential District
Sec. 7-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-3
Single-Family Residential District. The R-3 District is designed to provide for low to medium density single-family detached development and to protect
such residential areas from the encroachment of incompatible uses. The locations of R-3 zoned areas shall be in general accord with the comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 7-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Single-family dwelling. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, Class III.
Daycare center.
Garage, greater than nine hundred (900) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, Class II.
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development (solely residential).
Preschool.
Private leisure club.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1207, 5-18-2004)
Sec. 7-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the R-3 District is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet except:
Daycare center 25,000
Park or playground None
Planned unit development (residential) 3 acres
Private leisure club 25,000
Private or public school 25,000
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 293/377
Recreation center 25,000
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1207, 5-18-2004)
Sec. 7-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
35 feet 10 feet 35 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 7-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All nonresidential developments not subject to planned unit development or special use
review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 7-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article VIII. R-4 Single-Family Residential District
Sec. 8-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-4
Single-Family Residential District. The R-4 District is designed to provide for medium density single-family detached development in Northfield and to
protect such residential areas from the encroachment of incompatible uses. The locations of R-4 zoned areas shall be in general accord with the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 8-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Single-family dwelling.
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, Class III.
Daycare center.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 294/377
Garage, greater than six hundred (600) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, Class II.
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development (solely residential).
Preschool.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 8-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the R-4 District is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, except:
Daycare center 25,000
Park or playground None
Planned unit development (residential) 3 acres
Private or public school 25,000
Recreation center 25,000
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 8-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
30 feet 7 feet 30 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 8-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All nonresidential developments not subject to planned unit development or special use
review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 8-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article IX. R-5 Single-Family Residential District
Sec. 9-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-5
Single-Family Residential District. The R-5 District is designed to provide for higher density single-family detached development in Northfield and to protect
such residential areas from the encroachment of incompatible uses. The locations of R-5 zoned areas shall be in general accord with the comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 295/377
Sec. 9-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Single-family dwelling. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, Class III.
Daycare center.
Garage, greater than six hundred (600) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, Class II.
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development (affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A).
Planned unit development (solely residential).
Preschool.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 9-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the R-5 District is six thousand (6,000) square feet, except:
Affordable single-family housing
unit (per article XVII-A of this
appendix A)
5,000 square feet
Daycare center 25,000
Park or playground None
Planned unit development (affordable
housing per article XVII-A of this
appendix A)
2 acres
Planned unit development (residential) 3 acres
Private or public school 25,000
Recreation centers 25,000
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 9-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
30 feet 6 feet 25 feet
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 296/377
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 9-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII or XVII-A of this appendix A. All special uses are subject
to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All nonresidential developments not subject to planned unit development or
special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 9-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article X. R-6 Multiple-Family Residential District
Sec. 10-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the R-6
Multiple-Family Residential District. The R-6 District is designed to provide for single-family attached and multiple-family development in Northfield in a
planned setting. The locations of R-6 zoned areas shall be in general accord with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 10-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A.
Community residence, Class I.
Community residence, Class II.
Convent.
Daycare (home).
Home occupation, Class I.
Municipal use.
Parks and playgrounds.
Religious institution.
School (private or public K through 12).
Senior housing.
Single-family dwelling. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community residence, Class III.
Daycare center.
Garage, greater than six hundred (600) square feet in floor area.
Home occupation, Class II.
Multiple-family dwelling.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 297/377
Other public uses and structures.
Planned unit development.
Planned unit development (affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A).
Preschool.
Recreation center.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 10-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the R-6 District is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet except:
Affordable single-family housing unit
(per article XVII-A of this appendix A)
6,000 square feet
Daycare center 25,000
Multiple-family dwelling1 25,000
Park or playground None
Planned unit development3 (affordable
housing per article XVII-A of this
appendix A)
25,000
Planned unit development (residential) 65,000
Private or public school 25,000
Recreation center 25,000
Senior citizen housing2 25,000
Notes:
1. 5,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit - maximum of 8 dwelling units per acre.
2. 3,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit - maximum of 10 dwelling units per acre.
3. 2,500 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit - maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 10-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear
Required yard
(principal uses)
30 feet 6 feet 25 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 0.35 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 50 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet or 21/2 stories
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 10-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII or XVII-A of this appendix A. All special uses are subject
to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All multi-family residential developments not subject to planned unit development
or special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 10-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 298/377
Article XI. NC Neighborhood Commercial District
Sec. 11-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the NC
Neighborhood Commercial District. The NC District is intended to be a commercial area, which provides products and services to meet daily living needs
serving residents in nearby neighborhoods. These areas are to be developed at a relatively low intensity and at a small scale to ensure neighborhood
compatibility. As such, sites should be of sufficient size for integrated off street parking, landscaping and loading to permit safe and efficient vehicular traffic
circulation. Within the district any traffic or parking generated by a project must be studied and planned so as not to cause a detrimental or adverse impact
on adjacent residential properties. In order to promote such business development, as is appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create
traffic or parking hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic or late hours of operation. Development within this district
should be consistent with the locations and goals as provided in the Village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 11-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Animal grooming.
Antique store.
Apparel store.
Art gallery/studio.
Banks and other financial institutions.
Barber/beauty shop.
Bicycle shop.
Books and periodicals shop.
Camera and photography equipment store.
Cellular/digital telephone sales.
Copy shop.
Dressmaking/tailor.
Dry cleaner.
Dwelling unit (above first floor commercial).
Florist.
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry store.
Municipal use.
Music/musical instruments store.
Music or dance school.
Nail salon.
Office.
Pet store.
Picture framing shop.
Sewing and craft stores.
Shoe store.
Sporting goods store.
Toy, hobby and game store.
Travel agency.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 299/377
Video sales and rental. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Automated teller machine (ATM).
Bakery.
Catering establishment.
Clubs.
Coffee shop.
Community center.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Drugstore/pharmacy.
Food store, specialty (including ice cream, candy, meat, gourmet and specialty items, but does not include a supermarket).
Garden center and supply store.
Hardware store.
Health/fitness club.
Ice cream/dessert shop.
Medical/dental offices.
Other public uses and structures.
Outdoor seating.
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Planned unit development (affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A).
Planned unit development (mixed use or commercial).
Preschool.
Professional/higher education school.
Restaurant.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Service organization.
Veterinary clinic.
Wine shop (this does not include a full service liquor store). (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 11-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the NC District is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet except:
Daycare center 25,000
Planned unit development (affordable
housing per article XVII-A of this
appendix A)
25,000 square feet
Planned unit developments 1 acre
Recreational center 25,000
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 11-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 300/377
Front Side Rear Transitional1
Required yard
(principal uses)
5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 10 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 1.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 75 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet
Note:
1. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this Code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 11-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII or XVII-A of this appendix A. All special uses are subject
to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All other developments within the NC District not subject to planned unit
development or special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord.
03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 11-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article XII. B-1 Community Commercial District
Sec. 12-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations in the B-1
community commercial district. The B-1 district is designed to provide a complete range of products and services to large geographic areas. The B-1
commercial business district is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed to serve the community. In order to promote such
business development as is appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare,
heavy truck traffic or late hours of operation. It is also the intent of this district to encourage the concentration of local business to the mutual advantage of
both the consumers and merchants. Such concentration will promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and avoid the continuance of
marginal strip business development along major streets. As such, it should permit a sufficient size site for integrated off street parking, landscaping and
loading and be adjacent to a major thoroughfare to permit safe and efficient vehicular traffic circulation. Within this district the traffic flow and parking must
be planned so as not to have a detrimental impact on adjacent residential property. Development within this district should be consistent with the locations
and goals as provided in the village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 12-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Adult uses (see chapter 11, article VI of this code).
Animal grooming.
Antique store.
Apparel store.
Appliance stores and appliance repair.
Art gallery/studio.
Automobile leasing (no trucks).
Bank and other financial institutions.
Barber/beauty shop.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 301/377
Bicycle shop.
Books and periodicals store.
Cabinet sales I.
Camera and photography equipment store.
Carpet and rug store.
Catalog sales office.
Cellular/digital telephone sales.
China or glass sales.
Consumer electronics sales.
Copy shop (paper graphics).
Department store.
Dressmaker/tailor.
Drugstore/pharmacy.
Dry cleaner.
Dwelling unit (above first floor commercial).
Florist.
Furniture/home furnishings store.
Hardware store.
Housewares/kitchen stores.
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry store.
Leather goods store.
Massage therapy.
Municipal use.
Music/musical instruments store.
Music or dance school.
Nail salon.
Office.
Office supply store.
Paint and wallpaper store, retail.
Pet store.
Picture framing shop.
School supply store.
Sewing and craft store.
Shoe store.
Sporting goods store.
Toy, hobby and game store.
Travel agency.
Video sales or rental. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 302/377
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Amusement establishment.
Automated teller machine (ATM).
Automotive dealer.
Bakery.
Catering establishment.
Clubs.
Coffee shop.
Community center.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Food store (including ice cream, candy, meat, gourmet and specialty items).
Garden center and supply store.
Health/fitness club.
Ice cream/dessert shop.
Medical/dental office.
Other public uses and structures.
Outdoor seating.
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Planned unit development (affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A).
Planned unit development (commercial or mixed use).
Preschool.
Psychosocial rehabilitation.
Restaurant.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Service organization.
Theater (indoor).
Veterinary clinic.
Wine shop. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 12-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the B-1 district is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a minimum of eighty feet (80') of frontage except:
Community center 25,000
Planned unit developments 2 acres
Planned unit developments (commercial) 2 acres
Planned unit developments (mixed units
with affordable housing)
25,000
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 12-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear Transitional1
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 303/377
Required yard
(principal uses)
30 feet 10 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 1.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 80 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet
Note:
1. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this Code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 12-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII or XVII-A of this appendix A. All special uses are subject
to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All other developments within the B-1 District not subject to planned unit
development or special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord.
03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 12-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article XII.1 B-2 SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Sec 12.1-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the B-2
Service Commercial District. The Service Commercial District regulations are intended to provide for service oriented businesses, offices, limited light
manufacturing and industrial operations and regulated uses where such uses will cause the least disruption of the residential character of the Village. Bulk
and height regulations and specific standards will encourage clean and quiet operations which protect other uses and properties within the district as well
as properties within adjacent districts in order to enhance real estate values throughout the Village. The B-2 Service Commercial District is designed to
provide for business activities that do not create appreciable nuisances or hazards and that allow for a pleasant environment. Development within this
district should be consistent with the locations and goals as provided for in the Village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 12.1-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Bank or other financial institutions.
Bicycle stores: sales, rental and repair.
Cabinet sales I and II.
Catalog sales offices.
Clubs and lodges: private, fraternal or religious.
Dry cleaning establishments, without drive-through.
Event personal services (wedding planning, personal shopping, party planning).
Fabricating, processing, packing (nonperishable).
Fitness facilities with less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area, including one on one personal fitness training facilities and fitness
class studios.
Massage therapy.
Medical/dental office.
Municipal uses.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 304/377
Musical, dance or athletic schools.
Musical instrument sales and repair.
Offices.
Optician and optometrist offices, including laboratories.
Other public uses and structures.
Personal services (such as barbershops, beauty salons, spas).
Photocopying and duplicating services.
Photography studios.
Radio and television broadcasting studios.
Real estate and rental and leasing offices.
Research and laboratory.
Retail sales of merchandise manufactured on site.
Service organization.
Travel agency.
Warehouse storage.
Wholesale sales.
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Art galleries.
Carpet and upholstery cleaning.
Catering establishments.
Commissary kitchen (commercial kitchen for lease).
Community center.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Fitness facilities with fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more of floor area, including one on one personal fitness training facilities and fitness
class studios.
Funeral homes and funeral services, excluding cemeteries.
Light assembly manufacturing.
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Passenger car rental.
Planned unit developments.
Printing trades.
Professional/higher education academy.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Self-storage (interior loading and storage).
Veterinary clinic.
Wholesale trade. (Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 12.1-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the B-2 district is forty thousand (40,000) square feet except:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 305/377
Community center 25,000
Planned unit developments 3 acres
(Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 12.1-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side1 Rear Transitional2
Required yard (principal uses) 25 feet 10 feet 30 feet 25 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 2.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 90 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet
Lot frontage Minimum of 100 feet
Notes:
1. A 25 foot side yard is required if the side yard is adjacent to a residential use or a property designated for residential in the comprehensive plan.
2. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this Code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 12.1-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
The following special requirements shall apply to property within the B-2 District which is adjacent to property zoned as single-family residential:
(1)Natural vegetation located on the stream bank shall be maintained by the property owner in order to screen residences from commercial activity.
(2)No parking facility of any sort is permitted within thirty feet (30') of any single-family residential property.
(3)The exterior of each building must be constructed with brick and all new or renovated building elevations shall be subject to approval by the
Architectural Commission.
(4)No windows or doors may be installed on the west side of any building, except as required by Building or Life Safety Codes.
(5)No exterior lighting shall be permitted on the west side of any structure. Any exterior building lighting must be directed onto the structure and the
light source shielded from adjacent residential property.
(6)An eight foot (8') high solid fence shall be installed and maintained at building grade along the entire north, west and south edges of the developed
area on the west side of Northfield Road. The fence shall be maintained by the property owner and their successors in perpetuity.
(7)Fallen trees blocking the flow of the river shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the fallen tree was originally located. (Ord. 16-
1661, 9-20-2016)
Sec. 12.1-6: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as outlined in article XVI of this appendix A. All other developments within the B-2 District not subject to planned unit development or
special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-
2016)
Sec. 12.1-7: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016)
Article XIII. VC Village Center District
Sec. 13-1: PURPOSE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 306/377
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the VC Village
Center District. The VC District is the main civic, business and mixed use core of the Village. It includes a wide range of retail, service, office and
institutional uses within a geographically compact area near the center of the Village. The Village Center area is intended to be the core of the community's
retail activity. Height and bulk regulations, site plan review and specific standards are intended to ensure high quality architectural and site plan design. All
such development should promote a planned, pedestrian oriented Village Center compatible with the character of the Village as a whole that will
strengthen real estate values throughout the Village. It is further deemed appropriate that the Village Center District contain some housing for young
professionals, area residents seeking to downsize their homes, and aging residents provided that it is part of an overall development project that is
designed to take advantage of the variety of retail uses, commercial and civic services, and office and employment areas provided in a relatively compact
and intensive core of the Village.
While the village center is intended to create an inviting pedestrian environment, sufficient parking must also be provided for the patrons, employees and
residents of the district. Off street parking lots, loading areas and drive-through facilities must be designed with appropriate screening and located so as
not to dominate the street frontages. The village center district is ideally situated and well served by major thoroughfares and arterial roadways. Therefore,
safe, efficient and convenient vehicular traffic access and circulation must be provided within the district. The traffic and parking impacts of each
development proposal must be studied and planned so as not to cause adverse effects on adjacent properties. Development within this district should be
consistent with the locations and goals as provided for in the village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 13-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Animal grooming.
Antique store.
Apparel store.
Appliance stores and appliance repair.
Art gallery/studio.
Bank and other financial institution.
Barber/beauty shop.
Bicycle shop.
Books and periodicals store.
Cabinet sales I (less than 2,500 square feet).
Camera and photography equipment store.
Carpet and rug store.
Catalog sales office.
Cellular/digital telephone sales.
China or glass sales.
Consumer electronics sales.
Copy shop.
Department store.
Dressmaker/tailor.
Drugstore/pharmacy.
Dry cleaner.
Dwelling unit (above first floor commercial).
Florist.
Furniture/home furnishings store.
Hardware store.
Housewares/kitchen store.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 307/377
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry store.
Leather goods store.
Municipal use.
Music/musical instruments store.
Music or dance school.
Nail salon.
Office.
Office supply store.
Paint and wallpaper store, retail.
Pet store.
Picture framing shop.
School supply store.
Sewing and craft store.
Shoe store.
Sporting goods store.
Toy, hobby and game store.
Travel agency.
Video sales or rental. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Amusement establishment.
Automated teller machine (ATM).
Bakery.
Catering establishment.
Clubs.
Coffee shop.
Community center.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Fitness class Studio.
Food store (including ice cream, candy, meat, gourmet and specialty items).
Garden center and supply store.
Gas station (on Willow Road) (see chapter 11 of this code).
Health/fitness club.
Hospital/twenty four (24) hour emergency clinic.
Ice cream/dessert shop.
Massage therapy.
Medical/dental office.
Other public uses and structures.
Outdoor seating.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 308/377
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Planned unit development (affordable housing per article XVII-A of this appendix A).
Planned unit development (commercial or mixed use).
Preschool.
Restaurant.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Senior housing.
Service organization.
Theater (indoor).
Veterinary clinic.
Wine shop. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005; Ord. 13-1546, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 13-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
There is no minimum lot area for lots in the VC district except planned unit developments which must be at least one-half (1/2) acre or planned unit
developments with affordable housing which must have a land area of at least twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd.
Ord. 05-1231, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 13-4: BULK REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear Transitional1
Required yard
(principal uses)
None None None Match the yard
requirement of
any abutting
residential
district lot
Floor area ratio Maximum of 2.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 90 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 45 feet or 31/2 stories, whichever is lower
Note:
1. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 13-5: VCOD - VILLAGE CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT.
A. Purpose. The village center district benefits from a desirable location adjacent to the Edens Expressway and it is recognized that those properties
abutting this regional thoroughfare are appropriate for more intensive use than other village center properties. These key properties provide an
excellent opportunity to promote the presence of the village's main civic, business and mixed use core. As such, increased building heights and
residential densities are permitted for properties within the village center overlay district. Development within this overlay district should be consistent
with the location and goals as provided in the village's comprehensive plan.
B. Bulk Regulations. The following provisions supplement the bulk regulations set forth in section 13-4 of this article for the VCOD.
Building
height
Maximum of 60 feet or 6 stories. The village board, on the recommendation of the plan and zoning commission and the architectural
commission may approve a building height of 80 feet or 8 stories provided the enhanced design meets the economic and parking criteria
of the village center design guidelines as determined by the village board1.
Upper
story
setbacks
Stories above the third floor shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential district and any story above
the fifth floor shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential district.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 309/377
Note:
1. The commissions and the village board shall give consideration to the following factors, among others, in determining whether or not to grant an
increase in height above 60 feet:
a. The architectural and overall aesthetic quality of the building. This shall include not only the visual impact and style of the building, but the
attention to detail and materials. Sloping roofs should be included.
b. The environmental friendliness or "green" quality of the building and landscaping, including the use of covered walkways.
c. Any height above 4 stories should not cover more than 65 percent of the footprint of the building.
d. Any height above 6 stories should not cover more than 35 percent of the footprint of the building.
e. The first floor should be devoted to high quality retail tenants that would provide above market sales tax per square foot rates, demand higher than
market rates on tenant build out and lease rates.
f. Provision of additional parking that will benefit the entire village center district.
(Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 13-6: RROD - RIVER RESPONSE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
The village center district benefits from the presence of the Middle Fork of the north branch of the Chicago River along its western district boundary line.
This natural resource provides an opportunity to create an aesthetically appealing and pedestrian friendly corridor. Redevelopment of village center
properties along this waterway must address this distinctive feature and incorporate appropriate setbacks and provide the opportunity for pedestrian
linkages. Development within this overlay district should be consistent with the location and goals as provided for in the village's comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 13-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII or XVII-A of this appendix A. All special uses are subject
to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A.
The entire village center zoning district, along with the overlay districts as set forth above, shall be considered an area of special development control
which shall apply to any new use, change of use, new structure, addition to a structure or interior modification that may result in a more intensive use.
(1) Public Hearing. No change as set forth above shall be permitted in the village center district except pursuant to a public hearing before the plan
and zoning commission of the village, the submission of findings and recommendations to the president and board of trustees of the village of
Northfield and a determination by the president and board of trustees that:
(a) The proposed change is in conformance with the village's comprehensive plan; and
(b) Will not cause an increase in parking problems, traffic or congestion; and
(c) Will not compromise pedestrian safety; and
(d) The proposed change is in the best interest of the economic development of the village; and
(e) The physical characteristics of the structure will be consistent with recent development in the village center district; and (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-
2008)
(f) The proposed change is in conformance with the village center design guidelines. (Ord. 09-1403, 1-20-2009)
(2) Consistency. The foregoing shall apply even if the proposed use change is otherwise permitted within the Village Center District and the Village
may attach such conditions as it deems appropriate to cause the proposed change to be consistent with the standards set forth in subsection (1) of
this section.
(3) Exceptions. The following changes may be approved by the Director of Community Development so long as the changes are otherwise in
compliance with Village codes:
(a) If the nature of the use is unchanged (i.e., retail to retail) and will involve no additional parking and no exterior change other than signage.
(b) Additions that are smaller than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area, but only if the use remains unchanged.
(c) An affordable housing development which is in compliance with article XVII-A of this appendix A. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 13-7A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article XIV. O/R Office/Research District
Sec. 14-1: PURPOSE.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 310/377
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the O/R
Office/Research District. The O/R District is intended to be a mix of office uses, research and testing facilities in high quality, well designed settings. It is
intended to permit only those office uses which are compatible with the community as a whole. Bulk and height regulations, specific standards and
architectural review requirements shall encourage high quality architectural and site design of limited intensity which is compatible with the character of the
Village as a whole and which will enhance real estate values throughout the Village. In addition, the district is intended to establish a buffer between the
high intensity expressway or other business uses and the lower intensity residential areas. Development within this district should be consistent with the
locations and goals as provided in the Village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 14-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Bank or other financial institution.
Barber/beauty shop.
Catalog sales office.
Massage therapy.
Municipal use.
Office.
Printing establishment (commercial).
Research and laboratory.
Travel agency.
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Automated teller machine (ATM).
Automotive dealer.
Coffee shop.
Community center.
Copy shop (paper graphics).
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Health and fitness club.
Hospital/24-hour emergency clinic.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization.
Medical/dental office.
Other public uses and structures.
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Planned unit development (office or commercial).
Preschool.
Psychosocial rehabilitation.
Restaurant.
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Self-service storage (interior loading).
Veterinary clinic. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 14-1592, 6-17-2014)
Sec. 14-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 311/377
The minimum lot area for lots in the O/R District is forty thousand (40,000) square feet except:
Community center 25,000
Planned unit developments 3 acres
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 14-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side Rear Transitional1
Required yard
(principal uses)
10 feet 10 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 2.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 90 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet
Lot frontage Minimum of 100 feet
Note:
1. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this Code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 14-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A. All other developments within the O/R District not subject to planned unit development
or special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Sec. 14-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article XV. M-1 Light Manufacturing District
Sec. 15-1: PURPOSE.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this appendix A when referred to in this article, are the district regulations for the M-1 light
manufacturing district. The light manufacturing district regulations are intended to provide for manufacturing, industrial, administrative, research and
related uses in areas where such uses will cause the least disruption of the residential character of the village. Bulk and height regulations and specific
standards will encourage clean and quiet operations which protect other uses and properties within the district as well as properties within adjacent
districts in order to enhance real estate values throughout the village. The M-1 light manufacturing district is designed to provide for industrial activities that
do not create appreciable nuisance or hazards and that allow for a pleasant environment. Development within this district should be consistent with the
locations and goals as provided for in the village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1749 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1750 - MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE . Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 15-2: USE REGULATIONS.
A. Permitted Uses.
Automotive repair.
Cabinet sales I and II.
Catalog sales office.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 312/377
Fabricating, processing, packing (nonperishable).
Manufacturing.
Municipal use.
Office.
Printing establishment, commercial.
Research and laboratory.
Retail sales of merchandise manufactured on site.
Warehouse storage.
Wholesale sales. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
B. Special Uses. (See article XVI of this appendix A for standards.)
Community center.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facility.
Fitness class studio.
Medical/dental office.
Music, dance or athletic school.
Other public uses and structures.
Parking structure or surface parking (as a principal use).
Planned unit developments (industrial).
Seasonal and temporary uses (see article XIX of this appendix A).
Self-storage (interior loading and storage).
Veterinary clinic. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1207, 5-18-2004; Ord. 10-1444, 1-19-2010; Ord. 13-1546, 3-19-2013)
Sec. 15-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
The minimum lot area for lots in the M-1 district is forty thousand (40,000) square feet except:
Community center 25,000
Planned unit developments 3 acres
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 15-4: AREA REGULATIONS.
Front Side1 Rear Transitional2
Required yard
(principal uses)
50 feet 10 feet 30 feet 25 feet
Floor area ratio Maximum of 2.0 for all uses
Lot coverage Maximum of 90 percent (includes all impervious surfaces)
Building height Maximum of 35 feet
Lot frontage Minimum of 100 feet
Notes:
1. A 25 foot side yard is required if the side yard is adjacent to a residential use or a property designated for residential in the comprehensive plan.
2. Transitional yards are exclusive landscaped open space, free of any building or site improvements. See chapter 10 of this Code for landscaping
requirements. Transitional yards apply along any nonresidential property line adjoining a residential district or a property designated for residential in the
comprehensive plan.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 313/377
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 15-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
All planned unit developments are subject to the conditions and review as set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. All special uses are subject to the
conditions and review as outlined in article XVI of this appendix A. All other developments within the M-1 District not subject to planned unit development
or special use review procedures shall be subject to Architectural Commission site plan review as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Sec. 15-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Article XVI. Special Uses
Sec. 16-1: PURPOSE.
In order to provide for consideration of certain uses not otherwise permitted within a zoning district, a property owner may apply to the Corporate
Authorities for approval of a special use for those uses specifically enumerated as such within the applicable district or as outlined in article XXI of this
appendix A.
A special use is a conditional use and as such is a privilege to be earned and not a right which can be claimed simply upon complying with the standards
established in this article. The Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Corporate Authorities may require any reasonable condition to
promote proper development or assimilation of the proposed use into the community. Such conditions may be stricter than any requirement or limitation
stated elsewhere in this Code. It is not intended that the Corporate Authorities automatically grant a special use. The Corporate Authorities may: 1) deny
the application; 2) refer the application back to the Plan and Zoning Commission for further consideration; or 3) adopt an ordinance approving the special
use. The Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend for approval and the Corporate Authorities may approve only those special uses which will benefit
the Village. Each special use shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood, reflective of the objectives of the zoning district within which it is
proposed and consistent with the objectives of the Village's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-2: AUTHORITY.
The Corporate Authorities have sole jurisdiction to approve a special use. A public hearing shall be held and the Plan and Zoning Commission shall issue
written recommendations in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of this Code. No use identified by this appendix A as a "special use" shall be
established without the approval of the Corporate Authorities in accordance with the standards established in this article. Any addition to change in or
expansion of an existing special use shall be permitted only in accordance with the same procedures and standards established under this article for
original special uses. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-3: STANDARDS FOR CONSIDERATION.
The following standards shall be utilized in considering special use applications. These standards shall be used as a framework within which the village
may test the appropriateness of the use at a specific location.
(1) The special use shall conform with the general planning policies, goals and objects of the village's comprehensive plan.
(2) The special use shall be compatible with the uses of surrounding properties and with the character of the neighborhood in which the special use is
to be located.
(a) Potential adverse effects on nearby properties shall be mitigated through the building design, site design, landscaping and screening.
(b) Potential adverse effects on nearby properties by the operation of the use may be minimized through limiting or placing conditions on the hours of
operation, noise, delivery activities, refuse collection and lighting.
(3) The proposed special use may not cause an undue burden on any of the public infrastructure and/or will not diminish the existing tax base.
(a) If the tax base will be diminished, the applicant must provide a written report detailing the public service to be rendered by the operation of the
special use.
(4) The special use will not have adverse environmental impacts.
(a) Adequate garbage and debris removal will be provided to serve the special use. In addition, all refuse will be stored in fully enclosed areas
designed to minimize the impact on adjacent land uses.
(b) The special use must assure that levels of noise, odor, vibration and light pollution are the minimum that technologically and commercially are
feasible and must meet the performance standards of this code.
(5) There will be no negative impact as a result of the traffic, parking and circulation on the property and the surrounding area.
(a) The property must provide for adequate and safe vehicular and pedestrian access, vehicle stacking spaces and loading areas to serve the
special use.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 314/377
(b) Adequate parking areas will be provided to accommodate the special use.
(c) The special use will not generate traffic that is uncharacteristic of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(d) Adequate measures already exist or will be taken to provide ingress and egress to the proposed use in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion
on the public streets.
(6) The special use shall provide amenities that enhance the neighborhood in which it is located.
(7) The design of the special use will be an enhancement to the neighborhood. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-4: MANDATORY FINDINGS.
No special use shall be recommended by the plan and zoning commission unless the commission shall find in the affirmative as to each of the following:
(1) The establishment, maintenance and operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or
general welfare.
(2) The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor diminish or impair property values
within the neighborhood.
(3) The special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for those uses that are specifically
permitted in the district.
(4) Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided to serve the special use.
(5) Adequate measures have been or will be taken to ensure safe ingress and egress to the public streets.
(6) The special use conforms in all other respects to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as to those regulations which
may, in each instance, be modified by the Corporate Authorities after considering the recommendations of the Plan and Zoning Commission.
(7) Provisions or penalties are in place to assure that the special use is maintained in strict compliance with the standards established by the special
use ordinance.
(8) The tax base will not be diminished by the operation of the special use or if the tax base is diminished, that the benefit to the residents of the Village
of Northfield will outweigh the burden of diminishing the tax base.
(9) Unless specifically stated otherwise, each special use shall be personal and limited to the petitioner. Upon a change in or transfer of ownership the
special use shall lapse. For purpose of this section change in ownership shall occur when the person to whom the special use was granted holds
less than fifty one percent (51%) ownership interest in the use. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-5: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
All special use applications are subject to the complete review and submittal process before the staff, Plan and Zoning Commission and Corporate
Authorities as set forth in chapter 4 of this Code and all other Village regulations. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-5A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 16-6: AREA REGULATIONS.
If a special use involves any structure or other site elements not in compliance with the regulations of the district in which the special use is to be located,
then no special use approval shall be granted unless variations have been granted with respect to such noncomplying features. In the case of any special
use application, the Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board may approve exceptions to the applicable bulk and area
regulations of this appendix A as are deemed necessary and appropriate. Necessity and appropriateness shall be determined in accord with the variation
procedures set forth in chapter 4, article IX of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-7: CHANGES IN SPECIAL USE.
Except as provided below, any modifications to an approved special use shall require separate review and approval under this article as an amendment to
the special use. Any application for approval of such a change, addition or expansion shall be filed, processed, reviewed, and approved or denied in the
same manner as an original special use application.
(1) Minor Field Changes. Unless specifically referenced in the special use, minor changes in locations or sizes shown on exhibits may be approved, in
writing, by the Director of Community Development. Typically, a minor field change will not involve a percentage change greater than three percent
(3%). However, not all changes of less than three percent (3%) shall necessarily be deemed to be minor. The determination of the Director of
Community Development as to whether a change is a minor field change shall be final.
(2) Village Board Approved Changes. The Village Board may approve, without referral to the Plan and Zoning Commission, such other changes as it
finds: a) are in the best interest of the Village; b) do not involve changes in numerical values found in the text of the special use ordinance; and c) do
not have a substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties. The determination of the Village Board as to whether a requested change should be
referred to the Plan and Zoning Commission shall be final.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 315/377
(3) Changes Requiring A Public Hearing. Any change involving a size, quantity or other numerical value found in the text of the ordinance or any
change having substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties shall not be made except after a public hearing before the plan and zoning
commission. Additionally, the village board or the director of community development may refer any requested change to the plan and zoning
commission for public hearing when either believes it would be in the best interest of the village to do so.
If a developer requests more than two (2) changes pursuant to subsection (2) or (3) of this section, the third and subsequent change may be granted only
upon the affirmative vote of at least five (5) of the members of the corporate authorities. Such a third or subsequent change will be considered only after
the establishment of a cash escrow with the village in an amount, as estimated by the director of community development and building, that will cover all
village costs including, but not limited to, all outside consultant fees. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-8: LAPSE OR DISCONTINUATION.
The approval of a special use shall lapse and be of no further force and effect unless a building permit has been issued or if no building permit was
required, the petitioner has taken occupancy of the site within one year after the date of the ordinance approving the special use. An applicant who has
obtained special use approval may request an extension of this time period by filing with the director of community development a letter stating the
reasons for the request. The director of community development shall transmit the letter to the corporate authorities, which in its sole discretion, may grant
the request if good cause is shown by the applicant.
Any discontinuation of an approved special use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall constitute abandonment and the approval
of the special use shall automatically lapse. This shall not apply, however, to a special use, which is seasonal in nature, such as outdoor eating areas so
long as the use continues in operation each season. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 16-9: SEQUENTIAL FILINGS.
No application for a special use shall be filed with or accepted by the director of community development, which is identical or substantially similar to an
application, which has been denied by the board of trustees within the previous three hundred sixty five (365) days for the same site. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Article XVII. Planned Unit Developments
Sec. 17-1: PURPOSE.
In order to facilitate advantageous developments of larger tracts of land under a unitary site plan compatible with the existing uses within any zoning
district and neighboring areas, the owner or owners of land may apply to the corporate authorities for approval of a planned unit development in
compliance with the regulation as set forth in this article.
A planned unit development is a special use which is a privilege to be earned and not a right which can be claimed simply by complying with the standards
established in this article. The village board may: 1) deny the application; 2) refer it back to the plan and zoning commission for further consideration or; 3)
adopt an ordinance approving the planned unit development. The plan and zoning commission may recommend and the village board may require any
design modification or other condition which will promote appropriate development to the benefit of the community. It is not intended that the village board
shall automatically grant the use exceptions or density increases proposed for a planned unit development. The plan and zoning commission shall
recommend and the village board shall grant only such exceptions and/or density increases which will clearly benefit the village. The planned unit
development should provide amenities not otherwise required in this appendix A and establish facilities and open space greater than the minimum
otherwise required. As a condition for approval, each planned unit development must be compatible with the character and objectives of the zoning district
within which it is located and each planned unit development shall be consistent with the objectives of the village's comprehensive plan. The plan and
zoning commission and village board shall consider the additional objectives set forth in this article for planned unit developments. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Sec. 17-2: AUTHORITY.
The corporate authorities have the sole authority to approve planned unit developments as a special use under this appendix A. A public hearing shall be
held and the plan and zoning commission shall issue written recommendations in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of this code. An approved
planned unit development shall be an "overlay" zone so that the property retains the underlying zoning of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 03-1155,
3-18-2003)
Sec. 17-3: OBJECTIVES.
A. A residential planned unit development shall:
(1) Offer residential settings that promote appropriate architecture features and encourage the placement of structures in proper relationship to the
natural characteristics of the site; and
(2) Preserve natural environmental areas that achieve a sense of spaciousness and counteract the effects of urban monotony, congestion and paving;
and
(3) When located within an established neighborhood, provide harmonious architecture and site design at a scale, character and density that are
appropriate to the site and surrounding areas.
B. A commercial planned unit development shall:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 316/377
(1) Promote the cooperative development of business or commercial centers with adequate off street parking and controlled access points on
thoroughfares; and
(2) Promote the separation of pedestrian areas from vehicular traffic areas; and
(3) Enhance property values; and
(4) Develop centers which have a size and location compatible with the market potential; and
(5) Provide buffers from adjacent residential areas and encourage harmonious architecture between adjacent commercial structures and residential
areas; and
(6) Provide enhanced amenities such as plazas, parks, fountains and decorative plantings; and
(7) Promote quality design and architecture.
Commercial planned unit developments might include retail, general or professional offices, service uses and residential uses above these commercial
uses.
C. An industrial planned unit development shall:
(1) Promote the establishment of industrial parks which permit groups of industrial buildings with integrated design and coordinated traffic and site
planning; and
(2) Promote the separation of pedestrian areas from vehicular traffic areas; and
(3) Offer industrial settings that promote appropriate architectural features and encourage the placement of structures in proper relationship to the
natural characteristics of the site; and
(4) Promote quality design and architecture; and
(5) Provide buffers from adjacent commercial or residential areas and encourage harmonious architecture between adjacent commercial structures and
residential areas. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 17-4: STANDARDS FOR CONSIDERATION.
Modifications to conventional zoning and subdivision regulations is a privilege and will be considered by the village only upon evidence of tangible benefits
from the planned unit development to the village as a whole and to the neighborhood in which it is proposed. These benefits shall be in the form of
exceptional amenities, landscape, architectural, site design or special manmade features or the conservation of natural features on the site.
The following standards shall be utilized in considering an application for a planned unit development that requires modifications to the conventional
zoning. These standards shall be used as a framework within which the village can test the quality of the amenities, design and desirability of the proposal.
(1) Site Design. A planned unit development shall be laid out and developed with an integrated overall design concept. The design shall provide for the
safe, efficient, convenient and harmonious grouping of structures, uses and facilities. The design of both interior and exterior space shall be
appropriate to the intended uses and the community.
(2) Open Space. Common open space in the planned unit development shall be integrated into overall design. Such space shall have a direct
functional or visual relationship to the main building(s) and not be isolated either spatially or in character. The following shall not be deemed to be
common open space for purposes of this standard:
(a) Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner.
(b) Dedicated streets, alleys and other public rights of way.
(c) Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage area.
(d) Strips of land that are unusable because of their narrowness or irregular shape.
(3) Functional And Mechanical Features. Storage areas, trash and garbage retainers, mechanical equipment, service areas, loading areas, utility
buildings, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be specifically accounted for in the design of the planned unit development. These shall
be designed with special planting or other screening methods to ensure that they are unobtrusive and blend seamlessly with the project and
surrounding properties.
(4) Visual And Acoustical Privacy. The planned unit development shall provide for reasonable visual and acoustical privacy. Fences, insulation,
walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used to reduce noise, enhance aesthetics, provide privacy to occupants and to screen objectionable views.
(5) Environmental Conservation. The planned unit development shall conserve and enhance special landscape features on the site such as trees,
streams, ponds, wetlands, groves and animal habitat.
(6) Drives, Parking And Circulation. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall, in each instance, be the subject of a separately drawn and titled
architectural or engineering plan. Special attention shall be given to the location and number of access points to the public streets and the width and
access points of interior drives. This shall include general interior circulation patterns, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, adequate
provision for service by emergency vehicles and arrangement of parking areas that are safe, convenient and aesthetically pleasing both on site and
off site. Designs which integrate improvements in parking, vehicular traffic and pedestrian movements within the area are strongly encouraged.
(7) Surface Water Drainage. Special attention shall be given to surface drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Systems which improve the general drainage, quality of water runoff and/or detention
capacity within a watershed area are strongly encouraged.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 317/377
(8) Comprehensive Plan. The planned unit development shall conform with the planning policies, goals and objectives stated within the village's
comprehensive plan.
(9) Personal To The Petitioner. Unless specifically stated otherwise, each planned unit development shall be personal and limited to the petitioner.
Upon a change in or transfer of ownership, the planned unit development shall lapse. For purposes of this section, change in ownership shall occur
when the person to whom the planned unit development was granted holds less than fifty one percent (51%) ownership interest in the use.
(10) Standards Shall Apply. All of the standards for a special use shall be applied unless in conflict with this article. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 17-5: MANDATORY FINDINGS.
In order for the plan and zoning commission to make a positive recommendation and for the corporate authorities to approve an application for a planned
unit development, an affirmative finding must be made with respect to each of the following matters:
(1) The establishment, maintenance and operation of the planned unit development will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare.
(2) The planned unit development will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
(3) The planned unit development will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for those uses that
are specifically permitted in the district.
(4) Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
(5) Ingress and egress either has been or pursuant to mandatory conditions shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(6) The planned unit development conforms in all respects to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by the corporate authorities after considering the recommendations of the plan and zoning commission.
(7) Provisions or penalties are in place to assure that the planned unit development is maintained in strict compliance with the minimum standards
established by the planned unit development ordinance. This shall be the requirements of an ongoing legal entity such as a homeowners'
association, owner or management entity whose responsibilities for the planned unit development requirements run with the land. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-
18-2003)
Sec. 17-6: USE EXCEPTIONS.
The Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board may authorize specified uses not otherwise permitted by the use regulations of
the district in which the development is located, provided that the Plan and Zoning Commission makes each of the following findings:
(1) The use for which the exception is proposed is necessary or clearly desirable and is appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the planned
unit development;
(2) The use for which the exception is proposed will not have a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood or community. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
Sec. 17-7: EXCEPTIONS.
The Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may authorize, any exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this
appendix A, provided the recommendation or grant is supported by the following findings, which shall be based on evidence in the procedural record:
(1)That the exception meets the standards for consideration contained in section 17-4 of this article; and
(2)That the exception is solely for the purpose of promoting a unified site plan and of meeting the objectives contained in section 17-3 of this article and
the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 18-1706, 2-20-2018)
Sec. 17-8: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
All planned unit developments are subject to the review and approval process before the Plan and Zoning Commission and Corporate Authorities as set
forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 17-8A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the Comprehensive Plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is
entirely elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 17-9: CHANGES IN THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
A planned unit development shall be developed and maintained in strict and total accordance with the approved and recorded final plan and all supporting
data. The recorded final plan and supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 318/377
and assigns and shall limit and control the use of premises (including the internal use of buildings and structures) and location of structures in the planned
unit development. Changes in a planned unit development may only be made as follows:
(1) Minor Field Changes. Minor changes in locations or sizes shown on exhibits may be approved, in writing, by the Director of Community
Development. Typically, a minor field change will not involve a percentage change greater than three percent (3%). However, not all changes of less
than three percent (3%) shall necessarily be deemed to be minor. The determination of the Director of Community Development as to whether a
change is a minor field change shall be final.
(2) Village Board Approved Changes. The Corporate Authorities may approve, without referral to the Plan and Zoning Commission, such other
changes as it finds are: a) in the best interest of the Village, and b) do not involve changes in numerical functions or values found in the text of the
planned unit development, and c) do not have a substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties. The determination of the Corporate Authorities as
to whether a requested change should be referred to the Plan and Zoning Commission shall be final.
(3) Changes Requiring A Public Hearing. Any change involving a size, quantity or other numerical value found in the text of the planned unit
development or any change having substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties shall not be made except after a public hearing before the Plan
and Zoning Commission. Additionally, the Corporate Authorities or the Director of Community Development may refer any requested change to the
plan and zoning commission for public hearing when either believes it would be in the best interest of the village to do so.
If a developer requests more than two (2) changes pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the third and subsequent change may be granted
only upon the affirmative vote of at least five (5) of the members of the corporate authorities. Such a third or subsequent change will be considered only
after the establishment of a cash escrow with the village in an amount, as estimated by the director of community development and building that will cover
all village costs including, but not limited to, all outside consultant fees. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 17-10: LAPSE.
Unless stated otherwise in this appendix A, a planned unit development shall lapse and be of no further force and effect unless a building permit has been
issued by the village for such purposes within two (2) years after the effective date hereof. An applicant who has obtained planned unit development
approval may request an extension of this time period by filing with the director of community development a letter stating the reasons for the request. The
director of community development shall transmit the letter to the corporate authorities which, in its sole discretion, may grant the request if good cause is
shown by the applicant.
No application for a planned unit development shall be filed with or accepted by the director of community development, which is identical or substantially
similar to an application which has been denied by the board of trustees within the previous three hundred sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article XVII-A. Affordable Housing
Sec. 17A-1:PURPOSE.
A primary objective of the village's planning mission is to promote healthy, stable, and vibrant neighborhoods. One method of addressing the fundamental
need for a variety of housing opportunities is through zoning and development codes. The village recognizes that persons currently living and working in
Northfield may be unable to meet or maintain the household income necessary to support current homeownership costs or rents. This population group
may include senior residents and public employees like teachers, police officers, and firefighters. Such persons greatly enhance the fabric of the
community and provide a positive impact on the quality of life for all Northfield residents. The village is, therefore, committed to encouraging the
development of affordable housing units, in order to meet the needs of low and moderate income families. However, in incorporating such housing stock,
each affordable housing development project must be designed in such a way as to ensure its compatibility with the character of the neighborhood,
reflective of the objectives of the zoning district within which it is proposed, and be consistent with the objectives of the village's comprehensive plan. (Ord.
05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-2: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
No new affordable housing project for more than four (4) units shall be approved except as a planned development. Any residential unit not developed as
a PUD, but designated as an affordable housing project, by virtue of a grant of relief pursuant to this article, shall be burdened by a permanent, recordable
covenant declaring it to be "affordable housing" pursuant to state regulation. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-3: AUTHORITY.
The corporate authorities have sole approval jurisdiction of a planned unit development. As such, each affordable housing project shall be subject to the
process set forth in article XVII of this appendix A. This includes a public hearing before the plan and zoning commission which issues written
recommendations to the corporate authorities in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of this code. No affordable housing planned unit development
shall be established without the approval of the corporate authorities in accordance with the standards established in this article. Any additions or changes
to or expansion of any planned unit development for affordable housing shall be permitted only in accordance with the same procedures and standards set
forth under this article for an original affordable housing planned unit development. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-4: AREA REGULATIONS BY DISTRICT.
A. R-5 Single-Family Residential District. The minimum lot and area regulations for a single-family affordable housing dwelling in an R-5 district shall be
five thousand (5,000) square feet. However, if the project must be developed as a planned unit development for affordable housing the project shall
have a minimum land area of two (2) acres.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 319/377
B. R-6 Multiple-Family Residential District. The minimum lot and area regulations for a single-family affordable housing dwelling in an R-6 district shall
be six thousand (6,000) square feet. However, if the project must be developed as a planned unit development for multiple-family affordable housing
the project shall have a minimum land area of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet. In the case of multi-family affordable housing planned unit
development the following additional regulations shall apply:
2,500 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit - maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre
Front yard: 25 feet
Rear yard: 25 feet
Side yard: 6 feet
Floor area ratio: Maximum of 0.40
Building height: Maximum of 40 feet or 3 stories
Parking: 1.25 per affordable dwelling unit
C. NC Neighborhood Commercial District. The minimum lot area for the NC commercial district for a planned unit development with affordable housing
units above first floor commercial shall be twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet. The following additional regulations shall apply:
Floor area ratio: Maximum of 1.1
Building height: Maximum of 40 feet or 3 stories
Parking: 1.25 per affordable dwelling unit
Maximum lot coverage: 80 percent
D. B-1 Community Commercial District. The minimum lot area for the B-1 commercial district for a planned unit development with affordable housing
units above first floor commercial shall be twenty five thousand (25,000). The following additional regulations shall apply:
Floor area ratio: Maximum of 1.1
Front yard: 25 feet
Rear yard: 20 feet
Side yard: 10 feet
Transitional: 15 feet
Building height: Maximum of 45 feet
Parking: 1.25 per affordable dwelling unit
Maximum lot coverage: 85 percent
E. VC Village Center Zoning District. The minimum lot area for the VC zoning district for a planned unit development with affordable housing units above
first floor commercial shall be twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet. The following additional regulations shall apply:
Floor area ratio: Maximum of 2.2
Building height: Maximum of 45 feet
Parking: 1.25 per affordable dwelling unit
Transitional yard: 15 feet
(Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-5: STANDARDS FOR CONSIDERATION.
In order to foster the development of additional affordable housing units, an affordable housing developer shall be granted the additional densities and
other zoning considerations set forth in section 17A-4 of this article. In addition to the above, the following standards will apply and for planned unit
developments shall supplement the standards set forth in article XVII of this appendix A:
(1) Comprehensive Plan. The affordable housing development shall conform with the general planning policies, goals and objects of the village's
comprehensive plan.
(2) Character Of Neighborhood. The affordable housing development shall be generally compatible with the uses of surrounding properties and with
the character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(a)Potential adverse effects on nearby properties shall be mitigated through the building design, site design, landscaping and screening.
(b)Potential adverse effects on nearby properties due to increased density may be minimized by limiting or placing conditions on outdoor recreation
areas, delivery activities, refuse collection and lighting.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 320/377
(3) Environmental. The affordable housing development shall not have any adverse environmental impact.
(4) Refuse. Adequate garbage and debris removal shall be provided to serve the development with all refuse being stored in fully enclosed areas or
designed in such a way as to minimize the impact on adjacent land uses.
(5) Traffic And Parking. Traffic, parking and circulation on the property shall be planned to achieve minimal negative impact to the surrounding area.
(a)The property must provide for adequate and safe vehicular and pedestrian access.
(b)Adequate parking areas shall be provided to accommodate the development.
(c)Adequate measures shall be taken to provide appropriate ingress and egress to the proposed development.
(6) Design. The design of the affordable housing development shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood.
(7) Public Facilities. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities shall be provided to serve the development.
(8) Variations. Other than variations granted by the Corporate Authorities and the additional area regulations set forth in this article, the proposed
development shall be built in conformance with Village codes. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-6: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
The Corporate Authorities have the sole authority to approve an affordable housing planned unit development as a special use under this appendix A. A
public hearing shall be held and the Plan and Zoning Commission shall issue a written recommendation in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of
this Code.
If an affordable housing development plan involves any structural or other site elements that are not in strict compliance with this article or the regulations
of the district in which the development is to be located, the Plan and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Corporate Authorities may approve
exceptions to such requirements in order to establish affordable housing units in accordance with the purposes of this article. Such exceptions may be
granted only after due notice and a public hearing. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-6A: PRELIMINARY PROJECT REVIEW.
Proposed projects that represent a significant departure from the comprehensive plan may elect to submit for a preliminary project review, which is entirely
elective. See appendix D, article I, "Fees", of this Code for the associated fee. (Ord. 09-1436, 12-7-2009)
Sec. 17A-7: CHANGES IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
Except as provided below, any modifications to an approved affordable housing planned unit development shall require separate review and approval
pursuant to this article as an amendment to the planned unit development. Any application for approval of such a change, addition or expansion shall be
filed, processed, reviewed, and approved or denied in the same manner as an original planned unit development application.
(1) Minor Field Changes. Unless specifically referenced in the planned unit development, minor changes in locations or sizes shown on exhibits may
be approved, in writing, by the Director of Community Development. Typically, a minor field change will not involve a percentage change greater than
three percent (3%). However, not all changes of less than three percent (3%) shall necessarily be deemed to be minor. The determination of the
Director of Community Development as to whether a change is a minor field change shall be final.
(2) Village Board Approved Changes. The Village Board may approve, without referral to the Plan and Zoning Commission, such other changes as it
finds: a) are in the best interest of the Village; b) are recommendations or requirements made by the State Housing Appeals Board; and/or c) do not
have a substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties. The determination of the Village Board as to whether a requested change should be referred
to the Plan and Zoning Commission shall be final.
(3) Changes Requiring A Public Hearing. Except as outlined above, any change involving a size, quantity or other numerical value found in the text
of the ordinance or any change having substantial, direct impact on adjacent properties shall not be made except after a public hearing before the
Plan and Zoning Commission. Additionally, the Village Board or the Director of Community Development may refer any requested change to the Plan
and Zoning Commission for public hearing when either believes it would be in the best interest of the Village to do so. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Sec. 17A-8: LAPSE OR DISCONTINUATION.
The approval of an affordable housing planned unit development shall lapse and be of no further force and effect unless a building permit has been issued
within two (2) years after the date of the ordinance approving the planned unit development. An applicant who has obtained planned unit development
approval may request an extension of this time period by filing with the Director of Community Development a letter stating the reasons for the request.
The Director of Community Development shall transmit the letter to the Corporate Authorities, which in its sole discretion, may grant the request if good
cause is shown by the applicant. (Ord. 05-1230, 2-15-2005)
Article XVIII. Accessory Structures
Sec. 18-1: PURPOSE.
An accessory structure that is secondary and incidental to a permitted or approved special use within a particular zoning district may, in accord with this
article, be allowed to occupy the same zoning lot as the principal structure. To qualify as an allowable accessory structure, it must be maintained under the
same ownership and on the same lot as the principal structure and must meet the definition as stated in article III of this appendix A. All accessory
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 321/377
buildings and structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this appendix A and to all other Village regulations, including, but not limited to, the
Building Code, Electrical Code and the Fire Prevention Code. The requirement that the accessory structure be maintained on the same lot as the principal
structure shall not apply to tennis courts maintained by a public school. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 18-1700, 1-16-2018)
Sec. 18-2: GENERAL STANDARDS.
A. No accessory structure shall occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of any required yard.
B. Accessory structures shall not be located on or within a drainage, access, utility or other easement created by a duly recorded document or by
prescription in the case of a governmental easement.
C. No accessory structure shall be approved, established or constructed until fifty percent (50%) or more of the principal use or structure has been
completed. In addition, no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is occupied.
D. No accessory building or structure shall be used as a dwelling unit.
E. Permitted accessory structures and the standards for each are indicated in the table below. A description of each standard follows the table. These
standards shall apply to all accessory structures, including those in existence at the time of adoption of this appendix A. Existing accessory structures
that do not comply with these standards shall be deemed nonconforming, and subject to the provisions of article XXI, "Nonconforming Situations", of
this appendix A.
F. Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-
2003)
G. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in any district. (Ord. 04-1216, 9-21-2004)
H. Subsections A, C and F of this section shall not apply to tennis courts maintained by a public school. (Ord. 18-1700, 1-16-2018)
Allowable Accessory
Structures
Districts In
Which
Permitted
Development Standards
Permitted
Obstructions
R-1-R-
6
NC,
VC,
B-1,
B-2,
O/R,
M-1
Front
Side
Rear
Air conditioning/heat pump equipment All All Not less than 10 feet from a side lot line. Complete screening
required
X X
Antennas All All See chapter 18 of this code X X
Arbor or trellis All All Not to exceed 8 feet in height X X X
Awning, balcony, canopy, projecting bay
window, overhangs and eaves
All All Maximum 3 foot encroachment into any required yard.
Maximum 15 percent coverage of a required yard
X X X
Barbecue grill All X X
Basketball hoop All X X X
Chimney All All Maximum 3 foot encroachment into any required yard X X X
Deck All All Maximum 10 foot encroachment into any required yard X
Dog run All No closer than 3 feet to any lot line X X
Doghouse All No closer than 3 feet to any lot line X
Fences/barriers All All See chapter 18 of this code X X X
Fire escape All Maximum 5 foot encroachment into any required yard X
Firewood storage All No closer than 10 feet to any lot line and a maximum of 5 feet
high
X X
Flagpole All All 1 per lot and a maximum of 35 feet high X X X
Garage, detached All All No closer than 5 feet to any lot line and a maximum 20 feet
high
X
Garbage receptacle All All See chapter 8 of this code. Complete screening required for X X
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 322/377
nonsingle-family property
Garden appurtenances All No closer than 5 feet to any lot line. Maximum 10 feet high X X X
Generator (supplemental power) All All No closer than 10 feet to any lot line. Complete screening
required
X X
Greenhouse or conservatory All No closer than 10 feet to any lot line. Maximum 20 feet high X
Hot tub All No closer than 15 feet to any lot line X
Lighting All All See article XIX of this appendix A X X X
Mailbox All X
Off street parking - commercial district All See article XX of this appendix A X X
Off street parking - residential district All See article XX of this appendix A X X X
Patio/terrace (at grade) All All X X X
Play equipment All See chapter 18 of this code. No closer than 10 feet to any lot
line and a maximum 15 feet high
X X
Playhouse/tree house All No closer than 5 feet to any lot line and a maximum of 15 feet
high
X X
Pool house All No closer than 10 feet to any lot line. Maximum 20 feet high X
Porch (unenclosed) All Maximum 5 foot encroachment into required front yard and
maximum 10 foot encroachment in rear yard
X X
Recreational vehicle storage All All See chapter 13 of this code X
Retaining wall All All Maximum height 3 feet X X X
Sign All All See chapter 12 of this code X
Smoking shelter All No closer than 15 feet to any lot line. Unenclosed on at least 1
side
X X
Stable R-1
and R-
2
See article XIX of this appendix A X X
Steps and ramps All All No closer than 4 feet to any side lot line or 10 feet from front or
rear lot line. Maximum 5 feet high
X X X
Storage shed All All No closer than 5 feet to any lot line and a maximum 15 feet
high
X
Swimming pool All See chapter 18 of this Code X
Tennis and sport courts All M-11
See chapter 18 of this Code X
Window well All All Maximum 2 foot encroachment into any required yard X X X
Note:
1. Yard restrictions shall not apply to tennis courts maintained by a public school.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 04-1207, 5-18-2004; Ord. 04-1216, 9-21-2004; Ord. 05-1244, 6-21-2005; Ord. 08-1365, 2-19-2008; Ord. 08-1392, 8-
19-2008; Ord. 16-1661, 9-20-2016; Ord. 18-1700, 1-16-2018)
Article XIX. Performance Standards And Temporary Uses
Sec. 19-1: PURPOSE.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community and to protect and enhance the natural
environment. This shall be accomplished by establishing minimum requirements pertaining to light, noise, accessory structures, screening and vibrations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following performance standards apply to all zoning districts. These performance standards apply in addition to other
standards and requirements stated elsewhere in this Code or other Village regulations. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 19-2: LIGHTING.
A. Standards.
(1) Luminaries shall be of mercury vapor or metal halide type.
(2) No direct or indirect illumination shall project more than 0.25 foot-candle onto a residential use or district, as measured horizontally at the lot line.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 323/377
(3) No direct or indirect illumination shall project more than one foot-candle onto a nonresidential zoning lot, as measured horizontally at the lot line.
(4) No direct or indirect illumination shall project from its source onto any sidewalk, street or highway so as to cause a hazard or nuisance.
(5) The following maximum lighting level standards shall not be exceeded:
Activity Level Examples Lighting Levels (Foot-Candles)
Parking/
Pedestrian Areas Vehicle Travel Areas
Average Maximum Average Maximum
High Parking lots, gasoline service stations, recreation fields 2.3 3.8 1.5 2.0
Medium Any nonresidential uses located within or adjacent to a residential area 0.8 2.0 0.5 1.5
Low Residential 0.5 1.0 0.25 1.0
(6) All lighting shall be arranged so as not to shine directly onto any adjoining property. Steps shall be taken to minimize glare from such lighting to the
maximum extent practicable. This shall be accomplished by orienting the lights away from abutting properties, planting trees to block the glare and/or
installing light shields.
(7) No light source shall be visible below the lowest point of any awning.
(8) Shielding is required on all outdoor lighting for nonresidential properties to prevent glare. In parking lots on a site that is adjacent to residential
properties, lighting fixtures must be fully shielded with cut off type shielding. A fixture within one hundred feet (100') of any intersection shall be
shielded so that the lighting from the fixture does not interfere in any manner with the visibility of traffic signals.
(9) Lighting which shines upward is prohibited except for low intensity lighting to accent landscaping or signage. All searchlights, exposed neon, lasers,
flashing lights and other high intensity lights are prohibited.
(10) The total height of a light fixture shall not exceed ten feet (10') on any residential property and shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') on any
nonresidential property.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this appendix A, unless work is proposed to add to the number of fixtures or to replace more than fifty
percent (50%) of the existing fixtures.
(2) Public rights-of-way.
(3) Holiday lighting, not to exceed a sixty (60) day period.
(4) Temporary emergency or hazard lighting.
C. Procedure For Approval. All lighting plans for any nonresidential property are subject to the review and approval of the Architectural Commission as
set forth in chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1751 - STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS. Go to new ordinance.
Sec. 19-3: NOISE STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
A. Specific Violations. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section (but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive):
(1) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the Village, except as a
danger warning.
(2) The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound for the purpose of commercial advertising and which is audible
upon the public streets of the Village.
(3) The keeping of any animal shut up or tied up in any yard, enclosure, stable, house or other place within the Village which, by barking, howling,
crying, singing causes frequent or long continued noise.
(4) The discharge into the open air within the Village of the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or
other kind or type of engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises.
(5) The use within the Village of any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle, so defective or loaded in such manner or with material of such
nature as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
(6) The loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, containers or the like, without exercising reasonable
care to limit such noise and to confine the same.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 324/377
(7) Any automotive or machinery repair conducted outdoors or any construction related activity other than between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on weekdays, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturdays and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Sundays. Sunday hours must be observed on all national holidays. For purposes of this subsection "outdoors" shall
mean any space that is not completely enclosed with all doors and windows shut. For purposes of this subsection "construction related activity" shall
mean any use of percussion or power tools, excavation, demolition, and the moving of powered construction equipment and the loading or unloading
of construction material or equipment. If work outside of these hours is necessary to protect health, safety or property, an owner may apply to the
Village for an emergency work permit. Emergency work permits may be issued for the minimum time necessary to complete the emergency work up
to a maximum of three (3) days. The permit may be renewed for periods of up to three (3) days while the emergency continues. The person actually
committing the violation, the general contractor, the permittee, the property owner and the property occupier, shall be jointly and severally liable for
any violations of this subsection.
(8) The creation within the Village of any excessive noise in the vicinity of any school, institution of learning, church, synagogue, court or hospital, while
the same is in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys occupants, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in the vicinity of any such building indicating that the same is a school, hospital, court, church or synagogue.
B. General Standard. It shall be unlawful to create any sound or noise which because of its volume level, duration and character annoys, disturbs, injures
or endangers the comfort, health, peace, repose or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the Village.
(1) The following circumstances shall create a presumption of a violation of this subsection B:
Any noise audible one hundred feet (100') from the lot line during the following times:
(a) Sunday from seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Monday.
(b) Monday through Thursday from seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the next day.
(c) Friday from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Saturday.
(d) Saturday from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Sunday.
(e) National holidays from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. through seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. if the next day is a week day and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. if
the next day is a Saturday or Sunday.
(2) The limits set forth in this subsection B shall not apply to the following: noises not under the control of the owner or occupant of the property; noises
emanating from temporary construction or repair pursuant to appropriate permits; noise due to an emergency situation on the site; intermittent noise
due to normal maintenance activities conducted in conformance with this section and noises from Park District and school district athletic events;
other Park District and school district sponsored events that do not include sound amplification and private events on Park District property that do
not include sound amplification.
(3) The limits in this subsection B shall, likewise, not apply to noise from the following events which do include sound amplification:
(a) Park District sponsored special community and civic events during the following hours: Sunday from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M.; Monday - Thursday from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M. and Friday and Saturday from ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Exempt, sound amplified special community and civic events conducted by the Park District shall be limited to
seventeen (17) per calendar year. The Park District may seek relief from the conditions of this subsection B(3)(a) only from the Village Board.
(b) Private sound amplified events held on Park District property shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. The Park District has issued a permit for the event;
2. The hours set forth in subsection B(3)(a) of this section shall be applicable;
3. The permittee must acknowledge that the determination of whether noise levels are reasonable shall be within the sole discretion of the
Northfield Police Department;
4. No more than ten (10) private events with sound amplification may be held within any calendar year.
The permittee may seek relief from the conditions of this subsection B(3)(b) only from the Village Board. (Ord. 19-1738, 2-19-2019)
Sec. 19-4: AIR POLLUTION.
No person shall release into the air any fumes, gases, aerosols, dusts, mists or odors which are discernible at the property line. Emissions shall be
deemed a nuisance when they are dangerous to the public health or when they are found to be annoying, distasteful or causing discomfort to the public.
Additionally, when such air pollutants can be shown to contain toxic substances for which safe concentration standards have been determined by an
authoritative source, the production of such emanations in excess of standards set for human safety is prohibited. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 19-5: VIBRATION.
No vibration shall be detectable beyond the lot lines of the property from which such vibration originates. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 325/377
Sec. 19-6: HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS.
A. Home Occupation Class I. Class I home occupations are permitted uses subject to the following conditions:
(1) No employees of the business work at the home other than members of the immediate family who reside on the premises.
(2) The occupation must be conducted wholly within the principal structure. No business activity or storage is permitted within a garage or other
accessory structure.
(3) No more than twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the principal structure may be devoted to the occupation.
(4) No alteration shall be permitted which changes the character of the structure as a dwelling.
(5) Group instruction shall be limited to no more than two (2) students at a time.
(6) No sign is installed or maintained other than one nonilluminated wall plate, not more than one square foot in area.
(7) No more than a total of five (5) business visits per week are allowed. This shall include clients, customers, individuals representing clients or
customers, employees, couriers or any other business visitors.
(8) No mechanical equipment is used except that normally used for domestic or household purposes.
(9) No exterior storage of materials is permitted.
(10) Direct sales of goods not produced at the site are not permitted.
(11) The address of the home occupation may not be advertised to the public.
(12) Daycare homes may provide care for up to three (3) children who are not immediately related to the owner or occupant. All daycare homes shall
comply with all requirements of the department of children and family services and/or other applicable regulatory agencies.
(13) There shall be no separate entrance for the home occupation.
(14) The village shall have the right to inspect the premises at reasonable hours to ensure compliance.
B. Home Occupations Class II. Class II home occupations require review and approval as special uses as set forth in article XVI of this appendix A and
are subject to all of the conditions which govern class I home occupations, except as specifically stated in this article. A class II home occupation must
conform to all standards of a class I home occupation provided that up to two (2) people outside the family may be employed. The traffic volumes
generated by the home occupation may not result in parking problems or increase of traffic congestion in the neighborhood. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 19-7: HORSE AND PONY STABLES, PRIVATE.
The following provisions shall govern private stables, which shall be permitted as an accessory use to a residential home located in R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts:
(1) Stable Required. No horse or pony shall be kept on a lot unless a stable is provided in compliance with this section.
(2) Minimum Lot Area. No horse or pony shall be kept and no private stable shall be located on a lot of less than eighty seven thousand one hundred
twenty (87,120) square feet.
(3) Location On Lot. In no event shall any private stable be located in a required front yard or within thirty feet (30') of any lot line.
(4) Screening Required. All stables shall be adequately screened from the street and adjacent properties by a densely planted hedge or fence of not
less than six feet (6') in height.
(5) Stall Size. A box stall shall not be less than one hundred (100) square feet. A standing stall shall not be less than fifty (50) square feet. Additionally,
any enclosure designed for the purpose of sheltering horse or a pony shall be not less than two hundred (200) square feet in total area.
(6) Feeding. The feeding or watering of any horse or pony, other than grazing in an open pasture or in an enclosed stable, shall not be permitted within
fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
(7) Paddocks Required. A paddock of not less than forty feet by twenty feet (40' x 20') in area into which the stable opens shall be provided. No
paddock shall be located within seventy five feet (75') of a well or above a septic field. All paddocks shall be of such construction to prevent the
animals from leaving the enclosure. A paddock may be enclosed with fencing, provided such fencing is not less than four feet (4') in height and
contains not less than three (3) rails.
(8) Number Of Horses Or Ponies Permitted. The maximum number of horses or ponies permitted shall be determined in accordance with the
following table:
Acreage Square Footage
Maximum Number
Of Horses
Or Ponies
2-3 acres 87,120 - 130,679 2
3-4 acres 130,680 - 174,239 3
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 326/377
4-5 acres 174,240 - 217,799 4
5-6 acres 217,800 - 261,359 5
6 or more acres 261,360 or more 6
(9) No Commercial Or Agricultural Use. No private stable, or horses or ponies sheltered in the stable, or any paddock, shall be used for commercial
or agricultural purposes.
(10) Sanitation. A horse or pony shall be adequately sheltered and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All grain used for feeding shall be
stored in metal or other rodentproof receptacles. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 19-8: SEASONAL AND TEMPORARY USES.
A. Approval. Temporary uses may be allowed in any zoning district. Such uses shall be subject to the restrictions and standards established in this
appendix A, and shall meet the bulk regulations and parking requirements established in this article. All temporary and seasonal uses are subject to
approval as set forth in this section. No temporary use shall continue for such a length of time that it constitutes a permanent use. Any temporary use
lasting for more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed prima facie a permanent use. Recurring temporary uses where the same temporary use or
structure is established on the property on an annual or other periodic basis shall be treated as a special use and shall be subject to the regulations
established in article XVI of this appendix A. Conditions for approval of any temporary use may include special traffic provisions and/or other measures
deemed appropriate to protect public safety.
B. Compliance With Building, Electrical And Fire Prevention Codes. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this appendix A, any tent, trailer, building
or structure and intended or used for human occupancy, however briefly, shall comply with the applicable building, electrical and fire prevention codes
of the village and shall not be used or occupied until a temporary use permit has been issued.
C. Temporary Uses And Structures Subject To Approval By The Building Commissioner. The following temporary uses and structures meeting
requirements of this appendix A, are permitted in any zoning district upon receipt of a temporary use permit:
(1) Construction trailers, equipment storage sheds and portable lavatories, provided that:
(a) The trailer, shed or portable lavatory is an integral part of construction of an active, properly permitted building project; and
(b) The trailer, shed or portable lavatory is located on the same parcel as the building development; and
(c) The trailer, shed or portable lavatory remains on the property only during the time of active construction; and
(d) The trailer, shed or portable lavatory is located no closer than ten feet (10') to any property line or sidewalk.
(2) Portable lavatory for public uses, provided that:
(a) The portable lavatory is for public use incidental to a specific event; and
(b) The portable lavatory is located on the same lot as the public use; and
(c) For events having a duration of forty eight (48) hours or less, the portable lavatory is located no closer than twenty five feet (25') to any property
line located within or adjacent to a residential district.
(d) For events having a duration in excess of forty eight (48) hours, the portable lavatory must be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to
any other property line located within or adjacent to a residential district.
(e) In no case shall the portable lavatory remain on the property longer than ninety (90) days and no longer than forty eight (48) hours after the event
is over.
(f) Upon request of the Northfield park district or the Winnetka park district or a local school district, the village shall have the authority to permit
portable lavatories to be placed in the parks or school athletic fields from April 1 to October 31 of each year. The village may require such
screening as may be reasonably necessary to minimize the visual impact of the portable lavatories. The number of such lavatories shall be
determined by the village after consultation with park district or school officials. The location of such lavatories shall be consistent with the
restrictions on locations as set forth in subsection C(2)(d) of this section.
(3) Garage, estate and demolition sales in accordance with chapter 11 of this code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
(4) Temporary portable storage containers provided that:
(a) Only one container shall be permitted on a zoning lot; and
(b) A container may not remain on any property for more than fifteen (15) days; and
(c) A container may not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and eight feet (8') in height; and
(d) The container is placed on a paved surface; and
(e) A container may not be located closer than five feet (5') from any property line or street, as defined in this article. (Ord. 10-1458, 6-15-2010)
D. Temporary Uses And Structures Subject To Approval By The Village Manager. The following temporary uses and structures are permitted only
upon approval by the village manager based upon the standards set forth below:
(1) Carnivals, provided that:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 327/377
(a) Trailers and other equipment do not block driveways or other points of emergency vehicular access to any property;
(b) Trailers and other equipment do not block a public street, alley or sidewalk; and
(c) The operation, including parking, will be located entirely within the private or public property designated for the event.
(2) Produce and farmers' markets.
(3) Retail sales associated with a wholesale or warehouse establishment, provided that such sales are:
(a) Not to be held more than twice in a twelve (12) month period; and
(b) Associated with the warehoused, manufactured, or wholesale products and incidental to the main use; and
(c) Application for a warehouse sale shall be made not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the sale to the village manager; and
(d) The village manager may make reasonable regulations for such sales in order to protect the public safety and the orderly flow of traffic.
(4) Showcase display homes in accordance with chapter 11 of this code.
(5) Christmas tree sales lots, provided that:
(a) The use is located on a lot that fronts on a collector or arterial street;
(b) The use is located on a vacant lot or parking area;
(c) The trees are located at least fifty feet (50') from any structure on another lot;
(d) All trees shall be removed from the premises no later than December 31 of the same year;
(e) A refundable cash deposit, in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is posted with the village in order to assure that the site is properly
cleaned after the sale is completed; and
(f) The use is located in a commercial district or a site developed as nonresidential in a residential zoning district.
(6) Art, craft and book sales.
(7) Sidewalk sales.
(8) Other temporary events not exceeding ten (10) days in duration and/or occurring more than two (2) times per year.
E. Temporary Uses And Structures Subject To Approval By The Corporate Authorities. The following temporary uses and structures are permitted
only upon approval by the corporate authorities based upon the standards set forth below:
(1) Uses or activities in relation to which a person has filed a petition under this appendix A for an exemption, based on the free exercise of religion,
from any appendix A regulation or any village policy or practice.
The corporate authorities may issue a temporary use permit if it makes a preliminary finding, based on the information contained in the person's
exemption petition and the written recommendation of the village attorney that the issuance of a temporary use permit is necessary to avoid or
resolve any potential violation of the religious based rights afforded to any person under federal or state law which would otherwise be cause by the
enforcement of such village regulation, policy or practice. However, no temporary use permit shall be granted if the corporate authorities determine
with respect to the regulation, policy or practice in question:
(a) The regulation, policy or practice constitutes or furthers a compelling governmental interest in need of protection; and
(b) The regulation, policy or practice is the least restrictive alternative for achieving the compelling governmental interest.
The temporary use permit shall be limited to the land use or activity that is the subject of the exemption petition and shall expire at the time the board
issues its final decision in relation to the exemption petition.
(2) Any other temporary use or structure not specified in this article. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 19-9. FITNESS CLASS STUDIO STANDARDS.
A. The classes must be conducted in an enclosed building or tenant space.
B. The space must not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area.
C. The class instruction may include fitness workouts, dance, yoga, martial arts or similar activities.
D. Attendance must be for specifically scheduled classes supervised by an employee of the studio who has specialized training in the class being
conducted.
E. The aggregate total floor area occupied by fitness class studios may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of a building located in the
village center zoning district.
F. Must have a retail component for the sale of merchandise unique to the fitness industry.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 328/377
G. If the studio provides childcare or babysitting services, that service shall be limited to the children in the care of those attending a class. A child may not
be left in the care of the studio unless the adult bringing the child is on the premises attending a studio class. (Ord. 13-1546, 3-19-2013)
19-10: SHORT TERM DWELLING RENTALS.
Short term dwelling rentals are prohibited in all zoning districts. (Ord. 19-1737, 1-15-2019)
Article XX. Off Street Parking, Loading, Traffic And Access Regulations
Sec. 20-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
A primary objective of the village's planning mission is to relieve traffic congestion in the streets, minimize vehicular conflicts, minimize any detrimental
effects of any off street parking areas on adjacent properties and to ensure the proper and uniform development of parking areas throughout the village.
The village also strives to successfully and safely integrate automobile and pedestrian traffic within common rights of way. Therefore, all off street parking
and loading spaces shall be provided in strict accordance with the standards established in this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the voluntary
establishment of off street parking and loading facilities in excess of the number or standards, provided that such facilities meet all other minimum
requirements of the village. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-2: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Each principal and accessory use of land shall provide the number of off street parking spaces indicated for that use in the table provided in subsection
F of this section for all zoning districts, unless adjusted in accordance with section 20-10 of this article. When the square footage of the building or
tenant area is stated, the gross square footage shall be used unless specifically stated otherwise.
B. When the use of any lot or structure is changed to a use requiring more off street parking than the previous use or there has been an addition of
dwelling units, gross floor area or seating capacity, the additional parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for the entire use.
However, if the structure involved was erected prior to the effective date of this appendix A, additional parking or loading facilities are required only in
the amount by which the requirements for the new or added use exceed those for the existing use.
C. In the case of mixed uses, or when there are two (2) or more buildings on a single lot, the total requirements for off street parking spaces shall be the
sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
D. When calculations of the required number of spaces result in fractional numbers, results less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
number, and results 0.5 or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
E. Designated parking for bicycles shall be provided at a ratio of one to twenty (1:20) of required parking spaces for passenger vehicles for the following
uses: multi-family residential, public and quasi-public uses, recreational, commercial and employment uses. Whenever bicycle spaces are required a
minimum of two (2) shall be provided. However, no individual use shall be required to provide more than fifteen (15) spaces.
F. The following number of off street parking spaces shall be provided for the associated use listed below in all zoning districts. When the square footage
of building area is stated, the gross square footage shall be used unless specifically stated otherwise. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
TABLE
Uses Required Spaces
Residential uses:
Community residence 1 per 4 beds and 1 for each staff member
Convent 1 per 1,000 square feet
Dependent or semidependent senior
citizen facilities
0.75 per dwelling unit and 1 for each staff member
Dwelling, affordable housing units 1.25 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, multiple-family
Studio/efficiency 1.25 per dwelling unit
1 bedroom 1.5 per dwelling unit
2 bedrooms or greater 2 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, single-family 2 per dwelling unit
Senior citizen housing (independent
living)
1.25 per dwelling unit and 1 for each staff member
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 329/377
Public or quasi-public uses:
Clubs and service organizations 1 per 3 seats based on maximum occupancy
Colleges/university 1 per 4 seats and 1 per each staff member
Daycare centers and preschools 1 per employee and 1 per every 6 students
Elementary - junior high school 1 per employee and 1 per 2 classrooms
High school 1 per employee and 1 per each 5 students 16 years of age or older
Library 1 per 300 square feet
Municipal uses 1 per 300 square feet
Religious institution 1 per 5 seats
Schools, music and dance 1 for every 2 students and 1 for each employee
Recreational uses:
Adult use 1 per 200 square feet
Amusement establishments 1 per 3 person capacity plus 1 per staff member
Health or fitness club 1 per 200 square feet
Personal training facility 1 per client at maximum capacity and 1 per staff member
Private leisure club 3 per 1,000 square feet
Public parks and playgrounds 1 per 5,000 square feet of gross land area
Recreation/community centers 3 per 1,000 square feet
Theaters (indoor) 1 per 4 seats plus 1 per employee
Business/retail uses:
Antique store
Apparel
Appliance
Automobile dealership
Barbershop
Bakery
Beauty shop
Bicycle shop
Books and periodicals
Camera and photography
Carpet and rug store
Cellular phone sales
China or glass
Consumer electronics
Department store
Drugstore/pharmacy
Florist
Food store
Furniture store
Garden center and supply
Gift store
Hardware store
Housewares and kitchen
Jewelry
Leather goods
Medical cannabis dispensing organization
Paint and wallpaper store
Pet store
Picture framing
School supply
Sewing and craft store
Shoe store
Sporting goods
Swimming supply
Toy, hobby and game stores
Video sales or rental
Wine shops
1 per 250 square feet
Business/service uses:
Animal grooming
Art gallery/studio
Banks and financial institutions
Business machines sales and service
Cabinet showrooms
Catalog sale office
1 per 300 square feet
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 330/377
Catering establishment
Copy shop
Dressmaking/tailor
Dry cleaning
Interior decorating
Massage therapy
Nail salon
Office supply
Offices
Photography studio
Printing shop (commercial)
Tailor shop
Travel agency
Auto leasing 1 per employee and 1 per 3 fleet cars
Food service uses:
Carryout restaurant 1 per 200 square feet and 1 per employee
Coffee shop/ice cream/dessert shop 1 per 80 square feet
Restaurant (sit down) 1 per 100 square feet of seating area and 1 per employee
Employment uses:
Fabrication, processing and packaging
Manufacturing
Research/laboratories
Warehouse storage
1 per 1,000 square feet and 1 per employee
Gasoline service station See chapter 11 of this code
Hospital/24 hour emergency clinic 1 per 2 beds and 1 per employee
Medical and dental clinics
Psychosocial rehabilitation
Veterinary
1 per 200 square feet
Self-storage facility 10 minimum spaces and 1 per employee
(Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008; amd. Ord. 10-1444, 1-19-2010; Ord. 14-1592, 6-17-2014)
Sec. 20-2A: ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIRED2.
Parking spaces provided in accordance with this code shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the Illinois accessibility code, 71 Illinois
administrative code chapter I, section 400.310, as it may be amended from time to time and which is hereby incorporated into this code by reference. The
village building department shall provide copies of the pertinent regulations and diagrams to residents, businesses and property owners on request and
shall require compliance with this provision in all other respects, where applicable. (Ord. 06-1311, 12-5-2006)
Sec. 20-3: LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
A. Off street loading berths of the number and size set forth in the following table shall be provided in conjunction with any multi-family development or the
erection of, addition to, or expansion of any use within any nonresidential district. The number and size requirements shall be calculated based on the
aggregate gross floor areas of the various uses and occupancies within any given building. To the extent that it is practical, the locations of loading
spaces shall be placed so as to be equally accessible to the several occupancies of a building.
LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
Required Number
Of Berths
Minimum
Size
(Feet)
Minimum
Vertical
Clearance
(Feet)1
Less than 10,000 0 n/a n/a
10,001 - 40,000 1 10 x 25 14
40,001 - 100,000 2 10 x 35 14
Over 100,000 3 10 x 35 14
Note:
1. Includes path of travel from public roadway.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 331/377
B. All required off street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served and designed to ensure that no portion of a vehicle shall
extend into a street or alley or block a sidewalk. No loading space shall be located in a front yard. Every loading space shall be located at the rear or
side of the building and shall have direct access to a service entry through the rear or side of the building.
C. All loading spaces shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements.
D. No storage of materials and no motor vehicle repair or service work shall occur within any required loading space.
E. The space allotted to any loading space shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities.
F. All loading spaces shall be screened from view of abutting lots to a minimum height of six feet (6') by a solid fence, evergreen vegetation or a
combination of these elements. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-4: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.
A. No parking space shall be located within the required front yard or within five feet (5') of any lot line, except in residential districts where such space is
located in a driveway serving a single-family dwelling.
B. No parking space serving a nonresidential use shall be located within five feet (5') of any lot line.
C. All off street parking spaces required to serve a structure or use in a residential zoning district shall be located on the same lot as the structure to be
served.
D. Off street parking spaces required to serve any structure or use established in a nonresidential zoning district may be served by an off street parking
facility located on land other than the lot on which the structure or use to be served is located, provided that:
(1) Such facility is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the structure or use to be served; and
(2) Such facility is located in a zoning district where such facilities are allowed as a permitted use or special use; and
(3) Such facility is located on a lot owned or leased by the same party as the lot on which the structure or use to be served is located or is a publicly
owned facility with parking spaces dedicated to the structure to be served; and
(4) A letter executed by the owner of the use and the owner of the property is provided acknowledging that at such time as the additional parking is no
longer available the use will terminate or the use will be reduced in intensity so that on site parking is sufficient to meet these requirements;
(5) A recordable covenant is provided that runs with the land on which the parking facility is located, and prohibits any other use of the lot. The village
shall be the beneficiary of the covenant;
(6) Where the parking facility is located on leased land, a copy of the lease shall be provided to the village and a letter confirming that the lease
remains in effect shall be provided to the village on an annual basis. Failure to maintain the lease or to submit the annual lease shall result in the
termination of use described in subsection C of this section.
E. The covenant required in subsection D(5) of this section shall not be released until such time as one of the following conditions occurs:
(1) The use served by the required off street parking is terminated; or
(2) The required off street parking is provided on the same lot as that on which the structure or use being served is located; or
(3) Another lot meeting all of the requirements set forth in subsection D of this section is used to provide the required parking. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-
2008)
Sec. 20-5: SIZE OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES AND AISLES.
A. A required off street parking space shall be a rectangle having a minimum size at least nine feet (9') wide and eighteen feet (18') long, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Those spaces designated and marked for handicapped parking shall comply with the Illinois accessibility code.
(2) In parking lots where the predominant use is "low turnover parking" (defined as at least 65 percent of the daily users are parking for more than 4
hours) the stall width may be reduced to eight feet zero inches (8'0"), with all other dimensions and clearance remaining equal to the standard space
size.
(3) Up to ten percent (10%) of spaces in any facility may be designated for compact car parking (a minimum size of at least 8 feet wide and 16 feet
long) if appropriately identified with signage reviewed and approved by the architectural commission.
(4) The calculation for the required number of handicapped accessible spaces shall be based on the total number of spaces provided, including
compact car spaces.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 332/377
B. Any aisle providing access to a required parking space shall be at least the width designated in this figure, based on the angle and number of rows of
parking provided. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
C. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet (7'). (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-6: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
A. Off street parking spaces may be open to the sky or enclosed in a building.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 333/377
B. All off street parking areas shall provide continuous curb and gutter around the perimeter of the parking area and a surface area of asphalt, concrete or
other approved surface.
C. All off street parking spaces shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway.
D. All off street parking facilities shall provide an appropriate means of vehicular access to a public street or alley.
E. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind, other than noncommercial emergency repairs to one's own vehicle, shall be permitted in an off street parking
area.
F. All nonpaved areas in a parking lot shall be covered with grass, shrubs or other vegetative ground cover and shall not be utilized for the parking or
storage of vehicles or any other items.
G. A landscaped island, equal in size to one parking stall, shall be placed at the end of each row of parking in all off street parking lots. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-
15-2008)
Sec. 20-7: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
All parking lots must be landscaped consistent with the standards established in chapter 10 of this code. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-8: RESERVED. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-9: DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS.
A. No driveway that is located or extends into or across any public sidewalk or street right of way shall be constructed or maintained unless a permit for
such driveway has been issued in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this code.
B. One driveway is permitted per lot unless a traffic impact analysis is provided and approved by the village engineer indicating a safety or traffic flow need
for a greater number of driveways. Shared driveways and those which limit left turn movements are encouraged.
C. Any driveway or curb cut which serves a nonresidential use and provides direct vehicular access into a lot from a major street or collector shall be
located:
(1) At least twenty five feet (25') from any other driveway or curb cut located on the same side of the street; and
(2) At least sixty five feet (65') from any street intersection, as measured from the intersecting street right of way along the edge of the pavement.
D. No driveway or driveway apron shall exceed a width of twenty five feet (25').
E. In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 zoning districts, no more than thirty five percent (35%) of the required front yard shall be covered with
impermeable surface. Driveway access shall be located so as to avoid conflicts within the public right of way (i.e., trees, hydrants, manholes), and no
new driveway shall be located within twenty feet (20') of any intersection. In addition, the following driveway standards must be met:
(1) Width at property line: Ten feet (10') minimum.
(2) Flair: Six feet (6') on collector and arterial roadways, three feet (3') on side or local roadways.
(3) Radius: Twelve feet (12') minimum radii on all arcs for curvilinear driveways. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 20-10: ADJUSTMENTS TO OFF STREET PARKING, BICYCLE PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Adjustments. The parking requirements of this article may be adjusted in accordance with the following:
(1) Any adjustment to required parking or loading shall require a public hearing before the plan and zoning commission and shall be subject to the
approval of the president and the board of trustees.
(2) Any percentage adjustment to the required number of spaces shall be considered as a percentage of the requirements of this article and not a
percentage of existing parking.
(3) The zoning administrator may require a parking demand analysis by a qualified parking or traffic consultant in order to support a request for reduced
parking. Such a report shall be submitted with the application for plan and zoning commission review.
(4) The zoning administrator will review the submitted application and provide a recommendation to the plan and zoning commission.
(5) The village may attach such conditions to the adjustment as it may deem appropriate.
(6) The village may require a fee in lieu of parking spaces in accordance with a schedule approved from time to time by the village board.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 334/377
(7) An adjustment to parking, loading or bicycle parking requirements to less than seventy percent (70%) of the requirements of this article may be
made only if the adjustment is subject to the following additional restrictions:
(a) The petitioner must be an existing owner of the subject property; and
(b) Such relief may not be granted if the petitioner is seeking a variation from the gross floor area, building height or yard requirements.
(c) The owner has not created the problem by having previously subdivided the parcel from a larger tract.
(d) Such an adjustment shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) trustees.
B. Other Adjustments. The village board, without a public hearing, and not in addition to subsection A of this section, may approve a reduction in the
required parking in the following situations:
(1) Captive Market Credit. Retail and restaurant uses may be eligible for a captive market credit where it is determined that some portion of the
patronage of these businesses derives from other uses located within a maximum walking distance of one thousand feet (1,000'). In addition to or in
lieu of a parking design analysis the following factors for captive market adjustments may be utilized for uses as noted in the VC and O/ROD
districts:
ALLOWABLE PARKING REDUCTION BY USE
Retail/service 15 percent
Food and beverage 15 percent
General offices 5 percent
Financial institution 5 percent
(2) Public Transportation Proximity Credits.
(a) A reduction of up to five percent (5%) of the required parking, based on substantiated projections of reduction in parking demand, may be granted
for any use, building or complex located within three hundred feet (300') of any regularly scheduled bus route or other transportation system.
(b) A reduction of up to fifteen percent (15%) of the required parking, based on substantiated projections of reduction in parking demand, may be
granted for any use, building or complex that institutes and maintains a continuous, personalized shuttle service, or contracts with an outside
agency for such service.
(3) Complementary Uses. Up to ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area in the same building or building complex may be occupied by other
complementary uses without providing parking in addition to that imposed by the application of the ratio for the principal use. Occupancy by
complementary tenancies shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the building or building complex.
(a) Examples.
1. Pharmacy in a hospital or doctor's office building.
2. Food court, bar or restaurant in an office building.
(4) Alternative Transport Provision Credit.
(a) A reduction of up to five percent (5%) of the required number of parking spaces may be granted for any use, building or complex of buildings at a
credit of two (2) spaces for each space provided with no fee access electric car charging stations.
(b) A reduction of up to five percent (5%) of the required number of parking spaces may be granted for any use, building or complex of buildings at a
credit of four (4) spaces for each space provided with no fee access solar powered electric car charging stations.
(c) A reduction of up to five percent (5%) of the required number of parking spaces may be granted for any use, building or complex of buildings at a
credit of one space for each ten (10) bicycle parking spaces provided beyond the minimum calculated requirement. Said spaces shall be provided
with adequate rack parking as determined by the zoning administrator, sheltered from precipitation, and shall meet the minimum standards for
parking spaces as set forth in this code. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-11: DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES IN NC, B-1, AND O/R DISTRICTS.
A. Banking Facility. Stacking lanes sufficient to accommodate the number of automobiles that is equal to five (5) times the number of drive-through teller
windows. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with or include any portion of an access or service drive, aisle or designated parking space. Stacking lanes
shall not be located within any street setback.
B. Restaurants. Drive-through facilities shall provide for a vehicle stacking lane sufficient to ensure all stacking activity is provided on site. A stacking lane
for each order box or window shall be provided at a minimum length of one hundred feet (100'). The actual length of the stacking lane shall be
determined based on the queuing expectations of peak hour projections, transaction time and number of windows. Stacking lanes shall not interfere
with or include any portion of an access or service drive, aisles or designated parking space. No order box or window shall be located closer than one
hundred feet (100') to any residentially zoned property. This requirement shall not be deemed to confer any right to a drive-through facility for food
service.
C. Other Facilities. Stacking lanes sufficient to accommodate a number of automobiles equal to at least three (3) times the number of drive-through
service windows. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with or include any portion of an access or service drive, aisles, or designated parking space. The
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 335/377
actual length of the stacking lane shall be determined based on the queuing expectations of peak hour projections, transaction time and number of
windows. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-11A: DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES IN THE VC ZONING DISTRICT.
The following shall apply to drive-in and drive-through facilities in the VC zoning district:
(1) A site within the village center district may not have more than one drive-in/drive-through lane.
(2) No lane may have more than two (2) service/transaction positions, subject to the following:
(a) Automatic teller machines shall be deemed to be a transaction position.
(b) A stacking lane must be provided sufficient to accommodate a minimum of three (3) and a maximum of five (5) automobiles, not including the
transaction/service position(s).
(c) Stacking lanes shall not interfere with or include any portion of an access or service drive, aisles or designated parking space.
(d) Electronic telecommunication devices, menu signage or order boxes shall not be counted toward the maximum number of teller/service positions.
However, none of these devices may be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to any residential district.
(e) This requirement shall not be deemed to confer any right to a drive-through facility for food service.
(f) No portion of any stacking lane or area shall be located within any required setback or yard. (Ord. 08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Sec. 20-12: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
A. Village Review. In addition to the parking standards set forth in this section, the village reserves the right to review planned unit development, special
use or any seasonal or temporary use to determine if additional parking, loading or stacking is needed based on the actual application and the
proposed location.
B. User Parking. Every use for which any requirement for parking is listed in subsection 20-2F of this article must provide an absolute minimum of one
user off street parking space.
C. Commercial Vehicles. In addition to the requirements of subsection 20-2F of this article, one off street parking space shall be required for each
commercial vehicle directly associated with a permitted use, whether or not the vehicle is anticipated to be stored only overnight on the premises. (Ord.
08-1377, 4-15-2008)
Article XXI. Nonconforming Situations
Sec. 21-1: PURPOSE.
Some uses and structures currently existing in the village may not conform to the requirements of this appendix A. This may be due to: 1) their
establishment prior to the adoption of this appendix A; or 2) a subsequent modification made to a zoning regulation. Generally accepted planning
standards require that such nonconforming uses or structures should be changed over time to conform to the regulations of this appendix A. This article
addresses the conditions under which uses and structures that do not conform to this appendix A may continue to exist. Under no circumstances shall a
structure or use that was illegal at the time of the adoption of this appendix A be deemed to become a legal nonconforming use because of such adoption.
(Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 21-2: NONCONFORMING USES.
A. Uses In Existence At The Time Of Adoption Of Appendix A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of a building existing at the
time of the adoption of this appendix A may be continued as a nonconforming use, although such use does not conform to the provisions of appendix
A. Such a use may be extended throughout a building, provided that parking is provided on site that is in compliance with this appendix A. Further, no
structural alterations or additions may be made to the structure in which the use is located other than those ordered by an authorized public official or
without first obtaining a special use permit to do so. Further, such extension of the use may not displace any residential use in a residential district.
B. Unimproved Land. A nonconforming use existing at the time of the adoption of this appendix A, of unimproved land may continue for three (3) years
from the effective date of this appendix A. However, no improvements may be made to the land other than normal maintenance or those ordered by an
authorized public official. If such nonconforming use is discontinued at any time or if ownership or possession is transferred, all future uses of the land
shall then conform to the provisions of this appendix A.
C. Modifications To The Law. A zoning district may be changed or the text of this appendix A may be amended so that a use becomes nonconforming as
a result of the action. In those instances, the use may be continued and may be extended throughout the structure in which it is located, provided that
parking that is in conformance with this appendix A is provided on site. Further, no structural alterations may be made other than those ordered by an
authorized public official.
D. Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Uses. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six (6) months, such nonconforming
use shall become illegal and shall not thereafter be reestablished and all future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this appendix A. (Ord.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 336/377
03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 21-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
A. Nonconforming Lots For Detached Single-Family Dwellings. Notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other provisions of this article, in any
zoning district in which detached single-family dwellings are a permitted use, a single-family dwelling may be erected and thereafter maintained,
repaired, restored, replaced, altered and enlarged on a legal nonconforming lot of record provided that such lot has both width and area which are
equal to at least eighty percent (80%) of the lot width and area regulations required in the district in which the lot is located. Such construction shall
comply with all other regulations (except lot area, shape, width and depth) applicable to single-family dwellings in the zoning district.
B. Nonconforming Lots For Multi-Family And Commercial Use. In any district in which detached single-family dwellings are not permitted, a legal
nonconforming lot of record may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located, but only if, the lot of record has a width and area
equal to at least eighty percent (80%) of the lot width and area regulations of the district in which it is located. However, the development of such lot
shall comply with all other regulations (except lot area, shape, width and depth) applicable to the use and district in which it is located.
C. Adjacent Nonconforming Lots. In certain instances at the time of the adoption of this appendix A, there may be in existence two (2) or more lots of
record, combinations of lots or portions of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership. If all or part of such lots do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area, the parcels or portions involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purpose of this code. No portion of
the parcel or parcels shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this code.
Further, no division of any parcel may be made which creates a lot of a width or area below the requirements stated in this appendix A. (Ord. 03-1155,
3-18-2003)
Sec. 21-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
A. Use Of Nonconforming Structures.
(1) Any structure that cannot be adopted to a conforming use without modifications that will cost in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the structure's fair
market value, and that has not been used for twelve (12) consecutive months, shall not be placed back into use and shall be deemed a nuisance that
may be abated in accord with the provisions of this code.
(2) Use of any nonconforming accessory structure shall be terminated and the structure brought into compliance when the principal use on the lot is
terminated or ownership or possession of the principal use is changed or transferred.
B. Improvements To Nonconforming Structures. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no nonconforming structure may be enlarged, extended,
expanded or structurally altered. Repairs, however, may be made to buildings or structures even if the building is nonconforming as to height and/or
area regulations.
Additionally, structural alterations and enlargements may be made to residential buildings or structures provided that all alterations are in compliance
with village regulations and that:
(1) The building or structure was legally constructed and/or modified with proper permits; and
(2) Upon completion, the structural alteration or enlargement will conform in all respects to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Dwellings Constructed Prior To 1957. Single-family dwellings which were constructed prior to January 1, 1957, are not to be considered as
nonconforming. However, such dwellings may not be enlarged or modified if any of the following result from the change:
(1) Decreased required yard areas because of additional encroachment into setback;
(2) Increased height above the maximum permitted by this appendix A;
(3) Increased portions of the structure that are above such maximum height;
(4) Increased lot coverage above the maximum permitted by this appendix A; and
(5) Increased FAR above the maximum permitted by this appendix A.
D. Relocation Of Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on its lot
unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
E. Damage To Nonconforming Structures. A building or structure which is nonconforming at the effective date of this appendix A and is damaged or
partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, or other calamity or act of God to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value may be
restored and its previous occupancy or use resumed, provided such restoration is started within six (6) months of the occurrence of the damage and
diligently prosecuted to completion. If, however, such damage amounts to fifty percent (50%) or more of the fair market value of the building or
structure, no restoration shall be made unless every portion of the building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
is located. For purposes of this subsection, the dollar amount of damage shall be the amount that it takes to restore the structure to substantially the
same condition that existed prior to the calamity. This shall be based on a certified contractor's estimate obtained by the owner, subject to the approval
of the director of community development and building. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 21-5: APPEAL.
Appeals with respect to nonconforming structures are subject to the zoning board of appeals review process as set forth in chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 337/377
03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article XXII. Variations And Amendments
Sec. 22-1: VARIATIONS.
Requests for variations from the strict application of this appendix A shall be made to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the standards,
reviews and submittal process set forth in chapter 4 of this code. Variations may only be applied to structures and not to uses. The only regulations which
may be varied are those with numerical standards. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 22-2: AMENDMENTS.
The corporate authorities may from time to time on their own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing before the plan and zoning commission,
amend the regulations of this appendix A. In case a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts is signed and
acknowledged by: 1) the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage of the property or properties proposed to be altered; or 2) by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from the property or properties; or 3) by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
frontage directly opposite the frontage of the property or properties proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk and such protest has been served
by the protestor on the zoning amendment applicant or his or her attorney by regular mail, such amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Sec. 22-3: FEES AND ESCROW.
Any fees or escrows associated with any variation or rezoning of any property shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article XXIII. Violation And Penalty
Sec. 23-1: GENERAL PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
appendix A shall upon a finding of guilty be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision as set forth in appendix D of this code unless otherwise
set forth in this code. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article XXIV. Repeal
Sec. 24-1: REPEALER.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this appendix A, be, and the same are hereby repealed. (Ord. 03-1155, 3-18-2003)
Article XXV. Effective Date
Sec. 25-1: DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS.
This appendix A shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication according to law.
Title Appendix B
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter
SUBDIVISIONS
DIVISION I. GENERAL
1.1: Title.
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the Northfield subdivision regulations (hereinafter "appendix B"). This article shall be considered as
an implementation of the official comprehensive land use plan of the village. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.2: Intent.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 338/377
The intent of the Northfield subdivision regulations are to protect the interests of the land owner or subdivider, the investor in land, the homeowner, and the
village with respect to any map, plat, or subdivision of any block, lot, sublot, or any part thereof, or any portion or parcel of land within the village's
jurisdictional area. This appendix B will: a) provide reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with accepted engineering and public health standards
and practices; b) govern the location, width, and course of streets; c) control floodwater runoff; d) provide rules and regulations with respect to water
supply, sewerage collection, street drainage, and other public improvements. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.3: Illinois Department Of Transportation Specifications.
For any improvement or structure for which the Illinois Department of Transportation has issued specifications, those specifications shall apply to this
appendix B unless otherwise stated herein. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.4: Standard Specifications For Sewer And Water Main Construction In Illinois.
All underground utility improvements shall comply with the most recent edition of the "Standard Specifications For Sewer And Water Main Construction In
Illinois". (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.5: Time Limitations.
All time limitations placed upon the village by this appendix B shall be considered directory and not mandatory and unless otherwise specified, shall in no
way affect the obligation of the applicant to abide by the regulations herein or otherwise deprive the village or any agency thereof of jurisdiction. Further,
unless otherwise stated, any time limitation herein may be extended by mutual consent of the parties. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.6: Forms.
Any applications, bonds, certificates, or other documents required in this appendix B shall be in a form provided or approved by the building commissioner.
(Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.7: Definitions.
For the purposes of this appendix B, the following words and terms shall have the meaning indicated below. If there is an affirmative requirement in any
definition herein, that requirement shall have the same force and effect as if set forth in any other section of this appendix B.
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by combinations of streets and public parks, forest preserves, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead
lines or shore lines, waterways, or boundary lines of the county of Cook, or municipalities adjacent to the village of Northfield.
BUILDING: Any covered structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or movable property of any kind and which is affixed to
the land. When a building is separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed a
separate building.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The village of Northfield building commissioner or his designate.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line on the final plat of subdivision which a building or structure may not be erected beyond or encroached upon in any
manner. The line may designate a setback from the street or it may designate a setback from a lot line.
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN: A plan for the present and future development and/or redevelopment of the village of Northfield and the
jurisdictional area adjacent to Northfield.
CONCEPT APPLICATION: The completed initial form furnished by the building commissioner as set forth in section 2.5 of this appendix B.
CONSOLIDATION: The combination of two (2) or more tracts or lots into one "lot" as defined in this appendix B.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village of Northfield.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
DEDICATION: The designation of land for some public use that is made by the owner and accepted for such use by a municipality.
DETENTION BASIN: A basin for storm water storage having a horizontal area with limits as defined by a zone designated as the "detention basin" on plats
or plans submitted to the village. On a single zoning lot, the detention basin may be defined on the plat on the final engineering plans, without benefit of an
easement. The detention basin may have either grass/landscaped surface or paved surface that is generally dry when not used for storm water storage.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of one family maintaining a household or a community residence.
(a) Single-Family Dwelling: A residential building unattached to any other and containing, or designed to contain, only one dwelling unit.
(b) Multiple-Family Dwelling: A building containing, or designed to contain, two (2) or more dwelling units.
EASEMENT: A recorded agreement whereby a grant is made by a property owner for the use of land for a specific purpose.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 339/377
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in section 2.9 of this appendix B.
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS: See chapter 7, article V of this code.
JURISDICTIONAL AREA: The area described in section 1.8 of this appendix B.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described and subdivided as a single lot which is occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building together with
its accessory structures and uses. A "lot" shall have its principal frontage on a street, or other place officially approved by the corporate authorities, and
shall include open spaces required by this ordinance.
(a) Corner Lot: A lot having frontage on two (2) intersecting streets.
(b) Double Frontage Lot: A lot which abuts on two (2) streets but is not a corner lot.
(c) Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner or double frontage lot.
LOT DEPTH: The average distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured at five (5) equidistant points along the respective front and rear lot
lines.
LOT OF RECORD: Land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision or described by metes and bounds, and which is recorded in the office of the recorder
of deeds or registered in the office of the registrar of titles of Cook County, Illinois.
LOT WIDTH: The average distance measured between side lot lines, measured at five (5) equidistant points along the respective side lot lines.
OFFICIAL MAP: A graphic portion of the comprehensive land use plan implemented by regulatory ordinance, made up of, but not necessarily limited to,
the Northfield zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, and major street, sewer, and water maps.
OWNER: Any person who owns jointly or severally with others, legal or equitable title to any property or improvement thereon.
PARKWAY: Any nonpaved area within the right of way.
PAVEMENT WIDTH: Measurement perpendicular to a pavement centerline extending from the face of a curb to the face of the opposing curb or from edge
of pavement to the edge of the opposing pavement if there are no curbs.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public thoroughfare across a block or providing access within a block, which is designated for the use of pedestrians and for the
installation of utility lines.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A unified development pursuant to article XVII of the village of Northfield zoning ordinance of one or more tracts of
contiguous land containing not less than that specified in appendix A of this code, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, and involving a single or
combination of land uses where one or more of the uses proposed may not otherwise be permitted in the zoning district or districts in which the land is
located. A single entity must be responsible to the village for the development. All access to a planned unit development, public or private, must be within
the control of said legal entity or village. Private access to each principal building must be granted by easements to the public or to specific classes of
individuals as permitted by law. The width of easement must be adequate for its purpose. The area reserved for the easement shall not be included when
determining land area for purposes of meeting provisions of the zoning ordinance.
PLAT OF SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION: A plat involving a "subdivision" as defined in this section.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as described in section 2.7 of this appendix B, including supporting documents
required for preliminary approval of the proposed plat of subdivision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Those land improvements including any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, public or private street, detention facility,
environmental protection facility, water main, street planting strips, sidewalks, pedestrianway, off street parking area, or other facility for which the village of
Northfield may assume control and responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, roadway, alley, or other public thoroughfare open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of travel.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts or regulations restricting the manner in which the land may be used.
RETENTION BASIN: A basin for storm water storage that functions in the same manner as a detention basin except that a retention basin has a water
surface when not actively storing storm water.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land owned, dedicated, or used as a roadway, accessway, or easement.
SCREENING: Structures or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view designated areas or objects behind such structures
or vegetation.
STANDARDS: Specifications for the preparation of plans indicating, among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such features
as rights of way and blocks.
STREET: A public or private right of way which affords primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties. Street shall not include
driveways leading to buildings.
STREET WIDTH: Pavement width plus any additional right of way retained by the agency owning the street.
SUBDIVIDER: A person, corporation, or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: A subdivision is: a) any change or rearrangement (including resubdivision) in the boundary or division lines of any parcel or parcels of real
estate or of any public thoroughfare and shall include, but not be limited to, the resubdivision of multiple parcels into a single parcel; or b) the platting of a
parcel or tract of land into a single numbered lot without alteration of its boundaries; or c) a "planned unit development" as defined herein or in the zoning
ordinance of the county of Cook. This definition shall apply regardless of the purpose of the subdivision. Only tax division shall not be subject to this
appendix B.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 340/377
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning principles established as guides for the preparation of plans, plats, or plan for public
improvement.
SURVEYOR: Any person licensed as a land surveyor in the state of Illinois.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an arterial traffic way.
WORKING DRAWINGS: Engineer's and architect's plans, details, sections, and profiles prepared for the building or constructing of a public improvement.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: The portion of a lot lying between the corner side lot line and the building and extending from the front yard to the rear lot line.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the front of a lot, the depth of which is the minimum permissible horizontal distance between
either the public right of way line, the street line or a private access easement and the front of the main building as specified by appendix A of this code for
that zoning district.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the rear of a lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the rear of the main building as specified by appendix A of this code for that zoning district. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel
to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot
from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending across the side of a lot, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side
lot line and the side of the main building excluding steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches as specified by appendix A of this code for that
zoning district.
ZONING MAP: The official zoning map of the village of Northfield delineating the various zoning districts within the village of Northfield and outside the
village of Northfield to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988; amd. Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003)
1.8: Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this appendix B shall apply to land situated within the corporate limits and, except where specifically excluded, to contiguous territory
within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village as now or hereafter existing which is not included in any other city or village,
except as such jurisdiction is limited by the provisions of statutes of the state of Illinois or amended by agreement between the village and any other
municipality pursuant to statute. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.9: Organization.
A. Northfield Corporate Authorities. The corporate authorities shall have the authority granted by statute in regard to subdivision control, including, but
not limited to, the following:
(1) Approval or disapproval of final plats and working drawings or any documents preliminary thereto.
(2) Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the plan commission.
(3) Amendment of this appendix B when found necessary and desirable as hereinafter provided.
(4) Enforcement of the provisions of this appendix B, including spending and the revocation of building and occupancy permits.
(5) Approval or disapproval of intended dedication of land for public use.
(6) The vacation of streets, alleys, or other public places and the fixing of compensation to the village therefor.
B. Northfield Plan Commission. With respect to subdivisions, the Northfield plan commission's duties and responsibilities shall include:
(1) Subject to the approval of the corporate authorities, to prepare and adopt such procedural rules and regulations as are required for the orderly and
efficient conduct of its business as provided by chapter 4, section 25 of this code, provided the same shall not be in conflict with any provision of this
appendix B; and
(2) Review all preliminary and final subdivision plans and plats in order to make determinations and recommendations in the areas of design standards
and engineering specifications, as specified and referred to herein and to hold public hearings pertaining thereto; and
(3) Make determinations and recommendations to the corporate authorities regarding approval or disapproval of plats, working drawings, code
amendments, variations and exceptions, land dedications, and vacations. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.10: Variations And Exceptions.
The plan commission may recommend to the corporate authorities that a variation or exception be granted to this appendix B when it is found that
extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this appendix B because of unique physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
characteristics of the property, or such other reasons not caused by the property owner or anyone under his direction, as distinguished from mere
inconvenience or a desire to derive greater economic gain. The granting of the variation shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or
injurious to other property or improvements or to the neighborhood in which the property is located. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
1.11: Violations Penalties And Enforcement.
Whosoever, without having complied with all the requirements of this appendix B, shall sell, offer for sale, or lease any lot, block, or parcel of real estate in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 341/377
the village of Northfield or within its jurisdictional area, or shall subdivide or resubdivide any lot or block therein shall be subject to fines of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot, block, parcel, or part thereof and shall be subject to suspension or
revocation of any building and occupancy permit(s) issued for each such lot. Each day of the violation may be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 88-
536, 3-22-1988)
1.12: Construing These Subdivision Regulations.
A. Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this appendix B are intended to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, and welfare.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this appendix B upon the use of land or buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this appendix B, or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulations of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive shall govern.
B. Private Agreements. This appendix B is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this appendix B are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this appendix B shall govern.
C. Covenants. The corporate authorities may require or approve, consistent with this appendix B, certain subdivision restrictions that are to be private
covenants that run with the land. However, the village of Northfield shall be under no obligation to enforce such private covenants.
D. Recapture Agreements. The village in its sole discretion, may enter into an agreement with the developer to recapture on behalf of the developer or
the village reasonable costs, or any portion thereof, for off site and on site improvements. This subsection shall not be deemed to require the village to
enter into such an agreement.
E. Off Site Improvements. The village may require contributions for off site improvements which are necessary to effect compliance with this appendix B
or which are of benefit to the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
DIVISION II. PROCEDURE
2.1: Subdivision Prohibited Without Approval.
It shall be unlawful to subdivide property within the jurisdiction of this appendix B without first receiving approval therefor by the corporate authorities of the
village of Northfield. Such approval of the corporate authorities shall only be by official adoption of a resolution pursuant to section 2.8(3). (Ord. 88-536, 3-
22-1988)
2.2: Fees.
All subdivision fees shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.3: Forms.
Unless otherwise specified, all forms referred to in this appendix B shall be as provided by the village of Northfield building commissioner. (Ord. 88-536, 3-
22-1988)
2.4: Time For Filing Documents.
All information shall be submitted complete at least twenty (20) days prior to the initial hearing or meeting. Subsequent information shall be submitted at
least ten (10) days prior to a hearing or meeting. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.5: Concept Application Procedure.
(1) A concept application shall be made to the building commissioner which shall include:
(a) Location of the proposed subdivision.
(b) Current and proposed zoning for the subdivision.
(c) Nature of the improvements.
(d) Name of the applicant. If the applicant is a contract purchaser, that applicant shall include with the application a letter signed by the record owner
granting express consent to make said application.
(e) If the applicant is a corporation, the application must be accompanied by a resolution of the corporation authorizing the execution and submittal of
the instant application. In addition, the application shall indicate on its face the names of all directors and corporate officers of the corporation and
also the names of all shareholders who own individually or beneficially five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding stock of the corporation.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 342/377
(f) If the applicant is a general partnership, the application shall contain a list of all general partners who have a five percent (5%) or greater individual
or beneficial interest in the partnership.
(g) If the applicant is a limited partnership, the application shall contain the following information:
A list of all the names of general partners and the names of all limited partners having a five percent (5%) or greater individual or beneficial interest
in the partnership.
(h) If the applicant is a land trust or any other trust, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust together
with their respective interests in the trusts. The application shall be further verified by the applicant in his capacity of trustee or by the beneficiary
as a beneficial owner of an interest in the trust and the application shall be signed individually by as many beneficiaries as are necessary to
constitute greater than fifty percent (50%) ownership of the beneficial interest of the trust.
(2) Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the concept application, the building commissioner shall arrange with the applicant a prehearing meeting
which shall take place within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the concept application. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(3) Consolidations or lot line adjustments do not require this procedure. (Ord. 99-966, 1-25-1999)
2.6: General Procedure; Preliminary Plat.
(1) Within thirty (30) days of the final prehearing meeting, the applicant shall file a preliminary plat of subdivision with the building commissioner. The
filing of the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be the filing of the preliminary application. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(2) The petitioner shall send notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the first meeting at which the plan and zoning
commission will consider the said preliminary plat, to all owners of record of each lot or parcel of property located within two hundred fifty feet (250')
of any portion of the land proposed to be subdivided. This notice shall be based upon the most recent Cook County tax records and Sidwell maps.
This notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain a general
description of the land proposed to be subdivided and a general description of the proposed subdivision. The date for the first meeting shall be set
within twenty eight (28) days of the filing of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 99-966, 1-25-1999)
(3) The plan commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days from the date of the application or
the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later. If such plat is disapproved, then within said ninety (90)
days the plan commission shall furnish to the applicant a written statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity
the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to village regulations. The corporate authorities shall accept or reject said plat within thirty
(30) days after its next regular stated meeting following any action of the plan commission. Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
(4) Upon approval of the corporate authorities, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting a copy of the preliminary plat to such authorities as are
required for the approval of final plats under 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
(5) The plan commission shall have the right to continue a hearing for the purpose of permitting the applicant to comply with the requirements of this
appendix or other regulations of the village. However, the plan commission shall not be required to grant such continuances.
(6) The plan commission may recommend or the corporate authorities may require such changes or revisions in the preliminary plat as are deemed
necessary in the interests and needs of the community and as are consistent with this appendix. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(7) Consolidations or lot line adjustments do not require this procedure. (Ord. 99-966, 1-25-1999)
2.7: Preliminary Plat; Requirements.
A. Preliminary Plat. Each preliminary plat shall show and contain the following:
(1) Identification And Description.
(a) Proposed name of subdivision (not duplicating name of any plat heretofore recorded in Cook County).
(b) Location by township, section, town, and range, or by other legal description.
(c) Graphics (engineering scale not smaller than 1 inch to 100 feet).
(d) Names and addresses of all property owners adjacent to the subject property shall be shown on the plat along with all adjacent property lines and
easements or rights of way.
(e) North point (designated as true north).
(f) Date of preparation.
(g) A signed statement by the land planner or developer that the plat meets the requirement of this appendix B and the Illinois plat act.
(h) Names and addresses of planners, engineers, surveyors, legal and beneficial title holders, and persons responsible for the subject plat.
(i) Total acreage of the subdivision to within one-tenth (1/10) of an acre.
(2) Existing Conditions.
All of the following occurring within two hundred feet (200') of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be shown:
(a) Clear indication of the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision.
(b) Location, widths, and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public ways indicating types of improvements and location of
railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, and section and corporate
boundary lines.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 343/377
(c) Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities, including such data as grades, invert elevations, and
locations of catchbasins, manholes, and hydrants.
(d) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land identified by name and ownership.
(e) Topographical data including contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot (1'); watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, and high water
elevation. Sources of information and other significant features shall be included. When contour lines are more than one hundred feet (100') apart
intermediate spot elevation lines shall be provided.
(3) Subdivision Design Features. The application for preliminary approval shall show or contain the following:
(a) The location and width of proposed streets, alleys, and public ways.
(b) The proposed location of sewers and storm drains.
(c) The proposed dedication of public grounds, if any.
(d) The layout, number, area, and typical dimensions of lots to the nearest foot.
(e) Proposed easements for public utilities.
(f) An engineering plan and narrative statement of the proposed method of sewage and waste disposal, storm water disposal, and water supply.
(g) The quantity of storm water detention required and provided, the actual and allowable release rate, the upstream bypass area, and the route and
capacity of the downstream system.
(h) Soils information including USDA type, water table, bearing capacity, and boring location. (1 boring shall be provided for every 300 feet of road.)
(i) Preliminary landscape and lighting plan for roads or other areas intended for use by the public.
(j) Lot area for each lot with designations of the largest lot, smallest lot, and average lot area.
(4) Restrictive Covenants.
(a) An outline of the restrictive covenants shall accompany the preliminary plat.
(b) In cases of annexation, the applicant shall, within ninety (90) days after the final plat is recorded, initiate proceedings to disconnect from the
Northbrook rural fire protection district and the special police district such portion or portions of land contained in said subdivision that lies within
the village limits. The applicant shall further petition to annex such portions of land to the Northfield or the Winnetka park district and to the
Winnetka library district. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.8: General Procedure; Final Plat.
(1) Application for approval of the final plat shall be filed with the building commissioner not later than one year after preliminary approval has been
granted. Such application shall be accompanied by:
(a) The original tracing of the proposed final plat, suitable for recording, and six (6) copies thereof.
(b) All fees as required by appendix D of this code.
(c) Four (4) complete sets of engineering plans and specifications of required land improvements as regulated by section 3.2 of this appendix B. Said
plans and specifications shall bear the seal of an Illinois registered professional engineer, along with his signed statement that such plans and
specifications have been prepared in compliance with this appendix B and with good engineering practice.
(d) A statement signed by the subdivider, builder, or land developer setting forth an agreement executed by such subdivider, builder, or land
developer wherein he, or they, agree to make and install the improvements provided in section 3.3, division III of this appendix in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the village.
(e) All bonds required under section 2.11 of this division.
(2) The applicant may elect to have final approval made on a geographic part or parts of the plat which have received preliminary approval, and may
delay application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of the corporate authorities, provided that all
public improvements required to serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been provided. In such case only the part or parts of
the plat that have received final approval shall be recorded1.
(3) The plan commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat of subdivision within forty five (45) days from the date of the application for final
approval of the plat or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later. If such plat is disapproved, then
within said forty five (45) days the plan commission shall furnish to the applicant in writing a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the village of Northfield regulations. The corporate authorities
shall by resolution accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regular meeting following any action of the plan commission.
(4) After approval by the corporate authorities, the secretary of the plan commission shall cause the final plat to be recorded in the recorder's office of
Cook County. However, in the case of subdivision in the jurisdictional area outside the village limits, the final plat will be transmitted to the plat officer
of Cook County. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.9: Final Plat; Requirements.
Each final plat shall contain and show the following:
(a) Proposed name of subdivision and legal description of subdivision.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 344/377
(b) An identification system for all lots and blocks.
(c) Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles, and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, building
setback lines, areas to be reserved for public use, and other important features. Lot lines shall show dimensions in feet and hundredths. All
dimensions shown on curved lines shall be arc distances. The minimum scale of final plats shall be one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50').
(d) True angles and distances to at least two (2) of the nearest established street lines or official monuments accurately described in the plat.
(e) North point (designated as true north).
(f) Township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles.
(g) Radii, internal angles, points of tangency and curvature, tangent bearings, and lengths of all arcs.
(h) Accurate location of all subdivision boundary monuments of three inches by three inches by thirty inches (3" x 3" x 30") precast concrete with iron
pipe cast in the center. Concrete monuments shall be placed at all changes in direction of a subdivision exterior boundary and at all points where a
proposed dedicated right of way crosses the boundary. Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at the corners of each lot and at each point of tangency
and curvature.
(i) Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of the property owners within
the subdivision, with purposes indicated thereon.
(j) Where a floodwater retention or detention basin or storm sewer system is to be constructed, the date of completion of such basin or system or a
phasing schedule for the completion thereof. Such schedule shall assure the completion of all storm sewers and floodwater retention basins
necessary to accommodate all storm water associated with the particular phasing of the development prior to the issuance of any building permits.
(k) Restrictive covenants shall be lettered on the final plat or appropriately referenced thereon.
(l) Certification by a licensed surveyor, to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereon
exist as located and that all dimensional details are correct.
(m) Mylar topographical overlay for entire subdivision.
(n) The flood base elevation for the site shall be shown at each corner of each subdivision plat. Said plat shall also indicate for each lot in a subdivision
in the floodplain the minimum elevations of ground floors, basement floors, or the bottom of openings in basement walls. (Zoning Ordinance)
(o) Signed approval of the Illinois department of transportation indicating that the plat complies in all respects with all local, county, state and federal
regulations, including, but not limited to, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2, with respect to the approval for roadway access. (Ord. 01-1073, 8-20-
2001)
(p) Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder of record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public
areas.
(q) Forms for certification showing that all special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
(r) Forms for approval by signature of village, county, metropolitan sanitary district, and state officials concerned with the specifications of utility
installations.
(s) Form for approval by the plan commission.
(t) Form for approval by the village board.
(u) Forms for approval by Cook County authorities as required. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.10: Compliance With Floodplain Regulations.
All subdivision plats shall comply in all respects with article XIIIA, "Floodplain Regulations" of the Northfield zoning ordinance. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.11: Bonds Required For Subdivisions Both Within And Without Corporate Limits.
A. Completion Bond. Before issuance of any building permits for improvements of lots in a subdivision within the borders of the village or outside the
village border (but within the village's zoning jurisdiction) the subdivider, builder, or developer shall deposit with the village an amount sufficient to cover
one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the estimate made by the village engineer to complete all public improvements, both on and off site, (except
trees) required under this appendix, including all reasonable inspection fees. This bond may be accomplished in one of the following ways: 1) a cash
bond in said amount, 2) an irrevocable commercial letter of credit in said amount issued by a national or state banking association, or 3) an irrevocable
letter of commitment in said amount issued by a federal or state savings and loan association. The bond shall contain a statement that it shall not
expire prior to completion and acceptance of the public improvements as set forth in section 2.13 and a further statement that failure to complete the
public improvements prior to the scheduled completion date shall constitute default. The bond may be reduced from time to time upon the approval of
the village Manager concurrently with preliminary approval of corresponding portions of the improvements. Said reduction shall be on the basis of one
dollar ($1.00) reduced for each one dollar ($1.00) paid by the owner or developer. If cash is posted, as in item 1 of this subsection, that cash deposit
may be used to pay dollar for dollar for invoiced labor and materials subject to reasonable procedures for lien waivers and verification of invoices as
established by the village.
B. Defects Bond. Prior to any reduction in bond pursuant to subsection A of this section by the village, owner, subdivider, or developer shall deposit with
the village cash in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total deposit required under subsection A of this section. Such cash along with any
remaining principal deposit described in subsection A of this section, shall be retained by the village for a period of one year following the final
acceptance of all improvements to be constructed in order to insure and protect against defects or faults discovered during said one year period. The
village may use all or any portion of such amount retained to cure and correct any faults or defects discovered during said one year period, including
legal and engineering fees necessarily incurred by the village as a result of those faults or defects. Upon the expiration of said one year period, the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 345/377
entire amount remaining shall be refunded to the developer. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from further charging the subdivider for repair or
replacement of defective items or from maintaining legal action to enforce payment for repair of defects2.
C. Tree Bond. The owner, subdivider, or developer shall deposit with the village one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount of the village
engineer's estimate of the cost of all parkway trees within the subdivision. This amount shall be retained by the village for a period of forty eight (48)
months after the last tree is planted. The trees shall be replaced as often as necessary during that time period. Funds remaining after forty eight (48)
months shall be released upon approval of the building commissioner. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from further charging the subdivider for
repair or replacement of defective items or from maintaining legal action to enforce payment for repair of defects3. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.12: Portional Development Of Subdivision.
It shall be presumed to be in the best interests of the village that all subdivisions be developed and completed as a unit. No builder, developer, or
subdivider may install public improvements on a phased or sectional basis as a matter or right. The corporate authorities may approve such sectional
development only upon a finding that it will not adversely affect the rest of the subdivision or the village as a whole. Such sectional development shall be
subject to modification of bonding requirements, public improvement and private road acceptance requirements, and scheduling of issuance of building
permits as the corporate authorities shall deem appropriate. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.13: Acceptance Of Required Land Improvements.
When all public improvements required by this appendix B have been installed in conformance with the approved engineering plans and specifications and
when "as built" plans have been submitted to the building commissioner, the subdivider shall then present to the building commissioner a certificate by an
engineer licensed to practice in the state of Illinois stating that all public improvements have been completed in accordance with the specifications. "As
built" plans shall include a survey of all public improvements and private streets noting "as constructed" elevations, locations, materials, and fittings. All
structures shall be located by means of two measurements to surrounding permanent objects. The corporate authorities may then enact a resolution
accepting said improvements as having been completed, provided that roads and sidewalks may not be accepted by the corporate authorities until fifty
percent (50%) of the lots have buildings on them. Private roads shall require approval by the village in the same manner. In the sole discretion of the
village, roads and streets may be accepted subject to the installation of the asphalt surface not later than fifteen (15) months after installation of the binder
and base. The village shall require appropriate security for such delayed installation of the surface course. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.14: Building Permit.
No building permit shall be issued by any village official for the construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or any lot within a
subdivision until the plat of subdivision or portion of the plat affected by the building permit has been recorded. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.15: Occupancy Permit.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for the use of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting until the required public improvements and
private roads have been accepted pursuant to section 2.14 of this division. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
2.16: Failure To Complete.
In the event that the subdivider fails to complete the construction in accordance with the requirements of this appendix B within two (2) years of the date of
the bond agreement, the bond shall be forfeited and the village of Northfield may use all or part of such bond as may be required to complete the project in
accordance with the approved working drawings. The above time limit may be extended by the village when it deems that to do so is in the public interest.
(Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
DIVISION III. SUBDIVISION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
3.1: Public And Private Streets.
It is the intention of this appendix B that new streets shall be dedicated public roads with sidewalks which must specifically conform to the standards set
forth herein. However, a single-family residential subdivider may request, and the corporate authorities may approve, a subdivision which does not comply
with the construction standards of section 3.3 of this division which contains private, undedicated streets or which contains no sidewalks. The corporate
authorities may authorize the construction of streets that do not comply with the construction standards of section 3.3 of this division, approve such private
streets, and authorize the elimination of sidewalks. They may do so upon written notice from the village engineer, police chief, and fire chief that the street,
as designed, provides adequate and safe access for the public and for appropriate emergency vehicles; that doing so will result in the development of a
subdivision that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is to be located; and that the health, safety, and welfare of all
Northfield residents will not be adversely affected. Unless the corporate authorities have granted relief from the requirements of section 3.3 of this division
pursuant to the terms of this section, private, undedicated streets shall conform in all respects to the construction requirements of this appendix B. If the
subdivider petitions for relief under this section, the subdivider agrees to be bound by the requirements of the corporate authorities. If the subdivider is
unwilling to abide by the terms set out by the corporate authorities, he will then be required to abide by all of the standards set forth in this division. (Ord.
06-1277, 2-21-2006)
3.2: Design Standards.
(1) Street Plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the official comprehensive plan and to the
provisions of this section; and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 346/377
conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to be
served.
(2) Streets.
(a) All streets shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24') and a minimum street width of sixty six feet (66'), subject to the
provisions of section 3.1 of this division.
(b) Where a street centerline within a single block deflects more than ten degrees (10°), a curve with a minimum centerline radius of one hundred fifty
feet (150') shall be required. Street centerlines within a single block may deflect at less than ten degrees (10°) without curves, provided that such
deflections are at least three hundred feet (300') apart.
(c) Proposed subdivisions containing more than ten (10) acres shall have street layouts on curvilinear patterns. However, in such subdivisions an
interconnecting grid system of thoroughfares shall be required at approximately one-half (1/2) mile intervals unless specifically waived by the
corporate authorities upon advice of the village engineer. Subdivisions containing ten (10) acres or less may be curvilinear or rectangular.
(d) The maximum length of a straight street centerline or extension of a tangent to a curve shall be three hundred feet (300'). This shall not apply to
straight streets on the boundary of a subdivision.
(e) All centerline gradients shall be at least one percent (1.00%) and shall not exceed six percent (6.00%).
(f) Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in the centerline gradient occurs except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one
percent (1%) or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be forty feet (40') for each one percent (1%) of algebraic difference of
grade but in no case shall such length be less than one hundred feet (100').
(g) Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by traffic other than local will be discouraged.
(h) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') are prohibited.
(i) All street intersections and confluences shall be designed so as to encourage safe and efficient traffic flow. Visual or "sightline" easements will be
provided at intersections where directed by the village engineer.
(j) The maximum length of cul-de-sacs shall be five hundred feet (500') measured along the centerline from the intersection at origin to end of right of
way, unless there are fewer than sixteen (16) lots abutting the cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a
minimum right of way diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120'). Cul-de-sac pavements shall have a minimum diameter of ninety feet (90').
Curbed planting islands with a maximum diameter of forty feet (40') shall be included.
(k) Reserved strips of land designed to block the extension of platted or existing streets or direct street access are prohibited.
(l) Where a lot abuts two (2) or more streets, access shall be restricted to the more local cross street.
(3) Alleys And Sidewalks.
(a) Alleys are not permitted in residential areas.
(b) Alleys, at least twenty four feet (24') wide, shall be provided in commercial or industrial subdivisions unless all lots therein are otherwise provided
with access to off street loading space.
(c) Sidewalks shall be at least five feet (5') wide and shall be required along all streets. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(4) Street Lighting. There shall be at least one standard luminaire at each intersection in residential zoning districts. In the village center,
office/research, M-1 and NC zoning districts, spacing and location of standards shall be as approved by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-
1988; amd. Ord. 03-1156, 3-18-2003)
(5) Public Utility Easements. Easements for utilities, sewer and/or drainage shall be provided by clearly indicating on the face of the plat the following
language:
Easement Provisions
Whenever the words "public utilities" or "public utilities easement" shall appear on this plat, the Village of Northfield, a municipal corporation,
Cook County, Illinois, and its successors and assigns, jointly and severally, shall hold a perpetual easement under, over, and across the surface of
the property marked as such on the plat. The words "public utilities" or "public utilities easement" shall designate land to be used for the
installation, construction, use, repair, and maintenance of all public utility equipment, including, but not limited to, facilities used in connection with
underground transmission and/or distribution of electricity, sounds, signals, water, sewage, and overland swales. Rights to enter the subdivided
property shall be granted for all such purposes, including the right to enter to cut, trim, or remove vegetation as may be reasonably required for
such public utilities. Obstructions shall not be placed over grantee's facilities or in, upon, or over the property within the lines marked "easement"
without the prior written consent of the grantee. Such consent of the grantee shall not relieve the grantor(s) or their successors or assigns from the
duty and obligation to remove, at their sole expense, such obstructions whenever the grantee, in its sole judgment, deems such removal
necessary, in its sole judgment, to enable the grantee to repair or maintain any facilities within the easement rights granted hereunder. After
installation of any such facilities, the grade of the subdivided property shall not be altered in a manner so as to unreasonably interfere with the
proper operation and maintenance thereof.
The submission of the final plat to the corporate authorities for final approval shall constitute consent by the property owner(s) to the terms of the
declaration or easement set forth in this section. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(6) Drainage Easement. Where subdivisions abut the Middlefork or the Skokie branch of the north branch of the Chicago River or its tributaries, an
easement shall be granted to the village for drainage and future access to such watercourse. The easement shall be the greater of either of the
following: a) fifty feet (50') on each side of the waterway as measured from the centerline; b) the entire width of the floodway as designated by the
Illinois department of transportation. The width of an easement along tributaries may be reduced from the aforementioned width with the consent of
the corporate authorities. The village may also require a reasonable easement for drainage and future access from the street to the watercourse.
(Ord. 05-1247, 6-21-2005)
All subdivision plans shall include provisions (and easements, if required) for emergency overload flow.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 347/377
(7) Block Standards.
(a) The maximum lengths of blocks shall be one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800'). Blocks over nine hundred feet (900') long shall have
pedestrianways at their approximate centers. The use of additional accessways to schools, parks, or other destinations may be specified by the
plan commission.
(b) No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit readily into the overall plan of subdivision and their design must
evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and public open space areas.
(c) Blocks intended for commercial, industrial, and institutional use must be designed to accommodate such traffic and development.
(d) It shall be an objective of the village to limit intersections of subdivision roadways with existing roadways to not less than one-half (1/2) mile
intervals. To this end, any new subdivision with more than one-half (1/2) mile of frontage along an existing roadway shall have access points at not
less than one-half (1/2) mile intervals. The village may also require all subdivisions whether having more or less than one-half (1/2) mile frontage, to
have access from existing subdivision roadways or the village may require the construction of an access street parallel to the existing roadway
within a single subdivision or to connect new subdivisions to existing subdivisions.
(e) The above standards may be modified for planned unit developments upon approval of the corporate authorities.
(8) Lot Standards.
(a) Minimum lot dimensions in subdivisions designed for single-family detached dwelling developments shall be:
1. Seventy five feet (75') wide (85 feet for corner lots), measured at the established building setback line and fifty feet (50') wide measured at the
front lot line along outside street curvatures.
2. Not less than one hundred ten feet (110') in average depth.
3. Rear lot lines shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
4. All lots shall be in full compliance with the zoning ordinance of the village of Northfield, except those outlots established for compensatory
storage or detention. (Ord. 05-1247, 6-21-2005)
5. Any portion of a lot dedicated to detention, retention, or compensatory storage shall not be included when determining minimum lot square
footage for a particular zoning district pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the village of Northfield.
(b) Acute angled lot corners are prohibited. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular as practicable.
(c) Side lines of a lot shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the street line.
(d) All lots, except those in planned developments, shall abut on a publicly dedicated street or a private road as approved by the corporate
authorities.
(e) Double frontage lots are not permitted except:
1. Where lots back upon a major thoroughfare.
2. Where topographic or other conditions (such as commercial usage) render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
Such excepted double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least twenty feet (20') in order to allow space for a protective screen along
the back lot line.
No excepted double frontage lot shall have access to more than one street.
(f) A minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil must be provided on all lots and parkways. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
(9) Floodplain Regulations. (Rep. by Ord. 05-1247, 6-21-2005)
(10) Drainage Grading Plan. Prior to the approval by the village authorities of the final plat of subdivision, the applicant shall have prepared an overall
drainage grading plan of the area covered by the subdivision plan on which is indicated the proposed method of disposing of storm water from the
lots and blocks in the area. When possible, the plan shall indicate the approximate size and location of each home to be constructed on each lot, the
foundation or first floor elevation, the elevation of the proposed pavement and sidewalk, the route and elevation of the emergency overflow route, the
location grading and release rate from each detention or retention basin, and the elevation of the finished grade at each corner of each lot. The plan
shall also indicate the manner in which storm water runoff is to discharge from back lot line locations to the proposed pavement or storm sewer
system. All drainage plans shall comply with chapter 7 of this code.
(11) Compensatory Storage And Detention. All compensatory storage basins and detention areas in subdivisions of three (3) or more lots shall be
located in a separate outlot. The village, in its sole discretion, may also require that compensatory storage basins and detention areas in subdivisions
of less than three (3) lots be located in a separate outlot. An easement of not less than twenty feet (20') in width and running from a street to the
outlot shall be required to give access to the village for the purpose of maintaining the outlot. All new subdivisions in the village of Northfield or any
portion thereof which is located within the floodplain and which requires compensatory storage, shall provide the compensatory storage according to
a ratio of one to twenty five (1:25) units of storage for any unit of fill brought into the floodplain. This requirement shall be enforced notwithstanding
any less stringent compensatory storage requirements found in any other ordinances of the village of Northfield.
The building commissioner shall maintain a complete listing of all compensatory storage basins and detention basins for the storage and retention of
storm water in the village, whether required under this appendix B or otherwise, and shall cause each basin to be inspected periodically, but not less
than every five (5) years. Such inspection shall be performed at the owner's expense and by an engineer registered in the state of Illinois. A report
shall be submitted to the building commissioner, including supporting calculations stipulating the existing capacity of the storage basin. The building
commissioner shall cause notice to be served upon the record owner thereof to restore, repair, or properly maintain any such basin which does not
retain its original storage capacity. This paragraph shall apply to all compensatory storage basins or detention areas existing on the date of the
adoption of this appendix B as well as all future compensatory storage basins or detention areas. In the event such notice has not been complied
with on or before ninety (90) days after service thereof (unless such time period shall be extended by the corporate authorities), the village may
perform such restoration, repair, or maintenance work as may be necessary to return such compensatory storage basin or detention area to its
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 348/377
original storage capacity. The cost thereof shall be a lien in favor of the village upon the lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which compensatory storage
basin or detention area is located or against each property for which it was created to benefit. Such lien shall be enforceable at law or in equity upon
the village's filing with the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois, a notice of lien citing this paragraph and describing the necessary work
performed and the reasonable cost thereof to the village. A recordable covenant satisfactory to the village attorney shall be required for the perpetual
maintenance of the compensatory storage basin or detention area.
(12) Preservation Of Landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal so
that the resulting development will be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas and will not adversely affect the
ecology of the area. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
3.3: Construction Standards.
The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, water supply system, street grading and pavement, alleys, pedestrianways, public utilities
and street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances of the village of Northfield and with the most current "Report And Master Plan For Sanitary
Sewer Extensions", "Report And Master Plan For Storm Drainage", and "Report And Master Plan For Water Supply And Distribution". All utilities and
services shall be placed underground and trenched in. If such utilities are placed within a 1.1 slope of an existing or proposed pavement or sidewalk, they
shall be backfilled with crushed stone, the grade shall be as specified by the village engineer.
(1) Sewers.
(a) Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision and shall meet all requirements of chapter
7 of this code. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed of SDR 26 PVC or class 52 DIP. Sanitary and storm services shall be SDR 35 PVC or CL52
DIP. Public sanitary sewers shall have a minimum internal diameter of eight inches (8"). Sanitary sewer services shall have a minimum internal
diameter of six inches (6"). Joints for sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be of the compression type in conformance with the
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials, designation D3212 (PVC) or (DIP). Sidewalls and bases of manholes on sanitary
sewers shall be of reinforced precast concrete ring construction which shall have a five inch (5") minimum thickness. Manhole frames and covers
shall be Neenah R-1015 with a concealed pickhole, gasket seal and "SANITARY" cast on top. Precast flexible rubber sleeves shall be provided for
all manhole connections. Manhole covers to be used in the floodplain shall be a bolt down type (R-1077-B or R-1916-F).
(b) Current MDSGC requirements shall apply, including, but not limited to, requirements for pipe slope and manhole spacing. All PVC pipe shall be
defection tested. All pipe shall be tested for infiltration.
(c) In cases where a connection is within twelve inches (12") of the invert, sanitary services shall connect directly to the manhole. All other
connections shall be by WYE connection and shall attach to the pipe with a gasket or glue and bonding. Maximum infiltration shall be 100 gal./in
dia./mile/day, tested after service connections are installed.
(d) Storm sewers throughout the entire subdivision shall be designed to carry water off from all inlets and catch basins and connect to an adequate
outfall. The storm water drainage system shall comply with all requirements of chapter 7 of this code. Storm sewers shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete pipe (class IV). SDR 35 PVC may be used off road or where cover materials at least 1.5 x diameter of the pipe is available.
Other materials of storm sewer construction may be used in special cases only upon the approval of the corporate authorities. Existing drain tiles
shall be connected to the storm sewers and shall be restored to operating condition. Sidewalls and bases of manholes on storm sewers shall be of
reinforced precast concrete ring construction which shall have five inch (5") minimum thickness. Storm sewer capacities shall be determined with
the use of the SCS TR 55 method, or in accordance with the village's storm water management code, whichever is more restrictive. All
transmission lines shall be designed for a return frequency of not less than ten (10) years. Street grades and drainage swale grades shall be
constructed to transport storm overflow for a 100-year storm without damage to adjoining property and shall be subject to approval by the village
engineer.
(2) Fire Hydrants. All fire hydrants shall be Traverse City TVC-5 (Traffic). All eight inch (8") water valves shall be installed in four feet (4') diameter
precast concrete vaults with minimum five and one-fourth inch (51/4") valve openings rated at 150 psi working pressure and 300 psi total pressure
and shall have Neenah R-1015 frame and grate with "water" cast on top. Valves shall be waterproof resilient wedge gate valves, AWWA C509. All
tapping valves and valves larger than ten inches (10") shall be in a vault at least sixty inches (60") in diameter.
(3) Water Supply. Water distribution facilities, including pipe fittings, hydrants, valves, valve basins, water services, and all other necessary
appurtenances required for fire and domestic needs shall be in compliance with all requirements of chapter 7 of this code and shall be installed to
serve all properties within the subdivision. Water mains shall have a minimum eight inch (8") internal diameter, be constructed of ductile iron class
52, and shall conform to the specifications of the federal government designation WWP421, class 250. Pipes shall have approved double sealing,
single gasket type joints. Fittings shall have mechanical joints. All water services shall be constructed of type K copper pipe, having a minimum
internal diameter of one inch (1"). Such services shall be equipped with corporation cock, curb stops, and other necessary fittings in accordance with
current village standards. Fire hydrants shall be located with a maximum of three hundred feet (300') between hydrants. Each building site shall be
located not more than three hundred feet (300') from a hydrant, any other code notwithstanding.
(4) Bedding And Backfill. All utility lines shall be placed in a prepared (shaped and compacted) bed of crushed stone, one-fourth inch (1/4") to threefourths
inch (3/4") in diameter. The bedding shall be one-fourth (1/4) the ID of the pipe. but at least four inches (4") thick. The pipe shall be covered at
least to the springline with the bedding material. Crushed limestone is required. Crushed gravel may be used with prior written approval of the village
engineer in special circumstances. In situations where storm sewers function as french drains, washed crushed gravel without fines shall be used for
bedding and trench backfill. Plastic pipe must be covered with the same material to twelve inches (12") above the crown of the pipe. All areas below
existing or proposed pavement must be filled to the surface with granular trench backfill of the same material.
(5) Street And Sidewalk Improvements.
(a) Street Grading. The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the required section and major trees shall be protected as specified in the
approved plans. All unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally
accepted engineering practices.
(b) Pavement And Sidewalk Widths. Pavement and sidewalk widths shall conform to the design standards specified in sections 3.1, 3.2(2) and
3.2(3) of this appendix B.
(c) Service Drives. Service drives shall be provided along thoroughfares. Pavement width of these service drives shall meet with the requirements
for streets.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 349/377
(d) Street Pavements.
1. No public pavement or sidewalk within the village shall be constructed on soil which is unstable or which, in the opinion of the village engineer, is
otherwise unsuitable for pavement or sidewalk construction. Wherever unstable ground is encountered, either before preparation of detailed
plans or during the construction phase of the proposed improvements, said unstable materials shall be removed in their entirety and shall be
adequately compacted to the satisfaction of the village engineer. Combined thickness of base and surface course or base only shall be
determined from the Illinois department of transportation criteria for pavement design as dictated by soil testing. In no case shall the thickness
be less than the minimums stated below.
2. Pavements in residential areas shall consist of either of the following listed materials:
a. Portland cement concrete pavement having a minimum uniform thickness of eight inches (8"). Concrete for such pavement shall have a
minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds and shall contain not less than six (6)
bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete. Entrained air content shall not be less than three percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%).
Slump shall be not less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
b. Flexible pavement shall consist of a BAM base (minimum 6 inches thick) and class I modified surface (minimum 2 inches) course or a CA6
crushed limestone base (minimum 12 inches thick), a bituminous binder course (minimum 2.0 inches thick), and a class I modified surface
course (minimum 11/2 inches thick). Other flexible materials or designs may be permitted upon approval of the village engineer if the design is
in accordance with standard IDOT procedures. Minimum structural number shall be as follows:
Subdivision streets Minimum 3.00
Thoroughfare Minimum 4.00
Parking areas Minimum 2.75
Fire lanes Minimum 2.50
Minimum structural number designations shall be increased and geotextile utilized where the soil IBRs are less than three (3.0). Soil borings
are required, as per IDOT specifications, every three hundred feet (300') on all streets. IBR tests shall be required.
3. Pavements in or bordering industrial and/or commercial areas shall consist of either of the following listed materials:
a. Portland cement concrete pavement having a uniform thickness of nine inches (9"). Concrete for such pavement shall have a minimum twenty
eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch, shall contain not less than six (6) bags of
cement per cubic yard of concrete, and shall contain not less than three percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump
shall not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
b. See subsection (5)(d)2b of this section for flexible design requirements. A structural number of four (4.00) minimum is required.
4. All curbs shall be of the M-6.12 type. Curbs and gutters on all streets shall be Portland cement concrete of the integral type not less than
eighteen inches (18") in overall width and having a thickness at the gutter flag of not less than the thickness of the proposed street pavement.
Two (2) #4 rebars in the flags are required. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the Portland cement concrete pavement. Concrete for curb
and gutter shall conform to that hereinbefore required for concrete pavement.
5. All curb corners shall have a radii of not less than fifteen feet (15').
(e) Improvements Outside Corporate Area. Street improvements in subdivisions within one and one-half (11/2) miles outside of the corporate area
shall conform to the same standards of improvements as required of subdivisions within the corporate area.
(f) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete to a thickness of five inches (5") on a four inch (4") crushed stone bed
and offset one foot (1') from the abutting lot line. The sidewalks may meander to avoid large trees but shall at all times be at least six feet (6') from
the adjacent roadway pavement. Concrete for such sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand
five hundred (3,500) pounds, shall contain not less than six (6) bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete, and shall contain not less than three
percent (3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump shall not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4"). Sidewalks
shall be continuous between adjoining streets and shall be constructed through driveways.
(g) Handicapped Ramps. Handicapped ramps shall be required on all sidewalks at street crossings.
(h) Street Signs. Street name signs shall be erected at each intersection so as to identify every street within the subdivision. The design of public
street name signs shall be as designated by the village of Northfield.
All signs designating street names for all public streets in any subdivision or planned development shall be obtained and installed by the developer,
at developer's expense, pursuant to village specifications and at locations approved by the village. Private street name signs shall also obtain
approval by the village prior to installation. All public and private street names shall obtain village approval in order to avoid duplication or
confusion with existing street names.
(i) Storm Water Inlets. Storm water inlets shall be provided within the roadway improvements at points specified by the village engineer, but at least
once every three hundred feet (300') on both sides of the street. All curb inlets must include two foot (2') sumps and be at least forty eight inches
(48") in diameter. Frames shall be recessed approximately one-tenth foot (0.1') below the gutter line.
(j) Parkways. All parkways within a dedicated street area shall be covered with a minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil and fine graded. (Ord. 88-
536, 3-22-1988)
(k) Trees. Trees shall be planted along both sides of all streets at a maximum interval of thirty feet (30') unless suitable trees are in existence. All
new trees shall be balled and bagged and have a trunk diameter of not less than three inches (3") measured twelve inches (12") above grade. This
requirement may be waived in the sole discretion of the village if an equivalent number of trees of the same size or larger are planted in a natural
manner in the front yards of the adjoining lots. The plantings shall be approved by the village. (Ord. 03-1152, 2-18-2003)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 350/377
(6) Pedestrianways. Pedestrianways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements set forth under subsection (5)
(f) of this section.
(7) Public Utilities. Electrical and telephone service lines shall be installed underground in back and side yard easements unless permission for
overhead service is specifically given by the corporate authorities. Underground telephone, electrical, and gas service shall be placed within
easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. All transformer boxes shall be located so as
not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(8) Street Lighting Improvements. Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all properties within the subdivision. Such improvements
shall be of the individual service or of the multiple circuit type and shall consist of standards, luminaries, cable conduit under driveways and/or
streets, controllers, handholes, and all other miscellaneous work and equipment necessary for an integrated system of streetlights.
(a) Specifications. Lighting structures shall be consistent with other developments within the village and shall conform to neighborhood design
standards.
(b) Luminaries. Luminaries shall be of the mercury vapor or metal halide type. Size and life shall be as follows:
1. Residential area: One hundred seventy five (175) watts with average life of three thousand (3,000) hours.
2. Commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas: Two hundred fifty (250) watts or four hundred (400) watts with average life of three thousand
(3,000) hours as approved by the corporate authorities.
3. Ballasts shall be of the constant wattage type.
(c) Cable On Multiple Circuit Systems. Cable on multiple circuit systems shall be not less than no. 8 wire and shall be buried at least thirty inches
(30") below finished grade. Cable shall be installed in a two inch (2") galvanized rigid steel conduit with two inch (2") fiber bushings where such
cable crosses beneath existing or proposed pavements, driveways or sidewalks. No underground cable splices will be permitted.
(d) Cable In Individual Service Systems. Cable in individual service systems shall be not less than no. 12 wire with six hundred (600) volt
insulation, type USE, style RR, installed in direct burial not less than thirty inches (30") below grade. Underground splices will be permitted at
points of connection to the Public Service Company lines.
(9) Soils Investigations And Physical Tests.
(a) Soil borings, at least six feet (6') deep, shall be required at three hundred feet (300') on center in all proposed roadways, including IBR tests. If the
subsoil IBR is less than three (3.0), either structural geotextile shall be placed below the stone base or the subsoil shall be removed and replaced
at the village engineer's discretion. If used, the geotextile with structural compacted fill shall extend one hundred feet (100') beyond the poor soil
zone.
(b) If, in the opinion of the village engineer, soil of the buildable lots in the proposed subdivision is questionable and will require soil investigators'
borings or other soil tests to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the subdivider, builder or land developer shall retain
the services of a competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations. Such testing laboratory shall be subject to the approval of the
village.
(c) Copies of the completed reports compiled by the testing laboratory shall be filed with the village manager and the village engineer.
(d) Prior to installation of the base course, density tests must be made by the nuclear density method and approved by the village engineer. Density
of ninety five percent (95%) standard Proctor shall be required. Also, a proof-roll with a loaded six (6) wheeler track must be performed in the
presence of the village engineer.
(e) Nuclear density tests shall be performed on all asphalt courses to establish a proper rolling pattern. Weight tickets, cores, and test results must
be submitted and approved by the village engineer.
(10) Supervision. The design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder, or land developer shall be represented by his agent at the site of
construction at all times when construction of required land improvements is in progress. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute
grounds for immediate stoppage of said construction by the village inspector. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
3.4: Inspections.
Inspection of public improvements or required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this article shall be performed during the course of
construction by an inspector appointed by the corporate authorities. Salaries and other costs pursuant thereto shall be paid by the subdivider, builder, or
land developer. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
3.5: Conveyance Of Improvements.
Title to all public improvements required in this section shall, at the time the same are accepted by the corporate authorities, be conveyed and transferred
to the village of Northfield by sufficient documents of transfer. Partial acceptance of improvements by the village is permitted. (Ord. 88-536, 3-22-1988)
3.6: Dedication Of School And Park Lands.
If a new subdivision or planned development: a) creates a need that is uniquely and specifically attributable to the subdivision or development; and b) the
subdivision is wholly or partially residential; and c) is more than five (5) acres, then as a condition of approval of a final plat the subdivider or developer will
be required to dedicate land to serve immediate and future park, recreational and school needs. In certain instances as set forth below, the subdivider or
developer, at the sole discretion of the village, may be required to make a cash contribution in place of or in combination with actual land dedication. All
dedications or contributions shall be made in accordance with the following criteria and formulae. If because of the small number of persons added by a
new development, any required dedication is less than the minimum requirement set forth below, the dedication or contribution shall be prorated. This
dedication requirement shall apply to the park district and elementary or middle school district in which the development is located.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 351/377
A. Table Of Estimated Persons Per Dwelling Unit. The following table of population density is generally indicative of current and short range projected
trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of land or the equivalent cash
contributions:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED PERSONS PER DWELLING UNIT
TO BE USED IN DETERMINING REQUIRED LAND DEDICATION
Type Of Unit
Preschool
0_4 Years
Elementary
Grades K_3
5_8 Years
Middle School
Grades 4_8
9_13 Years
Total
Grades K_8
5_13 Years
High School
Grades 9_12
14_17 Years
Adults
18_Up
Total
Per Unit
Single-family detached dwellings
2 bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 0.700 2.017
3 bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 bedroom or more 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhouse dwellings and two-family dwellings)
1 bedroom 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.193 1.193
2 bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 bedroom 0.212 0.232 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 bedroom or more 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Multiple-family dwellings, community residences and apartments
Efficiency 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.294 1.294
1 bedroom 0.000 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2 bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.048 1.693 1.914
3 bedroom or more 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Note: The determination of the number of bedrooms contained in a building shall be made by the village. Rooms designated by an applicant as
"den", "library", "study", "sewing room", "exercise room", or the like may be designated by the village as bedrooms if they are suitable for such
accommodations.
B. Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication.
(1) Parks.
(a) Requirement And Population Ratio. The land dedication requirement shall be 0.55 acres of land for each one hundred (100) persons
estimated to be added in accordance with the table set forth in subsection 3.6A of this section. (If the estimated population increase is less than
100 persons, a cash contribution shall be required based on a figure of 0.0055 acres of land for each person.)
The type and location of the recreational site shall be determined by the village, in its sole discretion, using accepted recreational planning
standards and examining the community needs that are on account of and are uniquely and specifically attributable to the proposed development.
(b) Credit For Private Open Spaces Or Private Recreation Areas. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and recreation
area requirement for subdivisions or planned developments may, at the option of the corporate authorities, be provided in the form of "private"
open space or recreational facilities instead of dedicated "public" open space. This shall be determined by the corporate authorities, based upon
the needs of the village residents, the needs of the new residents of the development and total park and recreation land available in the general
area.
Substitution of "private" open space for "public" open space will require that the developer pay for and complete all of the private recreational
facilities. Detailed plans for these private recreational areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, shall be subject to the review and
approval of the corporate authorities. Before any credit is given for "private" open space, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that the
grounds and facilities of such "private" open space areas will be permanently maintained for such use. Such guarantee, supported by a
performance bond where deemed necessary, shall be in a form satisfactory to the village attorney. If the developer desires to qualify a private
swimming club as "private" open space, then the "suggested criteria for swimming pool development", as adopted by the park district, shall be
used to determine the suitability of the swimming pool for this purpose.
(2) Schools.
(a) Amount Of Land. The amount of land dedication required for a primary school shall be 3.5 acres for each one hundred (100) students estimated
to be added in accordance with the table as set forth in subsection 3.6A of this section and seven (7) acres for each one hundred (100) middle
school students to be added. (If the estimated student increase is less than 100 persons in either category, a cash contribution shall be required
based on a figure of 0.035 acres for each primary school student and 0.07 acres for each middle school student.)
C. Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Place Of Park And/Or School Sites. Where, in the judgment of the corporate authorities, a development
will add too few persons for a land dedication to be practical, or if the available land is inappropriate for park and/or school purposes, or if land for park
and/or school site purposes has already been obtained, the village shall require the subdivider or developer to make a cash contribution instead of or in
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 352/377
combination with land dedication. This contribution shall be used for park and/or school purposes for the direct and material benefit of those persons in
the particular subdivision or development. The cash contribution instead of park and/or school land dedication shall be paid to the village. The village
shall pay over such contribution to the appropriate park or school district only upon proper certification from the district that the funds will be used for
park and/or school purposes for the direct and material benefit of those persons in the particular subdivision or development in reasonable proportions
to the need for park or school facilities or services attributable to the subdivision or development.
D. Determining Fair Market Value For Either School Or Park Cash Contribution Purposes. The cash contribution instead of land shall be based on
the fair market value of undeveloped land in the area that might be appropriate as a park or school site. Fair market value shall be determined by the
certified appraisal of an independent MAI appraiser employed and selected by the village. Such appraisal shall be furnished to the corporate authorities
prior to the final approval of the subdivision plat. The developer shall reimburse the village for all fees and expenses associated with the appraisal.
E. Objections To Formula. A subdivider or developer may file, prior to the submission of a final plat, a written objection to the table of estimated persons
per dwelling unit in this section. In this event, the objection shall include a demographic study showing the developer's estimate of additional population
to be generated from the subdivision or planned development. In the event of an objection, the final determination of the density formula to be used in
such calculations shall be made by the corporate authorities based upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider or developer and
from other sources collected by the village. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change from time to time.
Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication of land or the payment of fees is subject to periodic review.
F. Reservation Of Additional Land. Where the village comprehensive plan, the standards of the village, or standards of the park district or school district
call for a larger amount of park and recreation or school land than the developer is required to dedicate pursuant to this appendix, the land needed
beyond the developer's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the appropriate public body, provided that such acquisition is made
within one year from the date of approval of the final subdivision plat or planned development.
G. Topography And Grading. The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, must be suitable for the purposes designated by the
governmental unit which will ultimately be responsible for the site. Grading on sites dedicated for park and school uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.
H. Improved Sites. All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer, and streets (including enclosed drainage and
curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, unless otherwise approved by the village.
I. Nonresidential Development. In the case of a nonresidential development that involves more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of new space
under roof, the corporate authorities may require that a study (to be paid for by the school district and/or park district) be conducted to determine
whether there will be additional land needed for schools or parks that is uniquely and specifically attributable to the development. If such a need is
predicted, the corporate authorities may, in its sole discretion, seek such land or donation on behalf of the school or park district.
J. Indemnification. Under no circumstances shall this section be construed to create a cause of action on behalf of the school or park district or its
constituents against the village or its officials for any failure to require land or donations. Further, the village shall not seek any donation of land or
money from any subdivider or developer pursuant to this appendix, unless it has received from the school district and/or park district a waiver, release,
hold harmless and indemnity agreement that gives complete liability coverage by the affected district to the village as may be satisfactory to the village
attorney.
K. Waiver Of Dedication Or Donation. Instead of indemnifying and holding the village harmless, the school district and/or the park district may in its sole
discretion, request that the village waive the dedication or contributions. (Ord. 00-1040, 8-21-2000)
Footnote 1: See also section 2.12, "Portional Development Of Subdivision", of this division.
Footnote 2: See also section 2.16, "Failure To Complete", of this division.
Footnote 3: See also section 2.16, "Failure To Complete", of this division.
Title Appendix C
SAFETY CODES
Chapter
SAFETY CODES
ARTICLE I. GENERAL AUTHORITY, INTERPRETATION, LIMITATIONS
Sec. C-1: ADOPTION OF MODEL CODES.
The model codes adopted in this appendix C are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/1 et seq.1 In the event that
any provision of any model code is in conflict with any federal, state or county regulation or any other ordinance or regulation of the village of Northfield,
then the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the public shall prevail. Further, no
provision of any code adopted in this appendix C shall be deemed by implication to permit any use or structure in the village which is otherwise prohibited.
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 353/377
Sec. C-2: FILING AND MAINTENANCE OF CODES.
Three (3) copies of each code adopted by reference herein shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk for use and examination by the public.
(1986 Code)
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. C-3: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
The international fire code 2009 is hereby adopted by reference as the fire prevention code for the village and is hereby made a part of this article with the
same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 06-1293, 9-19-2006; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008; Ord. 14-1588, 5-
20-2014)
Sec. C-4: AMENDMENTS.
Section 108 is hereby deleted and in its place shall read the following:
Appeals To The Fire Chief.
Whenever the fire prevention bureau shall deny a permit applied for or shall issue an order requiring any fire prevention measures to be taken, or when it
is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant or such person to whom such order has been issued may appeal the decision or order of the fire prevention bureau to the fire
chief within five (5) days. The fire chief shall, within five (5) days, review such order and file his decision thereon with the applicant and the village
manager. Pending decision of the fire chief, the order of the fire prevention bureau shall be stayed unless the fire chief believes there is a distinct fire
hazard to life or the property of others.
Appeals to the Corporate Authorities.
Whenever the fire chief shall deny or revoke or modify an order on appeal, the applicant or such person to whom such order has been issued may appeal
from the decision or order of the fire chief to the corporate authorities within five (5) days.
Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal, the corporate authorities shall meet as a board of appeals to uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the
fire chief. The meeting of this board of appeals shall be public. Pending final decision of the board of appeals, such order of the fire chief shall be stayed
unless in the opinion of the board of appeals there is a distinct fire hazard to life or the property of others. The decision of the board of appeals shall be
final.
Unlawful Continuance.
Any person who shall refuse to obey a summary abatement order, refuse to leave, interfere with the evacuation of other occupants or continue any
operation after having been given an evacuation order, or who shall not comply with a written violation notice within the specified time, or who violates a
condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate, shall be subject to penalties as hereinafter described.
Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this code, or fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof, or violates
any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. Each day that a violation continues after a service of notice as provided for in this code shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition
of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects.
(1986 Code; amd. Ord. 88-571, 10-18-1988; Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998; Ord. 06-1293, 9-19-2006)
Section 506 is hereby deleted and in its place shall read the following:
Section 506 Rapid Entry Key Box. The following structures within the village of Northfield shall be equipped with a fire department rapid entry key box of a
design and location approved by the village of Northfield fire official:
(Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 06-1293, 9-19-2006)
1.All existing buildings equipped with a fire alarm or fire suppression system,
2.Office or commercial buildings for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued after the effective date of this ordinance,
3.Office or commercial buildings where remodeling, the cost of which exceeds $10,000, takes place after the effective date of this ordinance,
4.Any building which the fire official determines, based upon accepted fire safety standards, has a condition where a delay in waiting for a key holder to
arrive may create a hazard to the public, the structure, or its contents.
The key box shall contain the keys necessary to gain entry into the building when the building owner or occupants are not present.
(Ord. 92-705, 12-16-1991)
Section 3404.2.13.1.4 is hereby deleted.
(Ord. 14-1588, 5-20-2014)
Sec. C-5: LOCAL RESTRICTIONS.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 354/377
(1) Expansion Of Facilities For Oil Storage And Flammable Liquids. It shall be unlawful to increase the facilities for storage of oil or other flammable
liquids of any business operating within the fire limits as set forth in the BOCA national fire prevention code unless such facilities are connected with a
business use permitted in the zoning districts in which the business is located.
(2) Dumping Of Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump any refuse upon any property within the established fire limits.
(Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
(3) Open Burning Prohibited. The open burning of leaves, branches, trunks, trimmings and roots of trees, bushes and shrubs, rubbish, waste, garbage,
paper, carbonaceous materials or any other combustible materials on any public or private property within the village is hereby declared to be unlawful
and is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the following: a) noncommercial cooking of food in outdoor fireplaces or
grills; b) the burning of diseased trees by employees of the village; c) the Northfield fire department for training sessions; d) the industrial fire brigades
under the fire department's supervision; e) the incineration of refuse in a device approved by the air pollution control board of the state of Illinois,
provided there is compliance with all other applicable laws and regulations; f) noncommercial use of outdoor fireplaces such as Weber or Chimenea,
limited to thirty six inches (36") in diameter or smaller in compliance with subsection (17) of this section; and g) prescribed burn for maintenance of
prairie landscape, subject to village and Illinois environmental protection agency permits and all applicable state and federal laws. (Ord. 00-1023, 4-17-
2000; amd. Ord. 05-1233, 3-15-2005; Ord. 14-1588, 5-20-2014)
(4) License Required For Persons Engaging In The Business Of Woodworking And Wood Finishing. An annual license shall be required of any
person engaging in the business of woodworking in which woodworking power machinery is used, or in the business of finishing or refinishing furniture
or other articles. The license shall be granted only after the fire chief has determined that the premises is safe for such operation, and upon payment of
the fee established in appendix D of this code. (1986 Code)
(5) Regulations For New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies. The fire chief and director of public works shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, the regulations applicable to any new materials, processes or occupancies, which may
involve fire or other hazards to the public safety in addition to those covered by this article. The fire chief shall post such regulations in a conspicuous
place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 98-928, 2-23-1998)
(6) Storage And Display Of Christmas Trees. Christmas trees, other than artificial, stored or displayed for sale shall be outside of buildings and at a
distance of at least ten feet (10') from any building or structure, except that such trees may be stored closer to a blank masonry wall with the
permission of the owner of such wall. No Christmas trees may be stored or displayed within thirty five feet (35') of any flammable liquid. Trees
remaining on hand after December 25 of any year shall be removed from the premises not later than December 31 of the same year.
(7) Ashes. Ashes from the combustion of solid fuel shall be placed in noncombustible containers. No such ashes shall be stored inside of any building. No
ashes shall be placed on any combustible floor nor in any combustible container.
(8) Interference With Fire Department Operations. It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or
restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire
to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation.
(9) Blocking Fire Hydrants And Fire Department Connections. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, obstruct or restrict the access to any
fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department
connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property.
If upon the expiration of a time stated for compliance in a notice of violation, the violation is not remedied, the fire official may proceed to remedy the
same. Any cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certification by the fire chief with the
approval of the chief of police; the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
(10) Maintenance Of Fire Suppression Equipment. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire
appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or
testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein
permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire
appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official.
(11) Fire Hydrant Placement. The fire chief may also require the installation of approved yard hydrants when a fire or life hazard occupancy is located
more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a public street. No public or private fire hydrant may be placed into or removed from service until approved
by the fire chief.
(12) Prohibited Occupancies And Activities. The following occupancies or activities are prohibited within the village:
(a) Storage of unstable (reactive) chemicals such as organic peroxides, nitromethane, and ammonium nitrate.
(b) Storage of magnesium in excess of fifty (50) cubic feet. (1986 Code)
(13) Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in accordance with NFPA #13 or an alternate fire protection system providing
comparable protection as approved by the fire chief shall be installed in:
(a) All new construction with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings.
(b) All existing structures, except one- and two-family dwellings: 1) where there is a change to a more intense occupancy or use, or 2) there is
remodeling or reconstruction in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the property prior to the remodeling or reconstruction.
(14) Two Hour Construction/Walls.
(a) All walls of elevator and stair shafts shall be two (2) hour masonry construction.
(b) The fire separation between office/warehouse, office/plant, or other mixed uses shall be two (2) hour masonry or concrete construction.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 355/377
(c) The tenant fire separation walls in multiple tenant retail, covered malls and office occupancies may utilize a two (2) hour rated gypsum wall
assembly with noncombustible materials in lieu of masonry. Such walls shall extend from the floor to the underside of the roof deck.
(d) The party walls of each townhouse or row house unit shall have a two (2) hour masonry vertical fire separation wall continuous at each side of each
unit. (Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
(15) Passenger Elevators. Passenger elevators other than those for one- and two-family dwellings shall be of such size to accommodate an ambulance
cot that is twenty four inches by eighty inches (24" x 80") in the horizontal open position, plus two (2) attendants. (Ord. 14-1588, 5-20-2014)
(16) Standpipe Systems. Standpipe systems shall be required in all buildings of three (3) or more stories in height. (Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
(17) Outdoor Fires; Outdoor Fireplaces, Grills And Firepits.
(a) Outdoor Fires In General. All outdoor fires, recreational or otherwise, shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. All outdoor fires shall be under continuous competent supervision.
2. No outdoor fire, including, but not limited to, fires in outdoor fireplaces, grills, firepits and similar devices, shall be used in such a manner or
location that it causes any building fire alarm to activate or that it otherwise creates a hazardous or objectionable condition.
(b) Outdoor Fireplaces, Grills And Firepits. All portable outdoor fireplaces, grills, firepits and similar devices and all such devices that are
permanently installed, shall be located and operated at least fifteen feet (15') from any building, fence or property line. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the operation of a permanent outdoor fireplace, grill, firepit or similar device that was lawfully installed before May 20, 2014, shall be permitted,
provided that such operation complies with section 307.4.2a of the international fire code.
(c) Authority To Extinguish. The code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of any outdoor fire that is not in compliance with this code or
that otherwise creates a hazardous or objectionable condition.
(18) Premises Identification - Rear And Side Access. In addition to the premises identification in section C-30 of this appendix C, all buildings except for
one- and two-family dwellings shall have their address posted on any rear and/or side door. The signage shall include the address, the name of the
street and business name or building name. The sign shall be installed at a height of approximately five feet (5') above the standing surface. The sign
shall be installed immediately to the side of the door so it is visible with the door in the open or closed position. All other installation locations shall be
approved by the fire chief or his designee. (Ord. 14-1588, 5-20-2014)
ARTICLE III. LIFE SAFETY CODE
Sec. C-6: ADOPTION OF NFPA 101/LIFE SAFETY CODE.
The NFPA 101/life safety code 2006 is hereby adopted by reference as the life safety code for the village and is hereby made a part of this article with the
same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Sec. C-7: RESERVED. (Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
ARTICLE IV. BUILDING CODE
Sec. C-8: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
(1) Residential Construction. The international residential code 2006 is hereby adopted by reference as the building code applicable to all residential
construction for the village and is hereby made a part of this article with the same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth
herein and as now or hereafter amended. If there is a discrepancy between the Council Of American Building Officials, the Illinois plumbing code,
international mechanical code and national electrical code, the specific trade code shall apply.
(2) Commercial And Nonresidential Construction. The international building code 2006 is hereby adopted by reference as the building code applicable
to all commercial and nonresidential construction for the village and is hereby made a part of this article with the same force and effect as if it was
specifically and particularly set forth herein and as now or hereafter amended. If there is a discrepancy between the Council Of American Building
Officials, the Illinois plumbing code, international mechanical code and national electrical code, the specific trade code shall apply. (Ord. 01-1074, 8-20-
2001; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Sec. C-8.1: PERMITS; TIME LIMITATIONS.
(1) All permits issued shall require that construction begin within six (6) months of the date on which the permit is issued, and be completed within
eighteen (18) months after the date on which the permit is issued, or such other time as the corporate authorities may have established by ordinance
for a particular project. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 88-562, 8-23-1988)
(2) A onetime extension of the time limits set forth in subsection (1) of this section may be granted by the Northfield building commissioner for good
cause shown and upon such conditions as the building commissioner may specify. "Good cause" shall require a showing that construction has
proceeded in the normal course without undue lapses but nevertheless has not been completed prior to expiration of the permit or that the permittee
has been prevented from completing construction in a timely fashion for reasons beyond their control, including, but not limited to, adverse weather
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 356/377
conditions, fire, flood, windstorms, strikes, or scarcity of building materials. Any denial of a request for an extension must be made in writing and
delivered in person or by certified mail to the applicant. Any appeal of a denial of an extension by the building commissioner and any request for a
further extension after one extension has been granted by the building commissioner must be made to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA) of the
village by serving written notice of such an appeal or request on the village manager within five (5) days of the denial of the extension or the
expiration of the permit or prior extension. The ZBA shall apply the criteria set forth above in determining whether a building permit extension should
be granted and the decision of the ZBA shall be final. (Ord. 03-1162, 5-20-2003)
Sec. C-8.2: FEES.
Fees for permits - time limitations shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 03-1162, 5-20-2003)
Sec. C-8.3: CONSTRUCTION SIGNAGE.
A sign eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") must be placed in the front yard of all properties undertaking any demolition, alteration or repair,
requiring a permit, of any structure within the village. The sign shall state: "No construction related activity except between the hours of 7:00 A.M. _ 7:00
P.M. Monday _ Friday, 9:00 A.M. _ 5:00 P.M. Saturday, and 12:00 P.M. _ 5:00 P.M. Sundays and national holidays". This sign must remain prominently
posted on site throughout the construction activity period. Signs may be purchased from the village in accordance with the fees set forth in appendix D of
this code. A paper sign may be posted for projects with a duration of ten (10) days or less, metal signs must be posted for all other projects. (Ord. 04-1214,
8-17-2004)
Sec. C-9: AMENDMENTS.
The international building code hereinabove referred to is hereby amended as follows: (Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Section 102.2 Existing Structures.
Section 102.2 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
Except as provided in this section, existing buildings, when altered or repaired as herein specified, shall conform to the full requirements of the building
code for new buildings.
102.2.1 Alterations Exceeding 50 Percent: If alterations or repairs are made within any period of twelve (12) months, costing in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of the physical value of the building; or
102.2.2 Damages Exceeding 50 Percent: If the building is damaged by fire or any other cause to an extent in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the physical
value of the building before the damage was incurred.
102.2.3 Alterations Under 50 Percent: If the cost of alterations or repairs described herein is between twenty five percent (25%) and fifty percent (50%) of
the physical value of the building, the building official shall determine to what degree the portions so altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the
requirements for new buildings.
102.2.4 Alterations Under 25 Percent: If the cost of alterations or repairs described herein is twenty five percent (25%) or less of the physical value of the
building, the building official shall permit the restoration of the building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration with the same kind of materials
as those of which the building was constructed; provided, that such construction does not endanger the general safety and public welfare and complies
with the provisions of section 928.1 with respect to existing roofs.
102.2.5 Increase In Size: If the building is increased in floor area or number of stories, the entire building shall be made to conform with the requirements
of the building code in respect to means of egress, fire safety, and light ventilation.
102.2.6 Part Change In Use: If a portion of the building is changed in occupancy or to a new use, that portion is separated from the remainder of the
building with the required vertical and horizontal fire divisions complying with the fire grading in table 16, then the construction involved in the change shall
be made to conform to the requirements for the new use and occupancy and the existing portion shall be made to comply with the exit way requirements
of the building code.
102.2.7 Physical Value: In applying the provisions of this section, the physical value of the building shall be determined by the building official and be
based on current replacement costs.
(Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
102.2.8 Wood Roof Shingles: Wood roof shingles shall not be used under any circumstances unless proof is provided that said shingles have been treated
for fire resistance.
(Ord. 01-1074, 8-20-2001)
102.2.9. In addition to international one and two family dwelling code 1998, section 502.10 draft stopping required.
(Ord. 01-1054, 2-20-2001)
Engineered Wood Products. Where engineered wood products such as trusses and joists, etc. are used for floor and ceiling assemblies in finished or
unfinished spaces or areas in one or two family dwellings, these assemblies shall be separated from adjacent spaces or areas by fire-resistant material
equal to 5/8 inch type X gypsum board or better. Such separation shall not be required for areas fully equipped with an automatic sprinkler system
designed and installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13 or areas where the floor to ceiling dimension is less than thirty-six inches (36").
(Ord. 10-1443, 1-19-2010)
Section 111.6 Suspension Of Permit. Section C-8.1 of this appendix C amends this section C-9, section 111.6 suspension of permit. Suspension of
permit is hereby deleted.
Section 112 Plans And Specifications. In line two, "two copies" is amended to read "ten copies".
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 357/377
Section 112.0 Fee Schedule. Said section is amended to read as follows:
Fees for permits shall be as set forth in appendix D to the Northfield municipal code. In addition to said fees, the applicant shall pay all administrative, legal
and consultant fees and costs of the village in reviewing the application and plans.
(Ord. 01-1074, 8-20-2001)
Section 117.4 Violation; Penalties. Violation of any provision of this building code shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00), provided that any person who shall commence work without a permit as required in this building code after having been notified by the village of
the necessity for said permit shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day the work is in progress without a permit. A like
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day shall be assessed against any person who contracts to work in violation of a stop work order.
(Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
Section 507.1 One Story Buildings. (Rep. by Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Section 915.0 Standpipe Systems. (Rep. by Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Section 1808.0 Wood Footings And Foundations. Sections 1808.1, 1808.2 and 1808.3 are hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
Wood footings and foundations are prohibited in the village of Northfield.
(Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998)
International building code _ zoning.
(Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
If there is a conflict between this chapter and appendix A of the Northfield village code or the Northfield zoning ordinances, the provisions of appendix A
and the zoning ordinance shall take precedence.
(Ord. 01-1074, 8-20-2001)
Section 3304 Protection Of Public. Section 3304.2 shall be amended to read as follows and shall apply to all construction activities regulated under the
international building code 2006 and the international residential code 2006.
(Ord. 08-1392, 8-19-2008)
Section 3304.2 Construction Fences. Every excavation area or area of construction on a site shall be enclosed with a temporary barrier not less than six
(6') feet high to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons. Fences shall remain in place throughout construction until the premises have been fully secured
and approval granted by the building commissioner for the fence removal. All barriers shall be of adequate strength to resist wind pressure as specified in
section 1609 and shall be posted "No Trespassing". A separate permit shall not be required for the construction fence installation.
(Ord. 02-1129, 10-22-2002)
ARTICLE V. INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. C-10: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
The international mechanical code 2006 is hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code for the village of Northfield and is hereby made a part of
this article with the same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 98-929, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Sec. C-10.1: FEES.
Fees for mechanical installations shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code. (Ord. 00-1046, 9-18-2000)
ARTICLE VI. ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. C-11: DEFINITIONS.
The village hereby establishes an electrical inspection department for the regulation of the installations, alterations and use of all electrical equipment, as
herein provided. Such electrical inspection department shall consist of the chief electrical inspector and such other electrical inspectors as may from time
to time be appointed by the village manager. The electrical inspection department shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the rules
and regulations relating to the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, as hereinafter provided, and shall function under the immediate
supervision and control of the chief electrical inspector. (1986 Code)
Sec. C-11.1: ADOPTION OF THE NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
The NFPA 70 national electrical code 2008 is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code for the village and is hereby made a part of this article
with the same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein and as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 99-978, 4-26-1999; amd.
Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Sec. C-12: RIGHT TO ENTER FOR INSPECTION.
The chief electrical inspector or such other electrical inspectors shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his
official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment contained therein, or for the
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 358/377
purpose of reinspecting present wiring installations to determine whether or not such wiring installations conform to the provisions of this article, and shall
have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents
are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. (1986 Code)
Sec. C-13: POWER TO STOP WORK.
No person, firm or corporation shall install any electrical conduits, electrical wire, equipment or apparatus in any building or structure for which a permit is
required until such permit shall have been secured. In case of any installation, alteration or repair of electrical wires or apparatus in any building or
structure without a permit authorizing the same, the work shall be stopped until the necessary permit is issued. (1986 Code)
Sec. C-14: REGISTRATION.
All persons, firms or corporations doing electrical work in the village must be registered or licensed in the state as an electrical contractor. The term
"electrical contractor" as used in this provision means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract,
electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power (not including radio apparatus, or equipment for wireless reception of
sounds and signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers which are
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities). (1986 Code)
Sec. C-15: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
The chief electrical inspector may suspend any village permit of persons, firms or corporations executing electrical installations contrary to the provisions
of this article until acted upon by the electrical commission, or at his discretion he may reinstate the suspended or revoked permit after the violations have
been corrected or rectified. (1986 Code)
Sec. C-16: FEES.
Fees for electrical installations shall be as set forth in appendix D of this code. (1986 Code)
Sec. C-17: WIRING.
All electrical installations, repairs and maintenance shall be performed according to the NFPA 70 national electrical code 2008 subject to the following
exceptions: (Ord. 08-1392, 8-19-2008)
(1) All electrical services, new and revisions, shall, except as may be authorized in writing by the building commission, be installed underground.
(2) All residential services shall have a single main disconnect sized for the service entrance conductors and service equipment. Service entrance
conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit. Rigid nonmetallic conduit may be used underground in accordance
with article 347. Circuit breaker panels used for service entrance equipment in single-family dwellings must accept at least twenty (20) full size single
pole breakers. Twin tandem, duplex or split circuit breakers shall not be approved for new construction. (1986 Code)
(3) Knob and tube wiring shall not be installed or extended under any circumstances.
(4) Service entrance cable (range cable) or nonmetallic sheathed cable shall not be accepted.
(5) Aluminum wire shall not be used on or in any structure.
(6) Each heating plant shall be on a separate circuit. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1009, 1-18-2000)
(7) Detached garages shall be required to have wiring installed at the time of construction. Overhead wiring to new garages will not be allowed.
Underground wiring to the garage may be in galvanized rigid intermediate conduit or PVC. (Ord. 90-643, 8-27-1990; amd. Ord. 00-1009, 1-18-2000)
(8) Low voltage wiring must be installed in conduit in areas made inaccessible by building construction or where subject to mechanical injury. Low
voltage wiring installed in ceilings used as ducts or plenums shall be installed in conduit. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 00-1009, 1-18-2000)
(9) All wiring in any residential or commercial building shall be installed in metal conduit or galvanized conduit. Underground wiring shall be permitted in
PVC conduit. (Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 08-1392, 8-19-2008)
Sec. C-18: EXCEPTIONS.
Any electrical equipment or method of installation not specifically covered by the foregoing section shall be governed by the rules and regulations in the
NFPA 70 national electrical code 2008 sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association under the auspices of the American National Standards
Institute, now on file in the office of the building department, herein referred to as the national electrical code, which is hereby adopted by reference and
made a part hereof. Any and all references to the national electrical code in foregoing sections shall mean the edition referred to above. (Ord. 90-643, 8-
27-1990; amd. Ord. 08-1392, 8-19-2008)
Sec. C-19: PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the sections of this appendix shall, in addition to any other penalties herein set forth, be subject to the
penalties set forth in section 1-13 of this code. (1986 Code)
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 359/377
ARTICLE VII. PLUMBING CODE
Sec. C-20: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH PLUMBING CODE.
(1) The rules and regulations of the Illinois department of public health plumbing code, 2004 edition, and any of its supplements, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated as if set forth herein and shall apply to all construction within the village of Northfield with the following exceptions: (Ord.
04-1212, 8-17-2004; amd. Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
(a) With respect to table A, approved materials for water distribution, section 890, appendix A, no chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) pipe or
tubing, poly butylene (PB) pipe or tubing, or type M copper piping shall be permitted for water distribution.
(b) No soldering shall be permitted on the copper water service on the street side of the water meter. A flared fitting to the valve and brass nipples
and/or ell shall be provided.
(c) With respect to table A, approved building drainage/vent pipe, section 890, appendix A for underground piping; sections 1, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12 and 14
shall be deleted.
(d) Section 890.690 b. shall be amended to require that deck mounted faucets with hoses, showerheads or spray attachments shall be provided with
an automatic safety water mixing device to prevent sudden excessive water temperature or unanticipated changes in water temperature.
(Ord. 04-1212, 8-17-2004)
(2) If at any time during the installation or repair of public utilities, it becomes necessary to disturb an existing driveway, the contractor shall be
responsible for the replacement of the entire apron from curb to sidewalk. No patches shall be permitted. If there is no material break of curb or
sidewalk, the area of the driveway which falls within the public right of way or access easement shall be replaced. (Ord. 01-1067, 6-18-2001)
ARTICLE VIII. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. C-21: DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE. Shall include all costs and expenses of the village in connection with the cleanup or abatement of the discharge of
hazardous materials or the extinguishing of a fire involving hazardous materials and shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
actual labor costs of village personnel involved in the cleanup or abatement of the discharge (including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits and
administrative overhead); cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as published and updated by the finance department of the village; cost of
materials obtained directly by the village; and cost of any labor and materials expended through the retention of other parties to assist in the cleanup or
abatement.
DISCHARGE. To leak, seep, spill, emit or release, or leakage, seepage, spill, emission, or other release, whether intentional or unintentional.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
fire chief or his authorized representative to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
(Ord. 89-582, 4-25-1989)
Sec. C-22: UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge hazardous materials within the village of Northfield. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. (Ord. 89-582, 4-25-1989)
Sec. C-23: DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
(1) The fire rescue department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous material discharged upon or into any property or facilities
within the village. The fire rescue department may be assisted in such cleanup or abatement by any other village department or independent
contractors, as necessary to protect against or eliminate such hazard. The fire rescue department or its designors shall have the right to go on
private property to clean up or abate such a hazard when in the sole discretion of the fire rescue chief or his authorized representative that
hazardous materials have been discharged. The fire rescue chief shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners or manager of the property
before entry, however, if in his sole discretion the time to effect such notification will endanger life or property, the abatement may proceed without
notice and such failure of notice shall not affect the owner's obligations under this article.
(2) Any person who intentionally, negligently, or otherwise causes such a discharge of hazardous material and any person who owns or controls the
hazardous material's container at the time of discharge and the owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable to the village for the
payment of all costs incurred by the village as a result of such cleanup or abatement by the village.
(3) The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression or other services which are normally or customarily
provided by the fire rescue department unless the fire involves hazardous materials.
(4) The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 89-582, 4-25-1989)
Sec. C-24: BILLING RESPONSIBLE PERSONS; PAYMENT TO THE VILLAGE; APPEAL.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 360/377
(1) The village shall, within sixty (60) days of completion of the cleanup or abatement of any hazardous material discharge, send an invoice for the
costs incurred by the village in connection with such discharge to the person determined by the village to be responsible for such discharge pursuant
to section C-23(2) of this article.
(2) The person responsible for such hazardous material discharge shall submit payment for the invoice to the village within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the invoice.
(3) Any person determined by the village to be responsible for a hazardous material discharge may appeal to the village manager any invoice sent
pursuant to this section by sending a written notice of appeal to the village manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of the invoice. The appeal shall
be heard by the village manager, and his decision shall be final. (Ord. 89-582, 4-25-1989)
ARTICLE IX. COST RECOVERY PROGRAM
Sec. C-25: DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CARELESS: Not taking ordinary or proper care; heedless; inattentive.
CONTRACT: An oral or written agreement to have work performed by a contractor, individual, organization, company, etc.
CONTRACTOR: Person or entity who has a contract to perform a task or service.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE: Any call requiring the Northfield Fire/Rescue and/or Police Departments to respond.
INCENDIARY ACT: A fire purposely set by a person or persons.
INCIDENT: Any event requiring the services of the Northfield Fire/Rescue and/or Police Departments.
MALICIOUS ACT: A wrongful act intentionally done without legal justification or excuse; an unlawful act done wilfully and purposely.
NEGLIGENCE: Failure to use the ordinary care a reasonable, prudent and careful person would use under similar circumstances; failure to do something
which a reasonable person would do; or the doing of something which a reasonable and prudent person would not do. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
Sec. C-26: ACTS REQUIRING COST REIMBURSEMENT.
The following acts are subject to the fees enumerated in section C-27 of this article: (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
(1) Negligence/Careless Acts. Any person whose negligence or careless actions or conduct cause an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency
response, shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to section C-27 of this article, to the Village for the costs of that emergency response. (Ord.
97-905, 7-21-1997; amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
(2) Malicious Or Incendiary Acts. Any person whose malicious or incendiary act causes an incident resulting in emergency response, shall be
required to make restitution, pursuant to section C-27 of this article, to the Village for costs of that emergency response. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
(3) Driving Under The Influence. Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(a), any person who has 0.08 or more alcohol concentration in
his or her blood or breath, or whose blood or urine contains evidence of the unauthorized use of cannabis, as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Control
Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., 1994, or of the unauthorized use of a controlled substance, as defined by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., 1994, and who causes an incident resulting in an emergency response, upon finding
of guilty for the underlying offense (includes supervision and probation) shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to section C-27 of this article,
to the Village for the costs of that emergency response. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997; amd. Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
(4) Helicopter Standby. When a helicopter (other than governmental craft such as Coast Guard craft or medical helicopters) lands or hovers within the
boundaries of the Village, the person responsible for such helicopter shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to section C-27 of this article, to
the Village for the costs of a fully staffed fire engine required for standby. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
(5) Fire/Rescue Company Standby. When fire/rescue services (engine, truck, squad or ambulance) are requested to stand by for a non-Village
sponsored event, the person by whom the standby is requested shall reimburse the Village for the costs of such fire/rescue standby pursuant to
section C-27 of this article.
(6) Other Fire/Rescue Services. When any fire/rescue services (engine, truck, squad or ambulance) are rendered, the person to whom the service is
rendered shall be required to reimburse the Village for the service as set forth in section C-27 of this article. (Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
Sec. C-27: FEES.
The fees for those acts enumerated in section C-26 of this article shall be as set forth in appendix D, article I of this Code. The Village Manager or
designee may waive fees should circumstances warrant such.
A minimum of one hour shall be charged for all calls. Subsequent hours will be prorated in fifteen (15) minute increments. All calls shall be billed "portal to
portal". (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
Sec. C-28: LATE FEES.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 361/377
All fees shall be paid to the Village Treasurer within sixty (60) days of the invoice date. In the event that the fees are not paid within the sixty (60) day
period, said fees shall be increased by fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
Sec. C-29: APPEAL PROCESS.
Any person aggrieved by the assessment of a fee as set forth in section C-27 of this article may, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of
assessment, file a written appeal with the Village Manager, setting forth the reasons why the fee should not be assessed. The Village Manager shall
respond, in writing, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. The Village Manager may, in his or her sole discretion, personally contact the appellant.
The decision of the Village Manager shall be final. (Ord. 97-905, 7-21-1997)
ARTICLE X. DISPLAY OF STREET ADDRESS
Sec. C-30: ADDRESS NUMBERS.
(1) It is the duty of the owner and occupant of every building in the Village to place and maintain proper street address numbers in a place visible from the
roadway. Figures shall be arabic or nonscript in nature and at least four inches (4") in height showing the number of the building. The address numbers
shall be easily and distinctly read year round in both the day and during darkness.
(2) If a building is not visible from the roadway, the address numbers shall be posted on the parkway or on the mailbox or some other visible location. (Ord.
97-906, 7-21-1997)
ARTICLE XI. INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Sec. C-31: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
The International Energy Conservation Code 2006 is hereby adopted by reference as the Energy Conservation Code for the Village and is hereby made a
part of this article with the same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 08-1363, 2-19-2008)
Footnote 1: Municipal adoption of codes and records act.
ARTICLE XII. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. C-32: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
The International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance Code for the Village and is hereby made
a part of this article with the same force and effect as if it was specifically and particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 13-1565, 9-17-2013)
Sec. C-33: ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Community Development Director or his/her designee to enforce the provisions of this article. In the event any
building or structure is in violation of this article, the Board of Trustees and/or Community Development Director, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings: a) to prevent the occupancy of any unsafe building, structure or land, b) to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises, or c) to restrain, correct or abate the violation. (Ord. 13-1565, 9-17-2013)
Sec. C-34: DELETIONS.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are not adopted:
Sections 103.2, Appointment, and 103.3, Deputies, are deleted.
Section 103.5, Fees, is deleted.
Section 107.2, Form, is deleted.
Section 109.6, Hearing, is deleted.
Section 111, Means Of Appeal, is deleted.
Section 112.2, Issuance, is deleted.
Section 112.4, Failure To Comply, is deleted.
Section 302.4, Weeds, is deleted.
Section 302.8, Motor Vehicles, is deleted.
Section 304.3, Premises Identification, is deleted.
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 362/377
Chapter 4, Light, Ventilation And Occupancy Limitations, is deleted.
Chapter 5, Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements, is deleted.
Chapter 7, Fire Safety Requirements, is deleted.
Chapter 8, Referenced Standards, is deleted.
(Ord. 13-1565, 9-17-2013)
Sec. C-35: AMENDMENTS.
The International Property Maintenance Vode hereinabove referred to is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101 - General
Section 101.1 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the international property maintenance code of the village of Northfield, hereinafter referred to as
"this code" or "the property maintenance code."
Section 101.5 is hereby added to read as follows:
101.5 Jurisdictional Liability. The village of Northfield shall not be liable under this code for any damage to persons or property, by reasons of the
inspection or reinspection of buildings, structures or equipment authorized herein, or failure to inspect or reinspect such buildings, structures or
equipment or by reasons of the approval or disapproval of any building, structure or equipment authorized herein.
Section 102 - Applicability
Section 102.3 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Any repair, additions or alterations to a structure or any change of occupancy, use, business name or tenant,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, fire prevention, electrical, life safety, and
energy conservation codes as amended and set forth in appendix C as well as the zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A of the village code.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provisions of the zoning ordinance.
Section 103 - Department Of Property Maintenance And Inspection
Section 103.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
103.1 Code Official. The community development director or his/her designee(s) shall be the code official.
Section 103.4, Liability, shall be revised to delete the words "member of the board of appeals."
Section 106 - Violations
Section 106.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
106.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail
to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises, property, structure or
equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code,
or to fail to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this code.
Section 106.3, Prosecution Of Violation, shall be revised to delete the word "shall" following the word "premises" and to replace it with the word
"may."
Section 106.4 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount set forth in appendix D, article III, of the
village code.
Section 107 - Notices And Orders
Section 107.3 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
107.3 Method Of Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 363/377
A. Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents;
B. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's address;
C. Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the party's address; or
D. Service by posting a copy of the charging document upon the property where the violation is found when the party is the owner or manager of
the property.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service
of notice upon the owner.
Section 107.6 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
107.6 Transfer Of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until
the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with.
Section 201 - General
Section 201.3 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the building, plumbing, mechanical, fire
prevention, electrical, life safety, and energy conservation codes, as amended, and set forth in appendix C of the village code, such terms shall
have the meaning ascribed to them as in those codes.
Section 202 - Definitions
A new definition of "building" shall be added and shall read as follows:
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Section 302 - Exterior Property Areas
Section 302.5 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
302.5 Rodent Harborage And Vermin Infestation. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation of
rodents, vermin or other pests. Where rodents, vermin or other pests are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which
will not be injurious to human health. After elimination of the rodents, vermin or other pests, proper precautions will be taken to eliminate rodent
harborages and to prevent reinfestation of vermin or other pests.
Section 304 - Exterior Structure
Section 304.1 shall be amended by adding the following sentence at the end:
Whenever repair, replacement or maintenance of exterior surfaces is required to comply with this section, such repair, replacement or maintenance
shall be undertaken so as to match, conform and be consistent with the existing exterior and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
code.
Section 304.14 is revised to insert the dates of March 1 to November 30.
Section 304.16 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
304.16 Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, vermin, pests and rain and
surface water.
Section 309 - Pest Elimination
Section 309.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
309.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect, rodent, vermin and pest infestation. Where rodents, vermin or other pests are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After elimination of the rodents, vermin or
other pests, proper precautions will be taken to prevent reinfestation of rodents, vermin and other pests.
Section 602 - Heating Facilities
Section 602.2 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 364/377
602.2 Residential Buildings. Every dwelling/unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees
Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the outdoor design temperature of minus ten (-10) degrees Fahrenheit.
Section 602.3, Heat Supply, shall be amended by inserting the following date where appropriate, "September 15 to June 1."
Section 602.4, Occupiable Work Spaces, shall be amended by inserting the following dates where appropriate: "September 15 to June 1."
Section 604 - Electrical Facilities
Section 604.2 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
604.2 Service. The size and usage of electrical appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the electrical code as set forth in appendix C, article VI of the village code. Every dwelling shall be serviced by a main service that
is not less than 100 amperes, three wire.
(Ord. 13-1565, 9-17-2013)
Title Appendix D
FEES AND BOND AMOUNTS
Chapter D
FEES AND BOND AMOUNTS
ARTICLE I. FEES:
Sec. 2-54 Freedom of Information Act fees
First 50 pages (b/w) NC
Over 50 pages (b/w), per page $0.15
Color copies and sizes larger than letter or legal Actual cost to reproduce
Electronic records (disk/tape) Actual cost of medium purchased
Certifying copy of record $1.00
Records for commercial purpose $0.15 per page
Ch. 7 Water service fees
5/8 inch water meter accessories and fittings $ 525.00
3/4 inch water meter accessories and fittings 575.00
1 inch water meter accessories and fittings 650.00
11/2 inch water meter accessories and fittings 850.00
2 inch water meter accessories and fittings 950.00
2 inch compound meter accessories and fittings 2,100.00
3 inch compound meter accessories and fittings 2,600.00
4 inch compound meter accessories and fittings 3,600.00
6 inch compound meter accessories and fittings 6,300.00
Plumbing permit fee $120.00 plus 2% of contract price or estimated cost of
plumbing price
Miscellaneous plumbing permit fee $ 75.00
Street and/or parkway opening bond (to be paid with separate check) 3,000.00
Annual well certification 75.00
Lawn sprinkler system permit fee 75.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 365/377
Water usage during construction 275.00
Service pipe connections bond 10,000.00
Licensed bond required 10,000.00
Sanitary sewer connection fee:
Northfield resident or business 300.00
Non-Northfield entities 3,500.00
Sanitary sewer work bond 10,000.00
Stormwater detention fee in lieu of detention $4.50 per sq. ft. of impervious surface
Professional engineering review $100.00/hour
Sec. 7-20.1
Water and sanitary sewer services fees effective May 1, 2019
Water and sanitary sewer service $9.09 per 100 cubic feet, minimum 1,100 cubic feet or
$99.99 quarterly
Water service only $6.51 per 100 cubic feet, minimum 1,100 cubic feet or
$71.61 quarterly
Sanitary sewer only Flat rate of $112.77 quarterly
Nonresident water and sanitary sewer 2x resident rate for water and 3x resident rate for sanitary
sewer
Water only rate for properties outside the Village Water service only rate x 2
Sanitary sewer only rate for residential properties outside the Village 3x the flat sanitary sewer only rate
Sanitary sewer only rate for commercial properties outside the Village $7.74 per 100 cubic feet, based on documented monthly
water usage
Late fees 10% after due date; 56 days late - $25.00 red tag plus
late fee
Reestablishment of water service $100.00 during business hours; $250.00 after normal
business hours
Fire hydrant meter $125.00 meter fee plus usage plus $1,500.00 bond
Ch. 8, Art.
III
Food regulations
Sec. 8-32 Temporary food service license $50.00
Sec. 8-49 Food vending machines, per machine 75.00
Replacement sticker 10.00
Ch. 10 Landscaping, screening, and tree preservation
Dead or diseased tree removal fee NC
Tree protection due to remodeling/ construction NC plus $1,000.00 escrow
Healthy protected tree removal or tree removal due to remodeling $225.00 plus $1,000.00 escrow
New construction commercial developments and subdivision $300.00 plus $500.00 escrow
Landscape plan review $150.00 plus $500.00 escrow
Ch. 11 Licensing regulations
Amusements (not otherwise licensed) (nonprofit organizations excluded
per section 11-13 of this Code)
$1,000.00
Arcades (see coin operated games)
Automated teller machine (ATM) 150.00
Automobile rental agencies 150.00
Automobile repair shops 150.00
Cigar, tobacco, and cigarette dealers 250.00
Closure: partial closure of street or right-of-way 75.00/hour
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 366/377
Closure: total closure of street or right-of-way 160.00/hour
Coin operated games (per machine) 100.00
Demolition sales 100.00
Film production (Village Manager may waive fee for not for profit groups),
per shoot
250.00
Firearms dealer 720.00
Florists (sell live or cut flowers to the public) 150.00
Food delivery vehicles 200.00
Food handlers 1,500.00
Food (packaged) sold on premises not licensed as food store 150.00
Food store (no charge for nonprofit) $225.00 plus $75.00/ cash register
Gas stations and pumps $425.00 plus $20.00/ dispensing nozzle
House movers (must secure a $1,000,000.00 bond) $2,500.00/day
Laundries and dry cleaners 175.00
Laundries (self-service), each machine 150.00
Massage establishment 60.00
Private refuse collectors 1,200.00
Raffle permit, per raffle 50.00
Restaurants 450.00
Showcase display homes (must also post a cash bond of $3,000.00 or a
security bond of $30,000.00 by approved surety company)
2,800.00
Sideshows and concessions 50.00/day
Solicitors NC
Use:
Partial or disruptive use of public building 1,500.00/day
Partial non-disruptive use of public building 550.00/day
Woodworking and wood finishing 175.00
Sec. 11-
134
Construction of utility facilities in the public rights-of-way 50.00
Sec. 11-
155
Estate sale NC
Garage sale NC
Ch. 12 Signs
Total area - less than 24 sq. ft. $75.00 plus $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign space
Total area - 24 sq. ft. to 50 sq. ft. $125.00 plus $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign space
Total area - more than 50 sq. ft. $150.00 plus $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign space
Sign review by Architectural Commission $120.00 plus $750.00 escrow
Sign variations by Architectural Commission $750.00 plus $750.00 escrow
Sec. 13-5 Annual vehicle registration fees if paid by June 30 (Additional 50% late fee after June 30)
Passenger vehicle sticker $ 50.00
Antique cars 20.00
Motorcycles 35.00
Recreational vehicles 60.00
Trailers TA 20.00
Trailers TB and TC 35.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 367/377
Trailers TD 65.00
Trailers TE 75.00
Trucks, Class B (under 8,000 pounds) 60.00
Trucks, Class D (8,001 - 12,000 pounds) 90.00
Trucks, Class F (12,001 - 16,000 pounds) 100.00
Trucks, Class H and over 120.00
Auto dealers (flat fee) 1,000.00
Seniors 65 and over who participate in the Illinois circuit breaker program,
1 passenger vehicle sticker per household (discount of 50%)
25.00
Replacement sticker 10.00
Sec. 14-2.1
Emergency alarms
Alarm connection fee 50.00
Alarm user permit fee $40.00 for 2 years
Renewal fee $40.00 for 2 years
Sec. 16-5 Liquor licenses
Class P-1: Supermarket package licenses with authorization for sale of
wine, spirits and beer for consumption on licensed premises and daily
sampling without additional permit
$4,200.00
Class P-2: Wine and beer only package license 3,200.00
Class F-1: Restaurant without lounge license 2,500.00
Class F-2: Restaurant corkage license 1,500.00
Class F-3: Restaurant with lounge license 3,200.00
Class F-4: Restaurant with bar license 4,455.00
Class F-5: Senior center license 1,900.00
Class F-6: Golf course license 3,500.00
Class F-7: Corporate headquarters license 2,000.00
Class S-1: Gourmet beverage shop license 3,500.00
Class S-2: License with special conditions As set by Liquor Commission
Class S-3: Governmental entity license $50.00
Class TP(1): Temporary civic permit 75.00/day
Class TP(2): Temporary government permit 75.00/day
Class TP(3): Temporary non-Northfield caterer's permit 75.00/day
Class TP(4): Temporary promotional permit 75.00/day
Class TP(5): Temporary Northfield caterer's permit (Class F) $75.00/day or $500.00/year
Class TP(6): Temporary daily sampling permit (Class P or S) $ 25.00/day
Class TP(7): Temporary outdoor entertainment permit (Class F) 100.00/day
Administrative fee 500.00
Application for a local liquor license (changes in classification of local
liquor license)
2,000.00
(500.00)
Management entity certification 2,000.00
Ch. 17 Animals and fowl
Pet registration fee (1 time) 25.00/pet
Replacement tag 20.00
Appendix A
Land use fees
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 368/377
Planned unit development (review by Plan and Zoning and Architectural
Commissions)
$7,500.00 plus $10,000.00 escrow
Special use $1,100.00 plus $3,000.00 escrow
Rezoning $1,100.00 plus $3,000.00 escrow
Other Plan and Zoning Commission reviews $1,000.00 plus $3,000.00 escrow
Zoning Board of Appeals variations $400.00 plus $200.00 escrow
Personal wireless services or tennis and sport courts review by
Architectural Commission
$120.00 plus $750.00 escrow
Architectural Commission plan reviews and variations $750.00 plus $750.00 escrow
Preliminary project review $1,000.00 ($500.00 will be credited toward the formal
application fee if the project moves to that level of review)
Appendix
B,
Subdivision
s
Procedure
Subdivision $1,000.00 plus $3,000.00 escrow
Plus, per lot $300.00
Appendix
C, Art. IV
Building Code
First $1,000.00 of the contract cost or estimated cost of the project,
minimum
60.00
Each additional $1,000.00 of contract or estimated contract cost of the
project
14.00
Permit time extension of permit previously issued 50% of initial permit fee
Reinspection $75.00
Fence permit 50.00
Work initiated without permit $75.00 or 2x permit fee whichever is greater
Plan review fees; permits
First hour of review, minimum charge $100.00 plus escrow ($400.00 escrow for projects less
than $50,000.00; $1,000.00 escrow for projects more
than $50,000.00)
Each additional hour over 1 hour $100.00/hour
Each overtime hour 150.00
Antennas 150.00
Grading permit/review 100.00
Grading permit reinspection fee 100.00
Roofing permit/review 100.00
Driveway permit/review 100.00
Occupancy permit 125.00
Tent permit
With food service 150.00
Without food service 75.00
Temporary occupancy permit 400.00
Temporary occupancy bond $10,000.00 minimum or 125% of outstanding items,
whichever is greater
Residential and commercial demolish/street permits
Permit to remove/demolish a residential structure $3,000.00
Permit to remove/demolish a commercial structure 6,000.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 369/377
Construction sign 20.00
After review by Building Commissioner if permit cost is not reasonably
accurate
$130.00 per sq. ft.
Street obstruction permit $15.00 plus $0.10 per 1,000 estimated cost
Permit to demolish residential building $3,000.00 plus $10,000.00 bond
Permit to demolish commercial building $6,000.00 plus $10,000.00 bond
Street and/or parkway opening bond (to be paid with separate check) $ 3,000.00
Cash completion bond
For a construction project when the proposed cost is less than $10,000.00
1,000.00
For a construction project when the proposed cost is greater than
$10,000.00 but less than $25,000.00
2,500.00
For a construction project when the proposed cost is greater than
$25,000.00 but less than $100,000.00
5,000.00
For a construction project when the proposed cost is greater than
$100,000.00
10,000.00
Appendix
C, Art. V
International Mechanical Code
Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) fee $60.00 minimum plus 2% of the cost
Air conditioning or heat pumps
First 3 tons or 36,000 Btu ratings, each $40.00
Each additional ton or 12,000 Btu, each 10.00
Heating plant inspection $8.00 for each burner, complete with associated controls;
inspection fees for electrical heat will be based on an
$8.00 per thermostat basis
Reinspection $75.00
Mechanical permit minimum 60.00
Minor mechanical permit (less than $250.00) 60.00
Major mechanical permit (more than $250.00) 80.00
Appendix
C, Art. VI
Electrical Code
Electrical permit $60.00 plus 2% of the cost
Electrical circuits:
1 circuit $9.00
2 - 10 circuits $7.00 for each additional circuit
11 - 20 circuits $5.30 for each additional circuit
21 - 50 circuits $4.50 for each additional circuit
51 - 75 circuits $4.25 for each additional circuit
More than 75 circuits $3.40 for each additional circuit
Electrical inspections on electric service:
200 amps or less $100.00
400 amps - 600 amps 200.00
600 amps and over 300.00
Swimming pools $80.00 (up to 2 hp)
Garage $40.00 plus minimum fee
Reinspection $ 75.00
Minimum electric inspection fee 60.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 370/377
Other apparatus 50.00
Train track 100.00
Plan review for elevator, escalator, freight, dock lift, platform, wheelchair
lift/chair lift, and dumbwaiter permits
120.00
Elevator permit:
5 floors or less in height (each car) 120.00
Each additional floor above 5 (each car) 16.00
Escalator permit:
5 floors or less in height (each stair) 120.00
Each additional floor above 5 (each stair) 16.00
Freight permit:
5 floors or less in height (each car) 120.00
Each additional floor above 5 (each car) 16.00
Dock lift permit 60.00
Platform lift 60.00
Wheelchair lift/chair lift 60.00
Theater curtains 120.00
Stage or orchestra platform 70.00
Dumbwaiter permit:
Electric:
5 floors or less in height 110.00
Each additional floor above 5 16.00
Hand operated:
5 floors or less in height 50.00
Each additional floor above 5 16.00
Annual inspections and issuance of certificates per unit fees:
Elevators 5 floors or less in height (each car) 75.00
Escalators 5 floors or less in height (each stair) 75.00
Freights 5 floors or less in height (each car) 75.00
Dock lift 75.00
Platform lift 75.00
Wheelchair lift/chair lift 75.00
Theater curtains 75.00
Stage or orchestra platform 75.00
Electric dumbwaiter 5 floors or less in height 75.00
Hand operated dumbwaiter 5 floors or less in height 75.00
If not completed in 1 day of call for inspection, per unit fee extra 75.00
Any follow up inspections shall be charged at a per unit rate for existing
elevators
75.00
Appendix
C, Art. IX
Emergency response cost recovery fees
C-26(1) -
(5)
Per fire-rescue vehicle, per hour 125.00
Per fire-rescue staff person, per hour 35.00
Per engine, per hour 85.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 371/377
Per truck, per hour 85.00
Per squad, per hour 85.00
Per ambulance, per hour 85.00
Per command vehicle, per hour 55.00
Per officer, per hour 45.00
Per fire suppression member, per hour 40.00
Per EMS member, per hour 40.00
Late fee, after 60 days Plus 50%
Public works services and materials As from time to time established by the Village Manager
C-26(6) Service with basic life support, resident $500.00
Service with basic life support, nonresident 625.00
Advanced life support I, resident 600.00
Advanced life support I, nonresident 700.00
Advanced life support II, resident 675.00
Advanced life support II, nonresident 750.00
Treatment, no transport, resident 100.00
Treatment, no transport, nonresident 175.00
Mileage charge, resident (per mile) 10.00
Mileage charge, nonresident (per mile) 10.00
Miscellaneous fees:
Village mailing list 50.00
Copies of reports, each (accident, police, ambulance, fire) 30.00
Installation of automobile child safety seats by Police Department,
nonresidents
50.00
(Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018; amd. Ord. 19-1740, 3-19-2019)
ARTICLE II. BOND AMOUNTS FOR VILLAGE OFFICIALS :
Sec. 2-23 Village President The amount secured by the Village's Intergovernmental Risk Management Agency. If none is set by such
agency, then in the amount of $10,000.00
Sec. 2-34 Village Clerk
Sec. 2-36 Village Treasurer
Sec. 2-45 Village Budget Officer
Sec. 3-37 Treasurer of Foreign Fire
Insurance
Sec. 4-3 Board of Police
Commissioners
(Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
ARTICLE III. PENALTIES:
A. General Penalty. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, any act is prohibited
or when any act or failure to act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor or where section 1-13 of this Code is
referenced, then the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day. Each separate offense shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of
Code
Reference
Classification Fee
Code
Reference Classification Bond
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 372/377
this article. The maximum fine stated pursuant to this article may be levied for each day that a violation of this article continues. Further, the penalties
set forth in this Code shall be assessed any time a finding of guilty is made in any case. This shall apply even to an order of supervision. However, if
the court believes it to be in the best interests of justice, the court may assign community service to mitigate a fine at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per
hour.
B. Other Penalties.
Work initiated without
permit
$75.00 or 2 times the permit fee, whichever is greater
Ch. 11 General licenses late
penalty:
1 - 10 days $25.00
After 10 days 50.00
Ch. 13 Motor vehicles,
trailers and traffic
control
Sec. 13-1 Adopt Illinois Vehicle
Code
$40.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-8 Proper State licenses
and registration
$40.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
9.1
Failure to obtain
vehicle sticker on
time
50% of the sticker fee in addition to the regular fee for the vehicle sticker
Sec. 13-
9.2
Failure to
obtain/display vehicle
sticker
$100.00
Sec. 13-17
Mud or refuse on
tires
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-18
No parking
regulations
(subsections 13-
18(3) - (12) and 13-
18(14) - (19))
$ 30.00
Sec. 13-18
Parking in fire lane
and where signs
prohibit parking
(subsection 13-
18(13))
75.00
Sec. 13-19
Parking 2:00 A.M. -
6:00 A.M.
30.00
Sec. 13-20
Parking at the curb 30.00
Sec. 13-21
Parking in residential
areas
30.00
Sec. 13-22
Parking of
commercial vehicles
30.00
Sec. 13-
22A
Unauthorized use of
parking places
reserved for
handicapped persons
250.00
Sec. 13-
22B
Unattended motor
vehicles
50.00
Sec. 13-23
Traffic not to be
obstructed
50.00
Sec. 13-
25(1)
Loading zones 30.00
Sec. 13-
25(2)
Not to exceed 75 feet
along the curb
30.00
Code
Reference
Classification Fine
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 373/377
Sec. 13-
26(1)
Snow removal
(snowfall of 3 inches
or more owner will
remove car to permit
snow removal)
50.00
Sec. 13-
26(2)
Snow onto public
road or sidewalk
100.00
Sec. 13-29
Parking trailers,
prohibited
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-30
Parking vehicles for
sale
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-31
Riding on vehicle
exterior
$50.00
Sec. 13-32
Toy or other non-road
worthy vehicles on
roadway
50.00
Sec. 13-33
Unattended animals
(horse or other
animal left
unattended in any
street)
50.00
Sec. 13-34
Permit to drive over
curb
30.00
Sec. 13-35
Bicycle license
displayed
10.00
Sec. 13-37
Bicycle license
attached
10.00
Sec. 13-38
Bicycles - for life of
vehicle with 1 owner
NC
Sec. 13-40
Bicycle - replacement
fee
NC
Sec. 13-
41(1)
Traffic controls -
official traffic signs
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
41(2)
Traffic controls -
directional signs
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-42
Yielding to
pedestrians
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-43
Speed of bicycles $25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-44
Right-of-way $25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-45
Leaving or parking
bicycles
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
46(2)
Bicycle bells $10.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
46(3)
Bicycle brakes $10.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
79A
Inoperable vehicles $50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-
79B
Vehicles left for more
than 30 days at
gasoline station
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 13-98
Penalty for
automated traffic law
violation
$100.00 per violation plus $100.00 after 25 days subsequent to service (or) plus $100.00 after 25 days
subsequent to administration
Ch. 14 Nuisances
Code
Reference
Classification Fine
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 374/377
Sec. 14-
2.1
Burglar/all trouble
and medical false
alarms:
5th - 7th response
$75.00 per response
8th - 9th response
$100.00 per response
10th response $175.00 per response
11 or more
responses
$200.00 per response
Sec. 14-
2.1G
Fire false alarms:
3rd - 5th response
$100.00 per response
6th - 10th
response
$200.00 per response
11 or more
responses
$300.00 per response
Sec. 14-17
Nuisance violations $100.00 - $750.00 per day such person shall continue a nuisance after being fined for the same; a new cause
of action hereunder shall immediately accrue against such person
Ch. 15,
Art. I
General offenses
Sec. 15-11
Sale of tobacco to
minors
$250.00 - $1,000.00
Sec. 15-
11(3)
Possession of
tobacco products by
minor
$25.00 - $400.00
Sec. 15-20
(1) - (9)
Offensive noises
prohibited
$40.00 - $750.00
Ch. 16 Alcoholic liquor:
Late penalty:
1 - 10 days $25.00
After 10 days 50.00
Violation of
chapter 16:
1st offense $500.00 - $1,000.00
2nd offense $750.00 - $1,500.00
3rd or more
offense
$2,500.00
Sec. 16-4 Failure to provide
timely copy of State
liquor license
100.00/day
Sec. 16-17
Conduct of
employees and
agents; supervisor on
premises
100.00/day
Ch. 17 Animals and fowl
Sec. 17-3 Diseased animals $25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-4 Keeping noisy
animals
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-5 Swine prohibited $25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-7
and 17-
10(1)
Animals running at
large:
Code
Reference
Classification Fine
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 375/377
1st offense $25.00
2nd offense 50.00
3rd offense 75.00
Sec. 17-10
Control of
domesticated
animals:
1st offense 30.00
2nd offense 40.00
3rd offense 50.00
Sec. 17-
10(2)
Pets to enter public
building or place
where food is stored
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-
10(3)
Pets trespass on
private property
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-
10(4)
Pets to chase or run
after vehicles
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-
10(5)
Pets to snap, growl,
snarl or jump on or
threaten persons in
public
$50.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-
10(6)
Pets to deposit any
excretions without
removing
immediately
$25.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-12
Pet bites:
1st offense $100.00 - $300.00
2nd offense $150.00 - $500.00
3rd offense $300.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-13
Nonbiting pet
offenses
$100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 17-18
Capture of pet with
current registration
tag (within 12 month
period):
1st capture $50.00
2nd capture 75.00
3rd capture $150.00; plus all actual impoundment charges
Sec. 17-19
Capture of pet
without current
registration tag
(within 12 month
period):
1st capture $100.00
2nd capture 150.00
3rd capture $300.00; plus all actual impoundment charges
Sec. 17-30
Animals and fowl $100.00 - $750.00
Other penalties
Sec. 1-24 Ethics violations $100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 5-34 Telecommunications
Tax
$500.00 - $1,000.00
Sec. 5-53 Cable and video
standards breach
Not more than $750.00 for each day of the material breach, not more than $25,000.00 for each occurrence
Code
Reference
Classification Fine
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 376/377
Sec. 7-10 Unlawful use of water
fine
$500.00 - $1,200.00
Sec. 7-45 Public sewers $100.00 - $750.00/day per offense
Sec. 7-51 Unlawful to tamper
with water meter
$500.00 - $1,000.00 plus the cost to replace the damaged equipment
Sec. 8-14 Declaration of
nuisance
$100.00 - $750.00/day per nuisance
Sec. 8-22 Insects dangerous to
public health
$100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 8-44 Adulteration and
misbranding
$100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 8-59 Garbage and debris
accumulation
$50.00 - $750.00/day per offense
Sec. 8-68 Landscape waste
disposal
$100.00 - $750.00 per offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues
Sec. 8-71 Clean indoor
air/smoking
regulations
$100.00 - $250.00 per person smoking in an area where smoking is prohibited. For violations by owners,
operators of public places, or places of employment, not less than $250.00 for the 1st violation; not less than
$500.00 for the 2nd violation and not less than $2,500.00 for each additional violation within 1 year of the 1st
violation. 50% of the fine shall be distributed to the Illinois Department of Public Health and 50% of the fine
shall be distributed to the Village
Sec. 9-27 Discrimination $100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 10-
10A
Replacement of trees
on public ROW
$175.00 per caliper inch dbh removed
Sec. 10-
10B
Removal of trees on
public ROW without a
permit
A fee equal to twice the amount of the cost of the replacement tree or trees
Sec. 10-13
Protection of trees $100.00 - $750.00; additionally, should the Village incur costs to abate a violation the cost shall be assessed
against the owner
Sec. 10-18
Removal of trees on
private property
without a permit
A fee equal to twice the amount of the cost of the replacement tree or trees
Replacement of trees
on private property
$175.00 per caliper inch dbh removed
Sec. 11-68
Solicitors $400.00 - $750.00; each solicitation of a Northfield premises shall constitute a separate finable offense
Sec. 11-
79.2
Special use permits -
car wash
$100.00 - $400.00 per day per offense
Sec. 11-
121
Firearms dealers $500.00 - $750.00 per day. Each day of operation in violation of sections 11-114 through 11-120 of this Code
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
Sec. 11-
130
Massage
establishments
$2,500.00 for violation of any provision of chapter 11, article II, division XIV of this Code. A separate offense is
deemed committed each time and each day during or on which violation occurs or is permitted to continue
Sec. 12-
13E
Sign violation $100.00 - $750.00
Sec. 18-70
Appurtenant
structures
$100.00 - $750.00
Appendix
C, Art. XII
Property
Maintenance Code
Residential property
maintenance
violation:
1st offense $ 100.00
2nd offense 200.00
3 or more offenses
500.00 each
Code
Reference
Classification Fine
12/18/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=886 377/377
Commercial property
maintenance
violation:
1st offense 200.00
2nd offense 400.00
3 or more offenses
1,000.00 each
(Ord. 18-1728, 9-17-2018)
Code
Reference
Classification Fine