HISTORICAL DATA AND TOWN CHARTER
of the
TOWN OF NORMAL
NORMAL, ILLINOIS
TOWN OF NORMAL
HISTORICAL DATA AND TOWN CHARTER
Normal University was founded and opened classes in a new building in 1861 in what was
then known as North Bloomington. Shortly thereafter, houses began to be built in its vicinity. By
1865 the population had grown to sufficient numbers to warrant the realization of the dream of its
founders who had worked so hard to secure the location of the school...a school Town.
Accordingly in that year steps were taken to organize the Town under the name "Normal".
The legislature of the State of Illinois granted a special Town Charter to Normal, Illinois on the 25th
day of February, 1867. The Town of Normal operates under its original Charter to this day, subject
only to legislative changes as from time to time enacted.
The following compiled lists of Presidents of the Board of Trustees of said Town is believed
to be complete to the date of this Code.
Wesley Pearse ............................. 1865 to 1866
L.A. Hovey ................................. 1866 to 1868
M.D. Seward ............................... 1868 to 1869
L.A. Hovey ................................. 1869 to 1870
Joshua Brown ............................. 1870 to 1871
Thomas Loar ............................... 1871 to 1872
W.A. Pennell ............................... 1872 to 1873
J.A. Taylor .................................. 1873 to 1874
W.A. Pennell ............................... 1874 to 1875
H.G. Fisher.................................. 1875 to 1878
R.B. Chaplin ............................... 1878 to 1879
B.F. Carpenter ............................. 1879 to 1880
H.G. Fisher.................................. 1880 to 1882
A.C. Taylor ................................. 1882 to 1883
P.S. Dodge .................................. 1883 to 1886
R.J. Merriam ............................... 1886 to 1889
Jerrome Chipman ........................ 1889 to 1891
Henry G. McCormick ................. 1891 to 1892
George Champion ....................... 1892 to 1893
George A. Griggs ........................ 1893 to 1894
J.S. Courtright ............................. 1894 to 1896
Jerrome Chipman ........................ 1896 to 1897
Otto Siebert ................................. 1897 to 1905
E.J. Metcalf ................................. 1905 to 1907
O.L. Manchester .......................... 1907 to 1917
J.A. Goodwin .............................. 1917 to 1919
F.S. Foulk .................................... 1919 to 1925
W.J. Arbogast .............................. 1925 to 1927
C.E. Clarke .................................. 1927 to 1929
W.A. Newhauser ......................... 1929 to 1931
E.L. Beach ................................... 1931 to 1933
W.A. Newhauser ......................... 1933 to 1935
Grant M. Ridenour ...................... 1935 to 1940
R.D. Marsh .................................. 1940 to 1944
N.W. Cline .................................. 1944 to 1944
C.W. Hudelson ............................ 1944 to 1948
Charles E. Murray ....................... 1948 to 1952
W.E. Raab ................................... 1952 to 1960
Robert D. Randall ....................... 1960 to 1964
Charles R. Spear .......................... 1964 to 1968
Charles L. Baugh ......................... 1968 to 1972
Carol A. Reitan............................ 1972 to 1976
Richard T. Godfrey ..................... 1976 to 1985
Paul M. Harmon, Jr ..................... 1985 to 1993
Kent M. Karraker ........................ 1993 to 2003
Christopher Koos …………….. 2003 to
From the first record the following accounts of the organization of Normal are taken:
____________________
Normal, Illinois, Sept. 9, 1865
Notice is hereby given that on Monday, the 18th day of September, 1865, at the Post Office
in the Town of Normal a public meeting will be held to take into consideration and decide by vote
the question, "Whether or not it is expedient to incorporate said Town as provided under the
General Act authorizing Towns to incorporate?" Said meeting to organize at two o'clock P.M., at
which time and place all who are qualified to vote are requested to attend.
For and on behalf of many citizens of the said Town.
____________________
Normal, Illinois, Sept. 18, 1865
The citizens met pursuant to call and proceeded to organize by electing L.A. Hovey,
Chairman, and W.G. Parr, Clerk, who were duly sworn by S.J. Reeder, a Notary Public, and the
meeting proceeded to business and voted to incorporate said Town under the general act, there
being thirty-seven votes in favor of organization and none against it.
____________________
Normal, Illinois, Sept. 19, 1865
Notice is hereby given that there will be a meeting of the legal voters of The Town of
Normal at the Post Office in said Town on Saturday, September 30, 1865, at 2 o'clock P.M., for the
purpose of electing five trustees for said Town pursuant to an election which was held on Tuesday,
the 18th day of September at which time said Town was duly incorporated.
W. G. Parr, Clerk
____________________
Normal, Illinois, Sept. 30, 1865
At an election held at the Post Office in the Town of Normal, County of McLean and State
of Illinois, on Saturday the 30th day of September, 1865, the following named persons received the
following number of votes for Trustees of said Town.
D.P. Fyffe, L.A. Hovey, Wesley Pearce, John A. Rockwood, S.J. Reeder; each received 11 votes.
W. G. Parr, Clerk L.A. Hovey, Judge of Election.
____________________
Normal, Illinois, Oct. 2, 1865
First Meeting of the Board.
The Board of Trustees of said Town met at the Post Office and proceeded to organize by
electing Wesley Pearce, President of said Board and S.J. Reeder, Clerk. On motion adjourned to
meet on the 7th day of October, 1865.
S.J. Reeder, Clerk
____________________
The first Ordinance was passed March 6, 1866, regulating small pox. It was followed by
one on nuisances passed the 7th day of June, 1866.
____________________
In 1867, after operating nearly two years under the general law, the founders of the Town
secured our present special charter from the State legislature. It is today one of the few special
charters operative in the State.
CODE
The Town of Normal was incorporated and still operates under Special Charter granted by
the State of Illinois and that Charter is in words and figures as follows:
AN ACT
TO INCORPORATE THE TOWN OF NORMAL
____________________
ARTICLE I
Section 1. Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, represented in the General
Assembly, That the inhabitants and residents of the Town of Normal, in the County of McLean, and
State of Illinois, are hereby constituted and declared a body corporate and politic, by the name and
style of "THE TOWN OF NORMAL," and by that name shall have perpetual succession; and may
have and use a common seal, which they may alter at pleasure; have power to sue and be sued,
plead and be impleaded in all courts and places where justice is administered, in all actions
whatever; to purchase, receive and hold property, both real and personal, within the limits of said
Town, and beyond its limits when needed for burial ground and other corporate purposes; to sell,
lease and convey property real and personal for the use of said town; to protect and improve any
such property, as the public good may require.
Section 2. The town limits of said Town of Normal shall be bounded as follows, to-wit:
Beginning at a point one mile due west of the central point of section twenty-eight (28), township
twenty-four (24) north, range two (2) east in McLean County, Illinois; thence north one mile; thence
east two miles; thence south two miles; thence west two miles; thence north one mile to the place of
beginning: Provided, that all tracts of land within the town boundaries, which are in extent ten acres
or more, and used for agricultural or horticultural purposes only, and not as parts of a residence, nor
laid off into town lots, shall be exempt from taxation for town revenue until the same shall be
subdivided into town lots; and each lot, when so divided, shall be taxed as other town lots.
Section 3. Whenever any tract of land adjoining said town shall be laid off into town lots,
platted and duly recorded, as required by law, the same shall be annexed to and form a part of the
Town of Normal: Provided, that the town council shall have power to require that all additions and
subdivisions hereafter made to said town shall be so laid out and platted as to correspond and
conform to the regular blocks, streets and alleys already laid out and established within said town;
and no map or plat of any addition or subdivision to said town shall be entitled to record, or be
recorded in the office of the recorder of McLean County, until the same shall be approved by the
town council of said town; and all such additions shall be null and void until a correct map or plat
thereof shall be approved by said town council.
ARTICLE II
Section 1. The legislative powers of the Town of Normal shall be vested in a town council,
composed of five trustees, to be elected annually by the qualified voters of said town; and no person
shall be a trustee of said town who has not arrived at the age of twenty-one years, and who has not
resided in said town one year preceding his election, and who is not a citizen of the United States;
and the said trustees shall, at their first meeting, proceed to elect one of their number president, and
shall have power to fill all vacancies in said board which may be occasioned by death, resignation,
or removal: Provided, the vacancy shall not exceed six months.
Section 2. The town council shall determine the qualification returns and election of its own
members. A majority shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to
time, and compel the attendance of absent members under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance; shall have power to determine the rules of its proceedings, punish a member for
disorderly conduct, and with a concurrence of three-fifths, expel a member.
Section 3. Each member of the town council shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take an oath to perform the duties of his office to the best of his knowledge and ability; to
support the Constitution of the United States and of this state; and there shall be at least one regular
meeting of said town council in each month, at such time and place as may be prescribed by
ordinance; provided, that the president or any three members of said council, may call special
meetings of said council, first giving such notice in writing as shall be provided for by the council.
ARTICLE III
Section 1. There shall be elected in the Town of Normal, by the qualified voters thereof, on
the first Monday of March, 1867 and on the first Monday of March every four years thereafter, a
police magistrate and a town constable, who shall hold their respective officers for four years, and
until their successors shall be elected and qualified.
Section 2. No person shall be eligible to the office of police magistrate, or to the office of
town constable, who shall not have been a resident of the town one year next preceding his election,
or who shall not be a citizen of the United States.
Section 3. For the election of five trustees, a police magistrate and town constable the Town
of Normal is hereby declared an elective precinct.
Section 4. The police magistrate shall be commissioned by the Governor of the State of
Illinois as a justice of the peace, and as such shall give bond and take and subscribe the same oath of
office as other justices of peace, and as such shall be a conservator of the peace for said town, and
shall have power and authority to administer oaths, issue writs and processes, to take depositions
and acknowledgments of deeds, mortgages, and other instruments of writing, and certify the same
as other justices of the peace; (and he shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all cases arising under the
ordinances of the corporation), and concurrent jurisdiction power and authority arising in all cases
whatsoever with other justices of the peace under the laws of this state, and shall be entitled to such
fees for his services as shall be fixed by town ordinance; and when not so fixed, as other justices of
the peace in similar cases: Provided, that upon the necessary oath being made by the defendant as
required by law governing justices of the peace, a change of venue shall be granted in all cases from
the police magistrate of the town to the nearest justice of the peace, who is hereby invested in such
cases with all authority of the police magistrate, and he shall proceed to try the same: Provided,
also, that in the event of absence, sickness, death or resignation of the police magistrate, the next
nearest justice of the peace of McLean County be invested with all the power conferred upon the
police magistrate by the provisions of this act.
Section 5. The town constable shall have the same power and authority, rights, privileges
and qualifications; shall have the same jurisdiction and be entitled to the same fees, and be liable to
the same penalties as constables now are or may hereafter be under the laws of this state; and shall
be placed under such bond conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office as
may be prescribed by ordinance of the corporation hereby created.
Section 6. In case the police magistrate shall at any time be guilty of palpable omission of
duty, or shall willfully or corruptly be guilty of corruption, of oppression, malconduct, or partiality
in the discharge of the duties of his office he shall be liable to be indicted in the circuit court of
McLean County, and on conviction shall be fined in any sum not exceeding two hundred dollars,
and removed from office.
ARTICLE IV
Section 1. On the first Monday of March, 1867, an election shall be held in said Town of
Normal for five trustees, a police magistrate, a town constable; and on the first Monday of March of
each year forever thereafter an election shall be held for the election of said trustees, who shall hold
their offices for one year, and until their successors shall be elected and qualified; and forever
thereafter on the first Monday of March every four years an election of a police magistrate and town
constable, who shall hold their offices for four years, and until their successors shall be elected and
qualified; which first election shall commence at 10 o'clock a.m., and close at four o'clock p.m. of
said day; and for the purposes of said first election the present board of trustees of the Town of
Normal are hereby constituted corporate trustees for said town.
Section 2. It shall be the duty of said board of trustees hereby constituted, or any two of
them, to give at least ten days' notice of the time and place of holding said first election, by posting
up notices in at least three of the most public places in said town; to be judges of said election; to
appoint their own clerk, receive and canvass the votes, declare the result, furnish to each one of the
persons elected a certificate of his election, certify the votes for police magistrate and town
constable to clerk of the county court of McLean County and lay the poll books of such election
before the board at its first meeting. All subsequent elections shall be held and conducted and return
made as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Section 3. A failure to hold said first election on the first Monday of March, 1867, shall not
work a forfeiture of this charter, but said first election may be held on any day after the first Monday
of March, 1867, by giving ten days' notice, and conducting the same as prescribed in Section two of
article four of this charter.
Section 4. If two or more persons shall receive an equal number of votes for police
magistrate or town constable, the board shall proceed to determine the same by lot; and when there
shall be a tie in the election of members of the town council, the judges of election shall certify the
same to the police magistrate who shall determine the same by lot, in such manner as shall be
prescribed by ordinance; and all contested elections shall be determined as prescribed by ordinance.
Section 5. All persons who are entitled to vote for state officers, and who shall have been
actual residents of said town ninety days next preceding said election, shall be entitled to vote for
said officers.
ARTICLE V
LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE COUNCIL
Section 1. The town council shall have power and authority to levy and collect taxes upon
all property, real and personal, within the limits of the town, not exceeding ten mills on the dollar
upon the assessed value thereof, and may enforce the payment of the same in manner to be
prescribed by ordinance, not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States or of his state; and
the town council is hereby authorized and empowered to provide for the sale of personal property
for the taxes due thereon, as also for the sale of real estate for the taxes due thereon, in such manner
as shall be prescribed by ordinance: Provided, that such ordinances are not inconsistent with the
Constitution of the United States or of this state.
Section 2. The town council shall have power to appoint a clerk, treasurer, assessor,
supervisor of streets, pound master or masters, town weigher, and all other officers that may be
necessary, and prescribe their duties, and to require of all officers appointed in pursuance of this
charter, bonds, with such penalties and securities for the faithful performance of their duties as may
be deemed expedient; also, to require all officers appointed as aforesaid to take an oath for the
faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices before entering upon the discharge of
the same.
Section 3. To appropriate money and provide for the payment of the expenses of the town.
Section 4. To make regulations to secure the general health of the inhabitants of said town,
and to prevent the introduction of contagious diseases into the town.
Section 5. To provide the town with water, to sink and keep in repair wells and pumps in
the streets for the convenience of the inhabitants.
Section 6. To open, alter, extend, grade or otherwise improve and keep in repair streets and
alleys, and remove obstructions therefrom, and to construct and keep in repair bridges.
Section 7. To license, tax, and regulate auctioneers, hucksters, teamsters, brokers, draymen,
peddlers, pawn-brokers and money changers and hackmen.
Section 8. To license, tax, regulate and suppress theatrical and other exhibitions, shows and
amusements.
Section 9. To provide for the inspection and weighing of hay and stone coal, measuring of
charcoal, wood and other fuel sold in said town.
Section 10. To provide for the extinguishment and prevention of fires; to organize and
regulate fire companies.
Section 11. To regulate the fixing of chimneys and flues thereof.
Section 12. To regulate the storage of tar, pitch, rosin, gunpowder and other combustible
materials.
Section 13. To prevent the running at large of dogs, and to provide for the destruction of the
same when running at large contrary to ordinance.
Section 14. To prevent the firing of guns and other combustibles or firearms within the
limits of said town.
Section 15. To restrain, regulate or prohibit the running at large of cattle, horses, sheep,
swine, goats and other animals, and to authorize the distraining, impounding and sale of the same,
and to prohibit the indecent exhibition of horses and other animals.
Section 16. To prevent horse racing, or any immoderate riding or driving within the limits
of said town of horses or other animals; to compel persons to secure their horses or other animals
attached to vehicles or otherwise while standing or remaining in any street or alley, or public road in
said town.
Section 17. To establish and maintain a public pound or pounds, and appoint a poundmaster
or masters, and prescribe his or their duties.
Section 18. To define and declare what shall be deemed nuisances; to punish the author
thereof; and to authorize and direct the summary abatement of nuisances and the removal of same
two miles from the boundaries of said town.
Section 19. To erect market-houses; to establish markets and market places and provide for
the regulation thereof.
Section 20. To provide for inclosing, improving and regulating all public grounds.
Section 21. To borrow money on the credit of the town: Provided, that no sum or sums of
money shall be borrowed at a greater interest than ten per cent per annum; nor shall the interest on
the aggregate of all sums borrowed and outstanding ever exceed one-half of the town revenue
arising from taxes assessed on real property within the limits of said corporation.
Section 22. To regulate the election of town officers, and to provide for removing from
office any person holding office created by ordinance.
Section 23. To regulate the police of the town; to impose penalties, fines and forfeitures for
the breach of any ordinance, for recovery and appropriation of such fines and forfeitures, and for the
enforcement of such penalties: Provided That the right of trial by jury shall in no case be denied to
any person charged with a breach of any of the provisions of this act or any ordinance.
Section 24. To provide for taking enumerations of inhabitants of the Town.
Section 25. To fix the compensation of town officers; to regulate the fees of jurors,
witnesses and others for services rendered under this act, or by any ordinance.
Section 26. To require railroad companies to construct and keep in repair suitable crossings
at the intersection of streets and alleys, where the town council shall deem it necessary; to prohibit
and restrain railroad companies from doing storage or warehouse business or collecting pay for
storage; to regulate the speed of locomotive engines within the town limits; also to regulate the
running of horse railway cars or street cars propelled by steam or otherwise; the laying down of
tracks for the same; the transportation of passengers therein and the kind of rail to be used within the
town limits.
Section 27. The town council shall have power to make and enforce all ordinances
necessary and proper for carrying into effect all the powers specified in the is act: Provided, That
such ordinances are not repugnant to, nor inconsistent with, the Constitution of the United States or
of this state.
Section 28. The town council shall have power to provide for the punishment of offenders
against the ordinances of said town, by imprisonment in the county jail, not exceeding thirty days
for any one offense, in all cases where the offenders shall fail or refuse to pay the fines and
forfeitures which may be recovered against them.
Section 29. To provide for the erection and improvement of all needful buildings for the
use of said town.
Section 30. To provide for lighting streets and erecting lampposts; to provide lamps
therefor and regulate and control the lighting of the same.
Section 31. To tax, restrain, prohibit and suppress tippling houses, dramshops, gaminghouses,
bawdy-houses, and other disorderly or disreputable houses, within said town, but not to
license any house or place for the sale of intoxicating drinks of any kind as a beverage.
Section 32. To regulate the inspection of butter, lard and other provisions.
Section 33. The style of the ordinances of the town shall be, "Be it ordained by the town
council of the town of Normal."
Section 34. All ordinances passed by the town council shall within one month after they
shall have been passed be published in some newspaper, published in the town, or in some other
way, to be provided by ordinances, in case no newspaper is published in the town; and shall not be
in force until they shall have been published as aforesaid.
Section 35. All ordinances of the town may be provided by the seal of the corporation, and
where printed or published in book or pamphlet form, and purporting to be printed or published by
the authority of the corporation, the same shall be received in evidence in all courts and places
without further proof.
ARTICLE VI
OF THE PRESIDENT
Section 1. The president shall preside at all meetings of the town council, and shall have the
casting vote and no other, and in case of his non-attendance at any meeting, the council shall
appoint one of their number who shall preside at that meeting.
Section 2. The president shall be active and vigilant in enforcing the laws and ordinances
for the government of the town; he shall inspect and conduct of all the subordinate officers of the
town, and cause negligence and positive violation to be prosecuted and punished.
Section 3. He shall have power, whenever he may deem it necessary to require of any
officer of said town an exhibit of his books and papers, and shall have power to do all other acts
required of him by any ordinance made in pursuance of this act.
ARTICLE VII
OF PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
Section 1. Whenever it shall be necessary to take property for opening or altering any
public street or alley, the corporation shall make just compensation to the owners of such property,
and pay or tender the same before opening such street or alley; and in case the amount of such
compensation cannot be agreed upon, the police magistrate shall cause the same to be ascertained
by a jury of six disinterested freeholders of the town.
Section 2. When all the owners of property on a street or alley proposed to be opened shall
petition for the opening of the same, the town council shall provide for the opening or altering of the
same; but no compensation shall be allowed to such owners for their property so taken.
Section 3. All jurors empaneled to inquire into the amount of benefit or damages which
shall happen to the owners of property proposed to be taken for opening any street or alley, shall
first be sworn to that effect, and shall return to the police magistrate their inquest in writing, signed
by each juror: Provided always, That in the assessment of such damages, the jury shall take into
consideration the benefit as well as injury happening to the owner of property proposed to be taken
for opening or altering a street or alley by such opening or altering.
Section 4. The police magistrate shall have power, for good cause shown within ten days
after any inquest shall have been returned to him as aforesaid to set aside the same, and cause a new
inquest to be made.
Section 5. The town council shall have power, by ordinance, to levy and collect a special
tax on holders of lots on any street or alley, or any part of any street or alley, according to the
respective fronts owned by them, for the purpose of grading or paving or otherwise improving such
street or alley: Provided, That the tax shall in no case exceed one-half of the expense of paving,
grading or otherwise improving said street or alley.
Section 6. The town council shall have power to cause all owners or occupants of premises
to build sidewalks and keep the same in repair in front of said premises, and when not built
according to the orders of the town council, to build and repair the same and assess the costs thereof
against said premises, and collect the same as other town taxes are collected.
ARTICLE VIII
SCHOOL AND SCHOOL FUNDS
Section 1. The town of Normal, as hereby incorporated and the several additions which
may hereafter be made to said town, shall constitute a school district, and be known as "Normal
School District".
Section 2. The government of said district for school purposes shall be vested in a board of
five persons, to be styled the Board of Education of Normal School District.
Section 3. There shall be elected by the qualified voters of said district, at the first election
for town officers herein provided for, five persons, who shall constitute said board, and hold their
offices for one, two, three, four and five years. And thereafter on the first Monday of March
annually there shall be an election for the purpose of electing one member of said board, who shall
hold his office for five years until his successor is elected and qualified. All vacancies in said board
shall be filled at said annual elections; but any vacancy happening between the times of the regular
annual elections by death, resignation, or removal from the district, shall be filled by the remaining
members of the board, and the person so appointed shall hold the office until the next annual
election, and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. The meetings for said election of
said member or members of said board shall be notified and called, and the poll book opened and
kept, the votes canvassed, and the returns made in the same manner as for the election of other town
officers: Provided, That the ballot for a member or for members of the said board of eduction shall
be upon a separate slip of paper, and form no part of a ballot for other town officers. In case of a tie
in any election of members of said board, the judges of election shall decide the same by lot on the
day of election, or as soon thereafter as may be.
Section 4. The said board of education shall be a body corporate and politic by the name
and style of "The Board of Education of Normal School District"; may have a common seal and
change the same at pleasure, and as such may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued,
plead and be impleaded in and before any tribunal having competent jurisdiction.
Section 5. It shall be the duty of said board to hold quarterly sessions on the second
Monday in March, June, September, and December of each year, and they shall meet by
adjournment at such times as they may think proper; and the president of the board, or any two
members thereof, may call a special meeting of the board by giving a verbal notice of the time and
place and object thereof, or by leaving a written notice thereof at the residence of each member of
the board; and at all meetings a majority may constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Said board shall organize by appointing one of their own number president; they shall also elect a
clerk, who may be a member of the board, and treasurer, who shall not be a member of the board,
who shall hold their respective offices during the pleasure of the board, and until their successors
shall be elected and qualified. The president shall preside at all meetings of the board at which he
shall be present; and it shall be the duty of the clerk to be present at said meetings, and to record in a
book to be provided for that purpose all the official proceedings of said board, which record shall be
public and open to the inspection of any person interested; and all said proceedings when recorded,
shall be signed by the president and the clerk, and a copy certified by the clerk shall be prima facie
evidence of such proceedings in all courts and other places. If the president or clerk shall be absent,
the board may appoint a president or clerk pro tem. The treasurer shall execute to said board an
official bond with good and sufficient securities, such bond to be approved by the board, in such
sums as the board shall determine, but to be as nearly as can be ascertained in double the amount of
all moneys that will be likely to be at any one time in his hands, and conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties as treasurer in safely keeping and promptly paying over all moneys which
he shall receive as such treasurer as he shall from time to time be directed and order of the board, or
required by law to do so. He shall keep a true and accurate record, in proper books for that purpose,
of all moneys received and paid out. for what purpose, and upon what and whose account; but he
shall pay out no money except upon order of the board; and for all moneys paid out he shall take
and file with the papers of his office proper vouchers; and he shall settle his accounts with the board
at least once a year, and oftener if the board shall so require.
Section 6. No member of he board shall receive any compensation for his attendance at the
meetings of the board, nor for the performance of its ordinary duties; but for extraordinary services
reasonable compensation may be allowed -- the board to determine what are extraordinary services
and the compensation therefor. The clerk and treasurer shall receive such compensation as the
board shall prescribe.
Section 7. The treasurer shall, under the direction of the board, demand and receive from
the officer or officers having the custody thereof, any interest or other money from any school fund
or other source to which the Normal school district, or any part thereof, or the schools or the
teachers therein would be entitled if this act had not been passed; and the money so received from
such funds or sources shall be placed in the treasury, to be used and expended under the order and
direction of the board for the support of schools and for school purposes, in the same manner as
other funds that come into the treasury by taxation or otherwise.
Section 8. The said Normal school district shall be exempt from the jurisdiction of trustees
of schools in the township in which said Normal school district is located, so far as common schools
are concerned; and the school commissioner of McLean County shall, in the distribution of the
school funds that may come into his hands, apportion so much of the school fund as said Normal
school district may be entitled to upon the pro rata distribution of said funds among the several
townships of said county to the said Normal school district; and upon the filing of the bond of the
treasurer of the said board of education, the said school commissioners shall pay over to the said
treasurer the amount due said district. All taxes levied in accordance with the provisions of this act
for school purposes shall be paid over by the officers collecting the same to the treasurer of the
board of education; and said board shall have the entire and exclusive control of all school funds of
said Normal school district or any part thereof, whether consisting of the portion of the school,
college, seminary, or township fund belonging and to belong to said district, or any part thereof, or
derived from taxations, loans or otherwise, to be used by them as provided by this act; and they may
receive by gift, grant, donation, devise, bequest or legacy made for the use of any school or schools,
or library, or other school purposes within their jurisdiction; and they shall be, and are hereby
invested in their corporate capacity, with the title, care and custody of all lots, lands, school houses,
school libraries, apparatus, and other property belonging or appertaining to the common schools of
the said district or any of them, with full power to control the same in such manner as they may
think will promote the interests of schools or the cause of education, and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this act; and when, in their opinion, it may be for the interest of said district to sell any
lot, or tract of land, or building belonging to said district, or any part thereof, said board may sell
and convey the same in the name of the board; and all such conveyances, as well as all other
conveyances, contracts and assignments of the board, shall be executed by the president of the said
board, and all conveyances of real and personal estate and assignments of choses in action which
shall be made to said board, shall be made to said board in its corporate name; and said board may
purchase and hold such real estate and personal property as may be necessary for the establishment
and support of schools, and such real estate as may be purchased under any sale upon execution or
decree in favor of said board, or in satisfaction of any debts due said board, and at any time
thereafter may sell and convey the same.
Section 9. For the purpose of erecting school houses and purchasing school sites, it shall be
lawful for said board to borrow, at a rate of interest not exceeding ten per cent per annum and issue
bonds therefor in sums not less than one hundred dollars, which bonds shall be executed by the
president and clerk of said board in the name of the board, and countersigned by the treasurer of the
board; and to secure the payment of said bonds, said board may mortgage any part or the whole
property belonging to said board.
Section 10. The said board shall, on or before the first Monday of April in each year, report
to the town council of said Town of Normal in writing respecting all moneys received, how and for
what purpose expended, with the proper vouchers therefor, and give such other information in
regard to said schools as they may deem important, specifying in said annual report the amount of
money necessary to be raised by taxation for school purposes for the ensuing school year; and the
said town council shall annually, upon the coming in of such report or within thirty days thereafter,
proceed to levy a tax sufficient to meet such expenses, according to the estimate of said board; said
tax to be levied and collected as other town taxes are levied and collected--upon all the taxable
property in said town: Provided, said tax shall not for any one year exceed two per cent of the
taxable property of said town according to its assessed value.
Section 11. The said board of education shall have the entire management and control of all
the common schools and transact all business which may be necessary in relation to said common
schools in said district, and shall have the rights, powers and authority necessary for the proper
management of the schools and school funds, with the power to make all such rules, orders and
requirements as they may deem necessary to carry their powers and duties into effect and perfect a
good system of public instruction and common schools in said district.
Section 12. Said board, at the end of each year of their term of office, shall cause to be
prepared and published a statement exhibiting the conditions of schools for the preceding year,
which statements shall be substantially as follows, viz:
First--The whole number of schools which have been taught in said year.
Second--What number of teachers have been employed in each school, stating the name of
each teacher, the time employed, and the compensation paid.
Third--The whole number of scholars in all the schools, giving the number of males and
females in each school separately, and the average number in attendance during the year.
Fourth--The amount of all funds received into the treasury of the board during the year, and
the sources whence derived, stating the amount received from each source.
Fifth--The amount paid out for salaries, rent, fuel, furniture, etc.
Sixth--The amount and kind of unexpended funds on hand at the end of the year.
Seventh--A statement of the total amount received and the total amount paid out for school
purposes during the year.
Section 13. Said board shall have power and authority to divide said school district into two
or more school districts, when, in the opinion of the board, it shall seem advisable.
ARTICLE IX
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 1. The inhabitants of the town of Normal are hereby exempted from working on
any road beyond the limits of the town, and from paying any tax to procure laborers to work on the
same.
Section 2. The town council shall have the power, and it is hereby made its duty, when it
may be necessary for the purpose of keeping in repair the streets and alleys of the town, to require
every able-bodied male inhabitant of said town over twenty-one years of age and under fifty, to
labor on said streets and alleys not exceeding three days in each year; and any person failing to
perform such labor when duly notified by the supervisors of streets of said town, shall forfeit and
pay the sum of one dollar and fifty cents to said town for each and every day so refused and
neglected.
Section 3. The town council shall cause to be published annually a full and complete
statement of all moneys received and expended during the preceding year, and on what account
received and expended.
Section 4. All ordinances and resolutions passed by the president and trustees of the town
of Normal shall remain in force until the same shall have been repealed by the town council hereby
created.
Section 5. All suits, actions and prosecutions instituted, commenced or brought by the
corporation hereby created, shall be instituted, commenced and prosecuted in the name of the town
of Normal.
Section 6. All actions, fines, penalties and forfeitures which accrue to the president and
trustees of the town of Normal shall be vested in and be prosecuted by the corporation hereby
created.
Section 7. All property, real and personal, belonging to the president and trustees of the
town of Normal for the use of the inhabitants of said town shall be, and is hereby declared to be
vested in the corporation hereby created.
Section 8. This act shall not invalidate any act done by the president and trustees of the
town of Normal, nor divest them of any rights which have accrued to them prior to the passage of
this act.
Section 9. The president and trustees of the town of Normal shall as soon as may be after
the passage of this act, take measures to promulgate this law within the limits of the town of
Normal, and issue their proclamation for the election of officers, and cause the same to be published
by written or printed notices at least ten days before the election of said town officers.
Section 10. Appeals shall be allowed in all cases arising under the provisions of this act, or
of any ordinance passed in pursuance of this act, to the circuit court of McLean County; and every
such appeal shall be taken and granted in the same manner and with like effect as appeals are taken
from and granted by justices of the peace to the circuit court in similar cases under the laws of this
state:
Provided, That when the town shall appear, a bond filed by the clerk of the council, in the
name of the town, shall be deemed sufficient to obtain an appeal.
Section 11. Whenever the police magistrate or town constable shall remove from the town,
resign or die, and his office shall be otherwise vacated, the town council shall immediately provide
for filling such vacancy by election; Provided, That if such vacancy occur within three months of
the next regular election of such officers, the town council shall fill such vacancy.
Section 12. The town constable, or any other officer authorized to execute writs or other
process issued by the police magistrate, shall have the power to execute the same anywhere within
the limits of McLean County, and shall be entitled to the same fees as other constables in like cases.
Section 13. All fines and penalties recoverable by indictment or action for any offense
committed within the limits of said town, and which are now required by law to be paid to the
county treasury or to the school commissioners of said county, shall hereafter be paid into the town
treasury for the use of said town.
Section 14. Deeds of land sold for taxes heretofore made or hereafter to be made under any
ordinance of said town, may be executed by the president of the corporation hereby created, and
shall be acknowledged as other conveyances, and when executed and acknowledged as aforesaid,
they shall be deemed and taken in all courts and places as prima facia evidence of the existence and
regularity of all such prior proceedings as might otherwise be required to be proved in order to
establish the title to the purchase and such deed shall be evidence as aforesaid, without any proof of
any proceeding prior to the issuing thereof.
Section 15. The Town Council are hereby expressly and forever prohibited from granting
license to any person or persons in said Town of Normal, to sell, traffic, exchange, barter, or give
away any strong beer, wine, rum, gin, brandy, whisky or intoxicating liquors, drinks or beverages of
any kind whatever, including Hostetter's stomach bitters, Plantation bitters, Roback's bitters, Red
Jacket bitters, Swain's bourbon bitters, or any other bitters of whatever kind or name containing
intoxicating liquors; and no person shall be permitted to bring into the Town or keep about his, her
or their premises, saloon, cellar, dwelling, outhouse, or in any other place in said Town, any of the
above named drinks or intoxicating beverages for the purpose of trafficking therein in any way
whatever: Provided the Town Council may grant license to two discreet persons, and no more in
said Town, to sell wine or other spirituous liquors for mechanical, medicinal and sacramental
purposes only; and the said council shall have power, at any regular meeting, to revoke this license.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay into the treasury of
the corporation not less than twenty-five dollars, nor more than one hundred dollars for each and
every offense, to be recovered by action of debts before the police magistrate or other justice of the
peace in said Town; and in case any offender shall refuse or fail to pay such fine or fines and costs
as may be adjudged against him, her or them, by said police magistrate or other justice of the peace,
then said offender shall forthwith be committed to the county jail for a term of not less than thirty
days, unless said fine or fines and costs be sooner paid.
Section 16. This act is hereby declared public, and may be read in evidence in all courts of
law and equity in this State without proof.
Section 17. All acts or parts of act coming within the provisions of this Charter, or contrary
to or inconsistent with its provisions are hereby repealed.
Section 18. This act to take effect and be in force from and after its passage.
Approved February 25, 1867
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)SS Office of the Secretary
State of Illinois, )
I, SHARON TYNDALE, Secretary of State of the state of Illinois, do hereby certify that the
foregoing is a true copy of an enrolled law now on file in this office. In witness whereof, I hereto
set my hand and affix the great seal of the state, at the city of Springfield, this fourth day of March,
A.D. 1867.
(L.S.) SHARON TYNDALE, Secretary of State
Certain legislative changes were made by the Illinois General Assembly with regard to the
governing body of a charter Town and those relevant are as follows:
I.R.S. (1967) Ch. 24 Sec. 3-5-1. In every village and incorporated town, whether
incorporated under a general or special law, a president shall be elected by the electors of that
village or incorporated town, at a general municipal election held therein. The president shall hold
his office for a term of 4 years and until his successor is elected and has qualified. The 4 year term
for president may be changed to 2 years pursuant to Section 3-2-0. In any village or incorporated
town which before January 1, 1942, adopted a 2 year term for president such village or incorporated
town shall continue to elect a president for a term of 2 years.
Whenever a vacancy in the office of a president occurs during his term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the term at the next election of trustees, unless the vacancy is filled by a
special election as provided in Sections 3-2-7 and 3-2-8. During the period from the time that the
vacancy occurs until a president is elected, as provided in this section, and has qualified, the
vacancy may be filled by the election of an acting president by the board of trustees.
I.R.S. (1967) Ch. 24 Sec. 3-5-4. In every village and incorporated town, incorporated and
existing under any special act, which, prior to June 4, 1909, pursuant to any special act, annually
elected members of its legislative body, the electors therein, in lieu of the legislative body now
provided for by law, shall elect 6 trustees. They shall hold their offices until their respective
successors are elected and have qualified. At the first meeting of this board of 6 trustees, the terms
of office of the trustees shall be staggered, and thereafter shall be for the same length of time, as
provided for aldermen in Section 3-4-13.
However, the electors of any such village or incorporated town may adopt a 2-year term for
their trustees as provided in Section 3-2-9. If this 2-year term is adopted, then at the next general
municipal election in the adopting village or incorporated town, 3 trustees shall be elected, and they
shall hold their offices for terms of one year each. In the next succeeding year, and in each year
thereafter, 3 trustees shall be elected in the adopting village or incorporated town, and they shall
hold their offices for terms of 2 years each.
Any such village or incorporated town, which before January 1, 1942, has adopted a 2-year
term for its trustees and is now electing 3 trustees each year, shall continue to elect 3 trustees each
year for a term of 2 years each. Any such village or incorporated town which before January 1,
1942, had adopted a 2-year term for its trustees but is not now electing 3 trustees each year, shall
elect 3 trustees at the next general municipal election in that municipality, and they shall hold their
offices for terms of one year each. In the next succeeding year, and in each year thereafter, 3
trustees shall be elected, and they shall hold their offices for terms of 2 years each.
This section shall not apply to or change the method of election of the members of the
legislative body of incorporated towns which have superseded civil townships.
I.R.S. (1967) Ch. 24 Sec. 3-8-2. The corporate authorities of villages incorporated and
existing under special acts which now provide for or require the election of one or more of the
following municipal offices, a treasurer, a clerk, a marshal, or a collector, may adopt this section by
resolution and may, in lieu of such provisions or requirements, provide by ordinance for the
appointment of such officers by the corporate authorities, prescribe their terms, duties,
compensation and the amount of any bond required.
CHAPTER SECTION DESCRIPTION
CHAPTER 1 - ELECTIONS
1.1-1 Elections
1.1-2 Place of Elections
1.1-3 Conduct of Elections
1.1-4 Eligibility
1.1-5 Determining Winner
1.1-6 Notification
1.1-7 Oath
1.1-8 Bond
1.1-9 Adoption
1.1-10 Precincts
1.1-11 Limitations on Political Contributions
Division 1 - President 2.1-1 Election - Term of Office
2.1-2 Duties
2.1-2.5 Compensation
2.1-3 RESERVED
2.1-4 Note
Division 2 - Board of Trustees 2.2-1 Election
2.2-2 Compensation
Division 3 - Appointed Officers 2.3-1 Appointment
2.3-2 Bond
2.3-3 Compensation
2.3-4 Municipal Manager - Office Created
2.3-5 Municipal Manager - Appointment
2.3-6 Municipal Manager - Removal from Office
2.3-7 Municipal Manager - Duties and Powers
2.3-8 Municipal Manager - Salary
2.3-9
Municipal Manager - Vacation and Employment
Restrictions
2.3-10 Municipal Manager - Miscellaneous Items
2.3-11 Municipal Manager - Bond
2.3-12 Executive and Administrative Powers and Duties
2.3-13 Appointive Officers - Powers, Dutues and Salaries
2.3-14 Audit
2.3-15 City Manager - Finality of Action
2.3-16 Director of Parks and Recreation - Appointment
2.3-17 Director of Parks and Recreation - Duties
2.3-18 Building Commissioner - Appointment
2.3-19 Building Commissioner - Duties
CHAPTER 2 - OFFICERS, ELECTED AND APPOINTED
MUNICIPAL CODE INDEX
2.3-20 Building Commissioner - Stop Order
2.3-21 Building Commissioner Inspector - Penalty
2.3-22 Plumbing Inspector - Appointment
2.3-23 Plumbing Inspector - Duties
2.3-24 Plumbing Inspector - Stop Order
2.3-25 Plumbing Inspector - Penalty
2.3-26 Director of Public Works - Office Created
2.3-27 Director of Public Works - Duties
2.3-28 Director of Public Works - Motor Fuel Tax
2.3-29 Electrical Inspector - Appointment
2.3-30 Electrical Inspector - Duties
2.3-31 Electrical Inspector - Stop Order
2.3-32 Electrical Inspector - Penalty
2.3-33 Legal Department - Composition and Qualification
2.3-34 Legal Department - Suits and Actions
2.3-35 Legal Department - Advice
2.3-36 Legal Department - Judgments
2.3-37 Legal Department - Compensation
2.3-38 Town Clerk - Office Created
2.3-39 Town Clerk - Duties
2.3-40 Town Clerk - Indices
2.3-41 Town Clerk - Vacancy
2.3-42 Town Treasurer - Office Created
2.3-43 Town Treasurer - Ex Officio Collector
2.3-44 Town Treasurer - General Duties
2.3-45
Town Treasurer - Deposit of Funds in Designated
Depositories
2.3-46 Town Treasurer - Records
2.3-47 Town Treasurer - Accounting
2.3-48 Town Treasurer - Special Assessment Fund
2.3-49 Town Treasurer - Warrants and Transfer of Funds
2.3-50 Chief of Police - Office Created
2.3-51 Chief of Police - Appointment
2.3-52 Chief of Police - Duties
2.3-53 Chief of Police - Rules and Regulations
2.3-54 Health Inspector - Office Created
2.3-55 Health Inspector - Duties
2.3-56 Health Inspector - Report
2.3-57 Health Inspector - Compensation
2.3-58 Town Engineer
2.3-59 Information Services
2.3-60 Director of Human Resources
Division 1 - General Provisions 3.1-1 Meetings of the President and Board of Trustees
CHAPTER 3 - COUNCIL MEETINGS AND ORDINANCES
3.1-2 Rules of Procedure
3.1-3 Quorum
3.1-4 Agenda
3.1-5 Presiding Officer
3.1-6 Procedural Rules
Division 2 - Ordinances 3.2-1 Publication of Ordinances - Effective Dates
3.2-2 Record and Memorandum of Ordinances Required
3.2-3
Record and Memorandum of Ordinances Required,
to be Prima Facie Evidence of Contents, Etc.
3.2-4 Proof of Ordinances
3.2-5 Ordinances to be Signed
3.2-6
Price and Cost of Ordinances Printed in Book, Etc.
Form
3.2-7 Effect of Repeal or Repealing Ordinances
CHAPTER 4 - LIQUOR
4.1 Purpose
4.2 Definitions
4.3 Prohibitions
4.3.5 Restaurant Requirements
4.4
Normal Local Liquor Commission and
Commissioner
4.5 Applications
4.6 Restriction of License
4.7 Restricted Areas
4.8
Hearing on License Application and Granting of
License
4.9 Term of License, Payment of Fees
4.10 Classification and Fees
4.11 License Limitations
4.12 Transfer of License
4.13 Refunds of License Fees and Renewals of Licenses
4.14 Private Parties
4.15 Employment of Underage Persons
4.16
Acts of Agents or Employees; Liability of Licensee;
Knowledge
4.17 Demand for Identification
4.18 Hearings
4.19 Entertainment
4.20 Mass Gatherings
4.21 Sale, Possession and Transportation of Kegs
4.22 Penalty
4.23 Severability
CHAPTER 5 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
Division 1 - Police Department 5.1-1 Composition
5.1-2 Chief - Appointment
5.1-3 Duties
5.1-4 Service Process
5.1-5 Conduct of Members
5.1-6 Witness Fees
5.1-6.5 Fingerprint Requests
5.1-7 Special Police
5.1-8 DELETED 5/17/2004
5.1-9 Appointments and Promotions
5.1-10 Discharges and Discipline
5.1-11 Compensation
5.1-12 Accident Reports
5.1-13 Penalty
Division 2 - Town Marshal 5.2-1 Creation
5.2-2 Creation - Deputy Marshal
5.2-3 Removal - Compensation
5.2-4 Duties
5.2-5 Firearms
5.2-6 Powers
5.2-7 Bond
Division 3 - Auxiliary Police 5.3-1 Appointment
5.3-2 Requirements
5.3-3 Powers
5.3-4 Carrying Firearms
5.3-5 Training
5.3-6 Compensation
Division 4 - Parking Violations
Bureau DELETED 8/1/1983
CHAPTER 6 - FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Division 1 - Fire Department
Personnel 6.1-1 Creation
6.1-2
Departmental Strength and Allocation of
Authorized Personnel Among Position
Classifications
6.1-3
Appointment of Persons to Position Classifications
Within the Fire Department
6.1-4 Duties of Fire Department Personnel
6.1-5 Personnel Regulations
6.1-6 Discipline, Suspension and Removal
Division 2 - Fire Inspector 6.2-1 Creation
6.2-2 Fire Inspectors
Division 3 - Firemen's Pension
Fund 6.3-1 Creation of the Board
6.3-2 Members
6.3-3 Powers of Board
Division 4 - Fire Prevention Code 6.4-1 Adoption
6.4-2 Duty to Obey
6.4-3 Division of Fire Prevention
6.4-4 Duties
6.4-5 Instructions
6.4-6 RESERVED
6.4-7 Permit
6.4-8 Inspections
6.4-9 Compliance
6.4-10 Records
6.4-11 Annual Report
6.4-12 Amendments
6.4-13 Scope
6.4-14 Source of Division
6.4-15 Penalty
6.4-16
Additions, Insertions, Deletions, Amendments and
Modifications to NFPA 1
6.4-17 Open Burning and Permit System
6.4-18
Failure to Comply with State Fire Marshal
Equipment Regulations
6.4-19 Relief from Personal Responsibility
Division 5 - Foreign Fire Insurance
Board 6.5-1 Creation
6.5-2 Definitions
6.5-3 Election of Member
6.5-4 Fund Established
6.5-5 Officers and Special Meetings
6.5-6 Powers and Duties
Division 6 - Emergency Medical
Services 6.6-1 Definitions
6.6-2
Fees for Emergency Medical Services,
Transportation and Other Emergency Services by
the Town of Normal
6.6-3 Liability for Payment
6.6-4 Third Party Billing
6.6-5 Failure to Pay
6.6-6
Emergency Medical Service for Persons Confined
by a Governmental Authority
CHAPTER 7 - WATER AND SEWER
Division 1 - Definitions 7.1-1 Town
7.1-2 Owner
7.1-3 Customer
7.1-4 Water Department or Water Utility
7.1-5 Main or Watermain
7.1-6 Water Service Connection
7.1-7 Temporary Water Service Connection
7.1-8 Construction Water Service Connection
7.1-9 Property Line
7.1-10 Owners Service or Service
7.1-11 Meter
7.1-12 Curb Stop
7.1-13 Fire Hydrant
7.1-14 Distribution System
7.1-15 Over Register
7.1-16 Backflow
7.1-17 Cross-Connection
7.1-18 Safe Air Gap
7.1-19 Secondary Water Supply
7.1-20 Submerged Inlet
7.1-21 Definitions
Division 2 - General Provisions 7.2-1
7.2-2
7.2-3 Access to Homes
7.2-4 Restricted Areas
7.2-5 Posting and Penalty
7.2-6 Flouridation
7.2-7 Electrical Grounding
Division 3 - Application for
(Metered Water) Service 7.3-1
7.3-2
7.3-3
7.3-4 Service Application/Transfer Fee
Division 4 - Water Service
Connections 7.4-1
7.4-2
7.4-3
7.4-4
7.4-5
7.4-6
7.4-7
7.4-8
7.4-9
7.4-10
7.4-11
7.4-12
7.4-13
7.4-14
Division 5 - Temporary Water
Service Connections 7.5-1
7.5-2
7.5-3
Division 6 - Meters 7.6-1 Meters Required
7.6-2 Location
7.6-3 Sizing of Meters
7.6-4 Protection of Meters
7.6-5 Discontinuance of Service
7.6-6 Liability
7.6-7 Meter Tests
7.6-8 Notice
Division 7 - Water Rates, Billing,
Payments 7.7-1 Rates
7.7-2 Rate Basis
7.7-3 Access
7.7-4
Delinquency, Notification, Pre-termination Hearing
and Termination of Services
7.7-5 Bill for Service
7.7-6 Revenues
7.7-7 Liability for Payment
7.7-8 Water Fund
7.7-9 Access to Records
7.7-10 Appeals
Division 8 - Discontinuance of
Service 7.8-1
7.8-2
7.8-3
7.8-4
7.8-5
Division 9 - Extension of
Watermains 7.9-1 Extension of Main
7.9-2
7.9-3 Watermain Improvement Cost Formula
7.9-4
7.9-5
7.9-6
7.9-7
7.9-8
Division 10 - Curtailment of Water
Service in Emergencies 7.10-1 Curtailment
Division 11 - System Development
Charge 7.11-1 Requirements
7.11-2 Application
7.11-3 Additional Requirements
7.11-4 Existing Annexation Agreements
7.11-5 Franklin Heights Water Main Extension
Division 12 - Fire Hydrants &
Services 7.12-1
7.12-2
7.12-3
7.12-4
7.12-5 Fire Services
7.12-6
7.12-7 Fire Hydrant Rental
7.12-8 Fire Protection Charges
Division 13 - Rules & Regulations 7.13-1
7.13-2 Books and Records
7.13-3
Division 14 - Enforcement 7.14-1
7.14-2
7.14-3 Discontinuance of Service
Division 15 - Cross Connection
Control & Backflow Prevention 7.15-1
7.15-2
7.15-3
7.15-4
7.15-5
7.15-6
7.15-7
Division 16 - Minimum and
Maximum Zone Provisions 7.16-1 Definitions
7.16-2 Prohibitions
7.16-3
Waiver, Exceptions and Certifications of Minimal
Hazard
7.16-4 Exclusions
7.16-5
Filing of Waivers, Exceptions and Certifications of
Minimal Hazard
Exhibit A-1
Exhibit A-2
Exhibit A-3
Exhibit A-4
Exhibit A-5
Exhibit A-6
Exhibit A-7
Exhibit B-1
Exhibit B-2
Exhibit C-1
Exhibit C-2
Exhibit C-3
Exhibit C-4
Exhibit D-1
Exhibit D-2
Exhibit D-3
Exhibit D-4
Division 17 - Water Outside the
Corporate Limits 7.17-1 Furnishing Water Outside the Town
7.17-2 Requirements for Service Outside Corporate Limits
7.17-3 Resale of City Water for Profit Prohibited
Division 18 - Potable Water
Supply Wells 7.18-1 Definitions
7.18-2
Prohibition on the Use of Potable Water Supply
Wells
7.18-3 Schedule A Prohibited Property
Exhibit A
Exhibit B
Division 20 - General Provisions -
Sewer 7.20-1 Definitions
7.20-2 Use of Public Sewers Required
7.20-3 Prohibition of Private Sewer Service Lines
7.20-4 Private Sewage Disposal
7.20-5 Sewer Permit
7.20-6 Classes of Permits
7.20-7 Costs of Installation
7.20-8 Cost of Inspection and Testing and Maintenance
7.20-9 Specifications
7.20-10 Size and Slope
7.20-11 Elevation
7.20-12 Excavations
7.20-13 RESERVED
7.20-14 Connections
7.20-15 Excavation Drains and Connections
7.20-16
Maintenance, Continuation or Retention of Broken,
Defective or Presently Unlawful Building Drains,
Building Sewers or Storm Drain Connections or
Conditions
7.20-17 Extension of Public Sewers
7.20-18 Use of Public Sanitary Sewers
7.20-19 Damage to Sewers
7.20-20 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
7.20-21 Penalty
7.20-22 Construction Standards
Division 21 - Sewer Charges 7.21-1
Sewer Charges Where Municipal Water Service is
Used
7.21-2 Rate Increase
7.21-3 Billing
7.21-4
Deliquency, Notification, Pre-Termination Hearing
and Termination of Services
7.21-5 Collection
7.21-6 Revenue
7.21-7 Sewer Fund
7.21-8 Bond
7.21-9
Sewer Charges Where Non-Municipal Water
Service is Used
7.21-10 Failure to Install Private Water Meters
Division 22 - Tap-On Charges for
Various Trunk Line Sanitary
Sewers and Storm Sewers 7.22-1 Requirements
7.22-2 Designated Areas
7.22-3 Map
7.22-4 Fees
7.22-5 Application
7.22-6 Additional Requirements
Division 23 - Sewer Tap-On Fees
for Recoupment of Expenses
Incurred in Constructing Public
Sewers to Replace Non-Public
Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems 7.23-1 Requirements
7.23-2
Designated Sanitary Sewers, Property Served and
Tap-On Fees
7.23-3 Additional Requirements
Division 24 - Location of Sump
Pump Discharges 7.24-1 Standards
7.24-2 Definitions
7.24-3 Waiver
7.24-4 Penalty
Division 30 - Storm Water Utility
and Storm Water Fund 7.30-1 Storm Water Utility and Storm Water Fund
7.30-2 Definitions
7.30-3 Scope of Responsibility for the Storm Water Utility
7.30-4 Determination of Storm Water Services Charges
7.30-5 Storm Water Services Charges
7.30-5.1 Single Family Residential Property Charges
7.30-5.2 Parcels Other than Single Family Residential
7.30-6
Exemptions and Credits Applicable to Storm Water
Service Charges Per Month
7.30-7 Billing and Collection Procedures
7.30-8 Storm Water Service Charges Billed in Common
7.30-9 Appeals
7.30-10 Partial Invalidity
Division 31 - Storm Water Storage
Facilities 7.31-1 Requirements
7.31-2 Definition
7.31-3 Standards
7.31-4 Fee in Lieu
7.31-5 Fee Rate
7.31-6 Use of Fee
7.31-7 Refund of Fee
7.31-8 Payment of Fees
7.31-9 Building Permit
7.31-10 Specific Standards for Off-Street Parking Areas
Exhibit A - New Main Procedure
CHAPTER 8 - PUBLIC WAYS
Division 1 - General Provisions 8.1-1 Supervision
8.1-2 Public Ways
8.1-3 Construction
8.1-4 Plans and Specifications
8.1-5 Issuance of Permits
8.1-6 Bond
8.1-7
Repairs and Resurfacing: Liability of Abutting
Owner
8.1-8 Prohibited Access; Injury to New Pavements
8.1-9
Obstruction of or Merchandise on Public Right-Of-
Way
8.1-10 Barricades
8.1-11 Disturbing Barricades
8.1-12 Wheelchair Ramps
8.1-13 Placement of Mailboxes
8.1-14 Newspaper Dispensing Devices
Division 2 - Excavations 8.2-1 Permit Required
8.2-2 Permit Fee
8.2-3 Security Requested
8.2-4 Bond or Insurance Policy Required
8.2-5
Director of Public Works to be Advised of Time,
Place and Type of Opening
8.2-6
Application for Permit to be Accompanied by Plat
or Sketch
8.2-7 Supervision and Inspection of Work
Division 3 - Curb Cuts and Access
Ways 8.3-1 Prohibited Activities
8.3-2 Permit
8.3-3 Standards
8.3-4
Access Way Pavement, Turning Radiuses and Curb
Replacement
8.3-5 Inspections
8.3-6 Illustrative Figures
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7
Division 4 - Closure Permit 8.4-1 Permit Required
8.4-2 Definitions
8.4-3 Closure Permit
8.4-4 Conditions Preceding
8.4-5 Issuance or Denial of a Permit
8.4-6 Highway Closure Requests
8.4-7 Preference in Applications
8.4-8 Issuance of Multiple Permits
8.4-9 Reconsideration
8.4-10 Contents of Permit
8.4-11 Suspension or Revocation
8.4-12 Appeal
8.4-13 Severability
Division 5 - Construction Project
Rules 8.5-1 Application of Rules
8.5-2 Cleaning of Streets
8.5-3 Blockage of Streets
8.5-4 Storage on Streets
8.5-5 Cuts on Town Property
8.5-6 Fences
8.5-7 Equipment: Lug and Cleats
Division 6 - Poles, Wire, Conduit
and Equipment in Rights-of-Way 8.6-1 Permit Required
8.6-2
Not to be Erected or Maintained so as to Impede
Travel or Injure Property; Liability
8.6-3
Reservation of Rights by the Town; Compensation
in Case of Use by Other Companies
8.6-4
Setting or Placing to be Under Supervision of
Director of Public Works
8.6-5 Person
8.6-6 Violation of this Division
Division 7 - Trees & Shrubs 8.7-1 Trees and Shrubs on Town Property
8.7-2 Public Utility Company Vegetation Management
Division 8 - Penalties 8.8-1 Penalty
8.8-2 Severability
Division 9 - Small Wireless
Facilities 8.9-1 Purpose and Scope
8.9-5 Definitions
8.9-10 Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities
8.9-15 Design Standards
8.9-20 Safety Standards
8.9-25 Fall Zone; Setback Requirements
8.9-30 Dispute Resolution
8.9-35 Indemnification
8.9-40 Insurance
Division 1 - Board of Local
Improvements 10.1-1 Adoption
10.1-2 Establishment
10.1-3 Confirmation
10.1-4 Powers and Duties
Division 2 - Human Relations
Commission 10.2-1 Establishment
10.2-2 Composition
10.2-3 Duties and Responsibilities
10.2-4 Meetings
10.2-5 RESERVED
10.2-6 RESERVED
10.2-7 RESERVED
10.2-8 Severability
Division 3 - Plan Commission 10.3-1 Creation
10.3-2 Composition
10.3-3 Terms
10.3-4 Reports
10.3-5 Duties
10.3-6 Maps and Plats
10.3-7 Meetings
Division 4 - Zoning Board of
Appeals 10.4-1 Creation
10.4-2 DELETED 5/6/1974
10.2-3 Duties
Division 5 - DELETED
Division 6 - Appointment and
Recall 10.6-1 Appointment Procedure
10.6-2 Recall
10.6-3 Cause
Division 7 - DELETED
Division 8 - Bloomington-Normal
Sister City Committee 10.8-1 Creation
10.8-2 Purpose
10.8-3 Membership
10.8-4 Officers - Powers and Duties
10.8-5 Financing
10.8-6 Meetings
10.8-7 Inurement of Income
10.8-8 Legislative or Political Activities
10.8-9 Operational Limitations
CHAPTER 10 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC SERVICES - DELETED 5/5/1986
10.8-10 Dissolution Clause
Division 9 - Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners 10.9-1 Board of Fire and Police Commission
10.9-2
Coordination of Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the
Illinois Municipal Code and This Division
Division 10 - DELETED 2/5/2007
Division 11 - Theater Advisory
Board 10.11-1 Creation
10.11-2 Composition
10.11-3 Appointment
10.11-4 Term
10.11-5 Purpose
10.11-6 Powers
10.11-7 Duties
10.11-8 Staff
Division 12 - Uptown Design
Review Commission 10.12-1 Creation
10.12-2 Composition
10.12-3 Appointment
10.12-4 Term
10.12-5 Purpose
10.12-6 Powers
10.12-7 Jurisdiction
Division 13 - DELETED 2/5/2007
Division 1 - Building Commissioner 11.1-1 Building Inspection Department
11.1-2 Position of Building Commissioner
11.1-3 Qualifications
11.1-4 Duties
11.1-5 Records
11.1-6 Right of Entry
Division 2 - Building Board of
Appeals 11.2-1 Creation, Composition, Appointment and Term
11.2-2 Functions
11.2-3 Quorum
11.2-4 Meetings and Records
11.2-5 Appeal Procedure
11.2-6 Rules and Regulations
Division 3 - General Requirements 11.3-1 Scope
11.3-2 Construction of Chapter
11.3-3 Conflict of Provisions of Codes of the Town
11.3-4 Severability
11.3-5 Penalties
CHAPTER 11 - BUILDING CODE
11.3-6
Legal Action and Adoption of Administrative
Hearing Procedure
Division 4 - Adoption of Codes 11.4-1 Adoption of Applicable Codes
A. International Building Code
B. International Residential Code
C. International Existing Building Code
D. International Fire Code
E. International Mechanical Code
F. International Fuel Gas Code
G. DELETED
H. International Property Maintenance Code
I. National Electrical Code
J. Illinois State Plumbing Code
Division 5 - RESERVED
Division 6 - RESERVED
Division 7 - Vacant Buildings 11.7-1 Scope of Division
11.7-2 Intent
11.7-3 Other Laws, Codes, Ordinances and Regulations
11.7-4 Definitions
11.7-5 Obligation to Register Vacant Buildings
11.7-6 Notice of Vacancy
11.7-7 Notice of Public Nuisance
11.7-8 Registration of Vacant Buildings
11.7-9 Other Enforcement
11.7-10 Vacant Building Plan
11.7-11 Approval of Plan
11.7-12 Authority to Modify lan and Appeal Right
11.7-13
Standards Governing Building Board of Appeals
Review
11.7-14 Decision by Building Board of Appeals
11.7-15 Failure to Comply with Plan
11.7-16 Change of Ownership
11.7-17 Maintenance Standards
Division 8 - Multi-Family Rental
Occupancy License 11.8-1 Multi-Family Rental Occupancy License
Division 9 - Single-Family Rental
Occupancy License 11.9-1 Single-Family Rental Occupancy License
Division 1 - Title 15.1-1 Title
Division 2 - Purpose and Intent 15.2-1 General
15.2-2 Severability
15.2-3 Specific Purposes
CHAPTER 12 - RESERVED
CHAPTER 13 - RESERVED
CHAPTER 14 - RESERVED
CHAPTER 15 - ZONING
Division 3 - Rules and Definitions 15.3-1 Rules of Construction
15.3-2 Definitions
Division 4 - General Provisions 15.4-1 Interpretation
15.4-2 Application of Code
15.4-3 General Provisions
15.4-4 Accessory Buildings and Uses
15.4-5 Lots and Yards
15.4-6 Non-Conformities
15.4-7 Miscellaneous
Division 5 - Zoning Districts 15.5-1 Establishment of Districts
15.5-2 Zoning Map
Division 6 - Principal Uses and
District Standards 15.6-1 Preamble
15.6-2 A-Agriculture District
15.6-3 R-1AA Single-Family Residence District
15.6-4 R-1A Single Family Residence District
15.6-5 R-1B Single-Family Residence District
15.6-6 R-2 Mixed Residential District
15.6-7
R-3A Medium-Density Multiple-Family Residence
District
15.6-8
R-3B High Density Multiple-Family Residence
District
15.6-9 R-4 Mobile Home Residence District
15.6-10 Special Public Interest Districts
15.6-11 S-1 University District
15.6-12 S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District
15.6-13 S-3 Historic and Cultural District
15.6-14 C-1 Office District
15.6-15 C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District
15.6-16 C-3 Community/Regional Shopping District
15.6-17 B-1 General Business District
15.6-18 B-2 Central Business District
15.6-19 M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District
15.6-20 M-2 General manufacturing
15.6-21 Form Based Overlay District
15.6-22 P-1 Overlay Corridor
15.6-23 South Uptown District Overlay
15.6-24 Optional Main Street Form Based Overlay District
15.6-25 Parking Impact Zone
Division 7 - Off-Street Parking and
Loading Regulations 15.7-1 General Provisions
15.7-2 Off-Street Parking
15.7-3 Off-Street Loading
15.7-4 Parking Impact Zone
Division 8 - Site Plan Review 15.8-1 Purpose
15.8-2
Procedure for Site Plans Requiring a Legislative
Public Hearing
15.8-3 General Conditions
15.8-4 Content of Site Plans
15.8-5 Recommendation and Decision on Site Plan
Division 9 - Planned Unit
Development Regulations 15.9-1 Intent
15.9-2 Designation
15.9-3 Conformance with Town Plans
15.9-4 Planned Unit Development Review Process
15.9-5
Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Guarantees
15.9-6 Submission of Record Drawings
15.9-7 Acceptance for maintenance
15.9-8 Final Security Release
15.9-9
Preliminary Development Plan and Supporting
Material
15.9-10
Public Improvement Engineering Plans and
Specifications
15.9-11 Final Development Plan and Supporting Material
15.9-12
Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Guarantees
15.9-13 As-Built Plans
15.9-14
Specific Regulations for Residential Planned Unit
Developments
15.9-15
Specific Regulations for Commercial Planned Unit
Developments
15.9-16
Specific Regulations for Industrial Planned Unit
Development
15.9-17 Specific Regulations for a C-1 Multi-Use Office Park
Division 10 - Special Use
Regulations 15.10-1 Purpose
15.10-2 Initiation of Special Use Applications
15.10-3 Processing
15.10-4 Special Use Standards
15.10-5 Decisions
Division 11 - Special Provisions 15.11-1 Bonus Provisions
15.11-2 Floor Area Bonuses
15.11-3 Parking Requirement Bonus
Division 12 - Administration and
Enforcement 15.12-1 Administration and Enforcement
15.12-2 Amendments of Regulations and Districts
15.12-3 Appeals
15.12-4 Variations
15.12-5 Complaints and Penalties for Violations
15.12-6 Schedule of Fees
Division 13 - Sign Regulations 15.13-1 Title
15.13-2 Intent
15.13-3 General Prohibition
15.13-4 Rules and Definitions
15.13-5 General Sign Types
15.13-6 General Provisions
15.13-7 Exempt Signs
15.13-8 Prohibited Signs
15.13-9 Permits
15.13-10 Specific Sign Requirements
15.13-11 Construction Specifications
15.13-12 Violations
15.13-13 Variations
15.13-14 Penalties
15.13-15 Severability
15.13-16 Preservation of Pending Claims
Division 14 - Community Design
Standards 15.14-1 Preamble
15.14-2 Application
15.14-3 Community Design Review Committee
15.14-4 Definitions
15.14-5 Procedure
15.14-6 Expedited Review Process
15.14-7 Standards for Design
15.14-8 Maintenance for Good Appearance
15.14-9 Incentives for Better Design Solutions
15.14-10 Overlapping Jurisdiction
15.14-11 Penalty
15.14-12 Severability
Division 15 - Telecommunication
Antenna Regulations 15.15-1 Title
15.15-2 Intent
15.15-3 General Prohibition
15.15-4 Rules and Definitions
15.15-5
Regulations for Telecommunications Antennas
Permitted in Specific Zoning Districts
15.15-6
Special Use Standards for Telecommunication
Antennas
15.15-7
Special Use Process for Telecommunication
Antennas
15.15-8 Variations
15.15-9 Co-Location Incentive
15.15-10 Federal Policy
15.15-11 Non-Conformities
Division 16 - Historic Preservation 15.16-1 Historic Preservation Commission
15.16-2 Nomination Process
15.16-3 Interim Control
15.16-4 Amendment and Rescission of Designation
15.16-5 Certificate of Appropriateness
15.16-6 Certificate of Economic Hardship
15.16-7 Appeals
Division 17 - Design Review in B-2
Central Business District 15.17-1 Purpose and Intent
15.17-2 Application
15.17-3 Coordination with Other Codes
15.17-4 Severability
15.17-5 Specific Purposes
15.17-6 Design Review Commission
15.17-7 Definitions
15.17-8 General Prohibition
15.17-9 Procedure
15.17-10 Expedited Review Process
15.17-11 Standards for Design
15.17-12 Maintenance Standards
15.17-13 Streetscape Provisions
15.17-14 Environmentally Sensitive Design
15.17-15 Penalties
Division 18 - Traditional
Neighborhood District General
Provisions 15.18-1 Scope of Chapter
15.18-2 Purpose and Design
15.18-3 Overview
15.18-4 Definitions
15.18-5 Code Applicability
15.18-6 Zoning
15.18-7
Major Land Use in a Traditional Neighborhood
District
15.18-8 Subdivision
15.18-9 General Development Standards
15.18-10
Neighborhood Center Area Development
Standards
15.18-11 Mixed Residential Area Development Standards
15.18-12 Neighborhood Edge Area Development Standards
15.18-13
Workshop Area and Employment Center Area
Development Standards
15.18-14 Building Construction Permits
Appendix A - Table of Authorized Principal Uses
Appendix B - Illustrations of Yard Requirements
Appendix C - Metric Conversions
Appendix D - Forms
1. Planned Unit Development Payment,
Performance and Workmanship Bond - Secured by
Corporate Surety
2. Planned Unit Development Payment,
Performance and Workmanship Bon - Secured by
Cash Escrow
3. Planned Unit Development Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond -
Escrow Receipt
4. Planned Unit Development Payment,
Performance and Workmanship Bond - Secured by
Irrevocable Letter of Credit
5. Planned Unit Development - Irrevocable Letter
of Credit
Division 1 - Title - Land
Subdivision and Development
Division 2 - General Provisions 16.2-1 Jurisdiction
16.2-2 Policy
16.2-3 Purpose
16.2-3.1 Intent of Planned Unit Development
16.2-4 RESERVED
16.2-5 Rules of Construction
16.2-6 Definitions
16.2-7 Interpretation, Conflict & Separability
16.2-7.1 Conflict with Public and Private Provisions
16.2-7.2 Separability
16.2-8 Saving Provision
16.2-9 Amendments
16.2-10 Conditions
16.2-11 Re-Subdivision of Land
16.2-11.1 Procedure for Re-Subdivision
16.2-11.2
Procedure for Subdivision Where Future
Subdivision is Indicated
16.2-12 Vacation of Plats
16.2-13 Variations
16.2-14 Obligation to Comply
16.2-15 Violation Penalties
16.2-16 Plat Officer
16.2-17 Land Trusts - Disclosures of Beneficial Interests
16.2-18 Timing (Subdivision Process Chart)
CHAPTER 16 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Division 3 - Submission & Review
Procedures 16.3-1 Pre-Application Conference
16.3-2 Preliminary Plan
16.3-3
Public Improvement Engineering Plans and
Specifications
16.3-4
Public Improvement Installation and Inspection
Procedures
16.3-5 Final Plat Submission and Review Procedure
16.3-6 Planned Unit Development Review Procedure
16.3-7
Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Guarantees
16.3-8 Submission of Record Drawings
16.3-9 Acceptance for Maintenance
16.3-10 Final Security Release
16.3-11 RESERVED
Division 4 - Form and Content 16.4-1 Concept Plan
16.4-2 Preliminary Plans and Supporting Material
16.4-3
Public Improvement Engineering Plans and
Specifications
16.4-4 Final Plat
16.4-5
Final Development Plan for Planned Unit
Development
16.4-6
Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Guarantees
16.4-7 Record Drawings
Division 5 - Specific Regulations
for Residential Planned Unit
Developments 16.5-1 Permitted Uses in Planned Unit Developments
16.5-2
Land Use Density Ratings and Related
Requirements for Residential Planned Unit
Developments
16.5-3
Specific Regulations for Commercial Planned Unit
Developments
16.5-4
Specific Regulations for Industrial Planned Unit
Development
16.5-5 Specific Regulations for a C-1 Multi-Use Office Park
Division 6 - Public Land Dedication
and Reservation Requirements 16.6-1 General Applicability
16.6-2
Amount & Location of Land Dedication
Requirements
16.6-3
Criteria for Requiring a Cash Contribution in Lieu of
Land Dedication
16.6-4 Reservation of Additional Land
16.6-5 Combining with Adjoining Developments
16.6-6 Topography and Grading
16.6-7 Improved Sites
16.6-8 School Land Dedication
Division 7 - Design and
Construction Standards 16.7
Design Standards based on "A Manual of Practice
for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town
of Normal"
Division 8 - Aquatic Ecosystem
Management 16.8-1
Subdivision Exhibits - Certificates A1 Owner's Certificate
A2 Owner's Certificate
A3 Owner's Certificate
B Surveyor's Certificate
C Drainage Statement
D County Clerk's Certificate
E School District Certificate
F Plat Certification
G
Final Plat Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Bond - Secured by Cash Escrow
G1
Escrow Receipt - Subdivider's Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond
H
Final Plat Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Bond - Secured by Irrevocable Letter of Credit
H1 Irrevocable Letter of Credit
I
Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement
Guarantee - Secured by Cash Reserve
J
Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement
Guarantee - Secured by Irrecovable Letter of Credit
J1 Irrevocable Letter of Credit
Division 1 - General Provisions 17.1-1 Attempts
17.1-2 Accessories
17.1-3 Person
17.1-4 Vicarious Liability
17.1-5 Severability
Division 2 - Prohibited Conduct -
General 17.2-1 Disorderly Conduct
17.2-2 Gambling
17.2-3 Throwing or Placing Objects
17.2-4 Discharge of Firearms, BB Guns and Paintball Guns
17.2-5 Public Nudity
17.2-6 Climbing Telephone Poles
17.2-7 Assault
17.2-8 Battery
CHAPTER 17 - MISDEAMEANORS
17.2-9 Criminal Damage to Property
17.2-10 Criminal Trespass to Land
17.2-11 Criminal Trespass to Vehicle
17.2-12 Resisting of Delaying an Officer
17.2-13 Assisting a Prisoner to Escape
17.2-14 Failure to Comply with Subpoenas
17.2-15
Obscuring Chalk Marks Used for Parking
Enforcement
17.2-16 Fireworks
17.2-17 Furnishing False Information
17.2-18 Theft
17.2-19 Retail Theft
17.2-20 Skateboarding
17.2-21 Bicycles in Uptown
Division 3 - Regulated Substances 17.3-1 Alcoholic Liquor
17.3-2
Possession of Cannabis and Cannabis Paraphernalia
Prohibited
17.3-3
Sale to and Possession of Tobacco by Minors;
Smoking in Town Buildings
17.3-4 Smoking Regulatory Act
Division 4 - Children 17.4-1 Harmful Materials to Minors
17.4-2 Curfew - Penalty for Violations
17.4-3 Truancy Prohibited
Division 5 - Noise Regulations 17.5-1 Definitions
17.5-2 Specific Noise Prohibitions in Residential Areas
17.5-3 Sound Amplifying Devices in Non-Residential Areas
17.5-4 Permits for Sound Amplifying Devices
17.5-6 Exemptions
Division 6 - Public Property 17.6-1 Use of Parks
17.6-2 Permitted Hours for Use of Constitution Trail
17.6-3 Horses Prohibited on Constitution Trail
17.6-4
No Camping in Uptown Roundabout and Gateway
Plaza
17.6-5 Uptown Station Code of Conduct
17.6-6 Exclusion from Parks
Division 7 - Property 17.7-1 Opening Burning and Combustible Refuse
17.7-2 Posting Bills
17.7-3 Obstructing Stairways or Exits
17.7-4 Abandoned Refrigerators
17.7-5
Outdoor Storage of Unlicensed Non-Operating
Vehicles on Private Property
17.7-6 Litter
17.7-7 Graffiti Prohibited
Division 8 - Animals 17.8-1 Cruelty
17.8-2 Dangerous Animals
17.8-2.5 Primates
17.8-3 Noises
17.8-4 Strays
17.8-5 Killing Dangerous Animals
17.8-6 Diseased Animals
17.8-7 Housing
17.8-8 Parks
17.8-9 Disruption of Garbage
17.8-10 Rabies, Inocultion and Tag
17.8-11 Running at Large
17.8-12 Dangerous Dogs
17.8-13 Animal Bites
17.8-14 Disturbing Quiet and Damaging Property
17.8-15 Sanitation
17.8-16 Female Dog in Heat
17.8-17 Rabies
17.8-18 Unlawful Treatment of Animals
17.8-19 Hindering Enforcement
17.8-20 Exceptions
17.8-21 Enforcement
17.8-22 Apppointment of Animal Warden
17.8-23 Penalty
17.8-24 Trapping Cats or Dogs
17.8-25 Impoundment Practices
17.8-26 Number of Animals
Division 9 - Penalties and
Settlements 17.9-1 Penalty
17.9-2 Fees
17.9-3 Settlement of Certain Ordinance Violation Charges
17.9-4
Settlement of Subsequent Ordinance Violation
Charges
Division 10 - Impoundments 17.10-1 Penalty, Seizure and Impoundment
17.10-2 Removal and Seizure
17.10-3 Prompt Probably Cause Hearing
17.10-4 Impoundment Hearing
17.10-5 Innocent Defendant
17.10-6 Release of Vehicle
17.10-7 Unclaimed Vehicle
17.10-8
Division 11 - Forfeitures 17.11-1 Contraband and Seizure of Money
17.11-2 Notice and Prompt Probable Cause Hearing
17.11-3 Notice and Forfeiture Hearing
Division 12 - Administrative
Adjudication 17.12-1 Establishment
17.12-2 Jurisdiction
17.12-3 Commencement of an Action
17.12-4 Powers of Administrative Hearing Officers
17.12-5 Administrative Adjudication Hearing Procedures
17.12-6 Judicial Review
17.12-7 Record on Appeal
17.12-8 Enforcement of Judgment
17.12-9 Eviction - Rights of the Occupants
Division 1 - Personnel Regulations 18.1-1 Definitions
18.1-2 General Provisions
18.1-3 Salary Administration Program
18.1-4 Non-Regular Work Time
18.1-5 Equal Opportunity and Nepotism
18.1-6 Recruitment and Employment
18.1-7 Uniform Provisions
18.1-8 Conference Attendance
18.1-9 Qualified Educational Assistance Program
18.1-10 Residence Requirements
18.1-11 Probationary Period
18.1-12 Part-Time and Temporary Employees
18.1-13 Outside Employment
18.1-14 Separation and Disciplinary Action
18.1-15 Promotions, Demotions and Transfers
18.1-16 Holidays
18.1-17 Vacations
18.1-18 Jury Duty
18.1-19 Sick Leave
18.1-20 Coordination of On-the-Job Injury and Sick Leave
18.1-21 Insurance Program
18.1-22 Retirement
18.1-23 Physical Examinations
18.1-24 Leave Provisions
18.1-25 Personal Use of Town Property
18.1-26 Grievances
18.1-27 Pecuniary Interest
18.1-28 Political Activity
18.1-29 Personal Convenience Day
18.1-30 Use of Personal Property for Town Business
18.1-31 Gift Ban
Division 2 - PSEBA Administrative
Ordinance 18.2-1 Title
18.2-2 Purpose
18.2-3 Definitions
18.2-4 Application
CHAPTER 18 - PERSONNEL
18.2-5 Appointment of Hearing Officer
18.2-6 Duties and Authority of Hearing Officer
18.2-7 Administrative Hearing
Division 1 - General Provisions 19.1-1 Application of Provisions
19.1-2 Permit
19.1-3 Application
19.1-4 State of Repair
19.1-5 Fees
Division 2 - Bowling Alleys 19.2-1 License
19.2-2 Fee
19.2-3 Closing Hours
Division 3 - Motion Pictures;
Theatricals 19.3-1 Permit
19.3-2 Application
19.3-3 License
19.3-4 Assignment
19.3-5 Admission
19.3-6 Term
19.3-7 Restriction
19.3-8 Revocation
Division 4 - Trampolines 19.4-1 Permit
19.4-2 Application
19.4-3 State of Repair
19.4-4 Supervision
Division 5 - Miniature Golf Links 19.5-1 Permit
19.5-2 Application
19.5-3 Consent of Neighboring Property Owners
19.5-4 State of Repair
Division 6 - Penalty 19.6-1 Penalty
Division 1 21.1-1 Definitions
21.1-2 Town Service
21.1-3
Requirements for Utilitzation of Town's Refuse
Collection and Disposal Service
21.1-4 Requirements for Refuse Receptacles
21.1-5 Private Refuse Collectors
21.1-6 Depositing or Storage of Refuse
21.1-7 Penalty
Division 2 - Multi-Family Recycling 21.2-1 Purpose
21.2-5 Definitions
21.2-10 Recycling Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings
21.2-12 Recyclables Collection and Processing
CHAPTER 20 - FOOD DEALERS - DELETED
CHAPTER 21 - REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 19 - AMUSEMENTS
21.2-15 New Multi-Family Dwellings
21.2-20 Penalties
21.2-25 Exemption for Town-Collected Dwellings
21.2-30 Evaluation of Recycling Requirements
Division 3 - Nuisances 21.3-1 Inspection and Investigation
21.3-2 Notice of Abate
21.3-3
Failure to Abate After Notice; Abatement by Town;
Cost
21.3-4 Abatement in Case of Emergency
21.3-5
Abatement by Owner, Agent or Occupant Where
Responsible Person is Unknown
21.3-6 Things Interfering with Peace and Comfort
21.3-7 Common Law and Statutory Nuisances
21.3-8 Nuisances
21.3-9 Nuisance Abatement
21.3-10 Penalty
Division 4 - Use of Town Dump DELETED
Division 5 - Rat Control 21.5-1 Definitions
21.5-2
Business Buildings to be Ratproofed and Freed of
Rats When Directed
21.5-3 Notice of Owner to Ratproof; Failure to Comply
21.5-4
Notice to Occupant of Rat Infestation; Duty to
Institute Rat Eradication Measures
21.5-5 Maintenance of Ratproofed Buildings
21.5-6 Inspection of Buildings; Notice of Evidence of Rats
21.5-7 Future Construction to be Ratproofed
21.5-8 Requirements as to Storage of Food
21.5-9 Disposal of Waste, Garbage and Refuse
21.5-10 Requirements as to Lumber, Boxes, Barrels, Etc.
21.5-11 Penalty
Division 6 - Rates and Charges for
the Collection of Garbage, Ashes,
Refuse and Rubbish DELETED 2/19/1979
Division 7 - Pollution Control
Facility Siting Ordinance 21.7-5 Definitions
21.7-10 Town Siting Approval Required; Host Agreement
21.7-15 Pre-Notice of Application Required
21.7-20 Application Form and Contents
21.7-25 Filing the Application
21.7-30 Filing Fee
21.7-35 Appointment of Hearing Officer, Consultants
21.7-40 Pre-Hearing Filings
21.7-45 Public Hearing; Schedule and Notice
21.7-50 Conducting the Public Hearing
21.7-55 Public Comment
21.7-60 Public Hearing Record
21.7-65 Siting Decision by Town Council
21.7-70 Appeal Procedure
21.7-75 Fees and Costs
21.7-80 Waiver of Rules
21.7-85 Public Disclosure
21.7-90 Severability
Division 1 - Licenses and Permits 22.1-1 Application
22.1-2 Person Subject to License
22.1-3 License Year
22.1-4 Forms
22.1-5 Signatures
22.1-6 Investigations
22.1-7 Fees
22.1-8 Termination of Licenses
22.1-9 Building and Premises
22.1-10 Change of Location
22.1-11 Nuisances
22.1-12 Inspections
22.1-13 Revocation
22.1-14 Posting License
22.1-15 Vehicle Tag
22.1-16 Penalty
Division 2 - Junk Dealers 22.2-1 License Required
22.2-2 Application
22.2-3 Fee
22.2-4 Stolen Goods
22.2-5 Vehicles
22.2-6 Location of Junk Yards
Division 3 - Transient
Merchants/Itinerant Vendors 22.3-1 Definition
22.3-2 Prohibition
22.3-3 Application
22.3-4 License
22.3-5 Term
22.3-6 Bond or Cash Deposit
22.3-7 Inventory Seizure
22.3-8 Suspension
22.3-9 Itinerant Vendors
22.3-10 Vehicles
22.3-11 Exemption
22.3-12 Penalty
Division 4 - Solicitors 22.4-1 Registration Required
22.4-2 Definitions
CHAPTER 22 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS
22.4-3 Time Constraints
22.4-4 Application
22.4-5 Application Review
22.4-6 Certificate
22.4-7 Notice Regulating Soliciting
22.4-8 Duty of Solicitors
22.4-9 Prohibitied Soliciting
22.4-10 Suspension
22.4-11 Highway Solicitation
22.4-12 Penalty
Division 5 - Second Hand Stores DELETED
Division 6 - Moving Buildings DELETED
Division 7 - Auctions 22.7-1 License
22.7-2 Fees
22.7-3 Time and Place
22.7-4 Fraud
22.7-5 Exceptions
Division 8 - Mobile Home Park 22.8-1 Definition
22.8-2 Permits
22.8-3 Mobile Home Park Development Standards
22.8-4 Operating Requirements
22.8-5 Licenses
22.8-6 Inspection of Mobile Home Parks
22.8-7 Notices, Hearings and Orders
22.8-8 Miscellaneous Requirements
22.8-9
Unlawful to Park Mobile Home Except as Permitted
Herein
22.8-10 DELETED
22.8-11 Guest of a Householder
22.8-12 Mobile Home Used as Permanent Office
22.8-13
Mobile Home Used for Temporary Occupancy on
Major Construction Projects
22.8-14 Penalty
22.8-15 Partial Invalidity
Division 9 - Taxis DELETED
Division 10 - Motor Vehicle
Towing Services 22.10-1 Definitions
22.10-2 License Required
22.10-3 License Application and Issuance
22.10-4 Restriction on License Holders
22.10-5 Continuing Obligation
22.10-6 Authorization Required
22.10-7 Signs
22.10-8 Towing When No Signs are Required
22.10-9 Show-Up Fee
22.10-10 Notification to Law Enforcement Agencies
22.10-11
Release of Motor Vehicles from Custody of
Relocators
22.10-12 Post-Tow Hearing
22.10-13 License - Revocation or Suspension
22.10-14 Vehicle Requirements
22.10-15 Severability
22.10-16 Penalty
Division 11 - Business License 22.11-1 Definitions
22.11-2 Compliance
22.11-3 Agents Responsible
22.11-4 Information Confidential
22.11-5 Application
22.11-6 Issuance of License
22.11-7 Renewal
22.11-8 Forms
22.11-9
Grounds for Suspension or Revocation of a
Business License
22.11-10 Reinstatement Following Revocation
22.11-11 Injunctive Relief
22.11.12 Penalty
Division 12 - False Alarms 22.12-1 Definitions
22.12-2 Response to Alarms
22.12-3 Excessive False Alarms and Fee Assessment
22.12-4 Appeal of False Alarm
Division 13 - Sexually-Oriented
Entertainment Businesses 22.13-1 Short Title
22.13-2 Purpose and Intent
22.13-3 Findings
22.13-4 Definitions
22.13-5 Excluded Activities
22.13-6 Ordinance Enforcement Officer
22.13-7
Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business License
Required
22.13-8 Operation Without License Prohibited
22.13-9 Operation in Violation of License Prohibited
22.13-10 Content and Display of License
22.13-11 License Term
22.13-12 License Renewal
22.13-13 Form and Submittal of License Application
22.13-14 Processing of License Application
22.13-15 Standards for Issuance or Denial of License
22.13-16 Inspection by the City
22.13-17
Operational Restrictions for All Sexually-Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments
22.13-18 Hours of Operation
22.13-19 Animals
22.13-20 Rest Rooms
22.13-21 Restricted Areas
22.13-22
Specified Prohibited Acts at Sexually-Oriented
Entertainment in Business Establishments
22.13-23 Exterior Display Prohibited
22.13-24 Sign Limitations
22.13-25 Noise Amplification Outdoors
22.13-26 Gambling and Related Devices Prohibited
22.13-27 Lighting
22.13-28 Manager's Station
22.13-29 Age Limitations
Special Restrictions for Adult
Video Arcades 22.13-30 Prohibited Except in an Adult Media Stores
22.13-31 Occupancy and Prohibited Acts
22.13-32 Open Booth Requirement
22.13-33 Aisle Required
22.13-34 Apertures Prohibited
22.13-35 Sanitation Required
22.13-36 Sign Required
22.13-37 Age Limitations
Special Restrictions for Adult
Cabarets 22.13-38 Performance Area
22.13-39 Lighting
22.13-40 Tipping
22.13-41 Notice of Sign Rules Required
22.13-42 Age Limitations
22.13-43 Security Guards Required
Special Restrictions for Adult
Motion Picture Theaters 22.13-44 Seating
22.13-45 Aisle Required
22.13-46 Sign Required
22.13-47 Age Limitations
License Revocation or Suspension 22.13-48 Grounds
22.13-49 Licensee's Responsibility for Employees
22.13-50 Procedure
Recordkeeping, Penalties,
Nuisances & Severability 22.13-51 Administrative Record
22.13-52 Recordkeeping by Licensee
22.13-53 Penalty for Violation
22.13-54 Nuisance Declared
22.13-55 Rules for Computation of Time
22.13-56 Severability
Division 14 - Video Gaming
License 22.14-1 Definitions
22.14-2 License Required
22.14-2.5 Moratorium on New Licenses
22.14-3 License Application Requirements
22.14-4 Video Gaming License Fees
22.14-5 Number of Video Gaming Terminals, Density
22.14-6 Unlawful Activity
22.14-7 Employer Responsibility
22.14-8 License Denial
22.14-9 License Revocation
22.14-10 Right of Entry
22.14-11 Records
22.14-12 Penalty
Divisin 15 - Tree Trimmer and
Cutter 22.15-1 Definition
22.15-2 License Required
22.15-3 Application
22.15-4 RESERVED
22.15-5 Insurance
22.15-6 Bond
22.15-7 Removal of Debris
22.15-8 Vehicles
22.15-9 Estimate Required
22.15-10 Term and Fee
22.15-11 Renewal
22.15-12 License - Suspension or Revocation
22.15-13 Penalty
Division 1 - Definitions and
General Provisions 23.1-1 Definitions
23.1-2 Obedience to Police
23.1-3 Scene of Fire
23.1-4 Interference with Fire Department
23.1-5 Signs and Signals
23.1-6 Traffic Control Signal Legend
23.1-7 Flashing Signals
23.1-8 Lane Control Signals
23.1-9 Pedestrian Control Signals
23.1-10 Unauthorized Signs
23.1-11 Interference with Signs or Signals
23.1-12 Advertising Signs
23.1-13 Operation of Ambulances
23.1-14 Animals
23.1-15 Exemptions
Division 2 - Through, One-Way
and Yield Right-of-Way Streets
and Stop Intersections 23.2-1 Through Streets
23.2-2 One-Way Streets or Alleys
23.2-3 Stop Streets
23.2-4 Yield Right-of-Way Streets
CHAPTER 23 - TRAFFIC
23.2-5 Posting Signs
23.2-6 Chief of Police Empowered to Make Regulations
Division 3 - Rules for Driving 23.3-1
Required Position and Method of Turning at
Intersection
23.3-2 Starting Parked Vehicle
23.3-3 Driver's Signal
23.3-4 Signals and Turning
23.3-5 Signal Lamps and Signal Devices
23.3-6 Driving From Alleys, Driveways or Garages
23.3-7
Vehicles Not to be Driven on Sidewalks, Bicycle
Lanes or in Safety Zones
23.3-8 Right-of-Way
23.3-9 Vehicle Turning Left
23.3-10 U-Turn
23.3-11 No Left Turn
23.3-12 Fire Department Vehicles
23.3-13 Driving on Right Side of Roadway
23.3-14 Passing Vehicles
23.3-15 Overtaking Vehicles
23.3-16 Overtaking Vehicles on the Right
23.3-17 Limitations on Overtaking on the Left
23.3-18 One-Way Roadways and Rotary Traffic Islands
23.3-19 Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic
23.3-20
Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized
Emergency Vehicles
23.3-21 Reckless, Negligent or Careless Driving
23.3-22 Speed Restrictions
23.3-23 Special Speed Limits While Passing Schools
23.3-24 Traffic Not to be Obstructed
23.3-25 Bicycles and Motorcycles
23.3-26 Unattended Vehicles
23.3-27 Unattended Animals
23.3-28 Clinging to Vehicles
23.3-29 Toys
23.3-30 Riding on Running Boards
23.3-31 Train Signals
23.3-32 Driving through Funeral or Other Processions
23.3-33 Drivers in a Procession
23.3-34 Funeral Processions
23.3-35 RESERVED
23.3-36 Backing
23.3-37 Restricted Access
23.3-38 Trucks Prohibited on Certain Streets
23.3-39 Weight Limits - Garbage or Refuse Disposal Trucks
23.3-40 School Buses
23.3-41 Following too Closely
23.3-42 Disregarding Traffic Orders
23.3-43 Refusal to Stop Vehicle
23.3-44 Light on Motor Vehicles
23.3-45 Disobeying Traffic Control Devices
23.3-46 Opening Door into Traffic Lane
23.3-47 Drag Racing
23.3-48 Alcoholic Liquor in Motor Vehicles
23.3-49 Seat Safety Belts
23.3-50 Lights on Emergency Vehicles
23.3-51 Motor Vehicles Prohibited on Constitution Trail
23.3-52 Using Private Drive as a Throughway
23.3-53 Park Speed Limit
23.3-54 Expired Registration
23.3-55 Weight Limits
Division 4 - Pedestrians 23.4-1 Right-of-Way
23.4-2 Pedestrians Crossing Roadway
23.4-3 Signals
23.4-4 Standing on Sidewalk
23.4-5 Pedestrian Crossing
23.4-6 Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
23.4-7 Blind Pedestrians - Right-of-Way
23.4-8 Walking on Highways
Division 5 - Parking Rules 23.5-1 Parking Rules
23.5-2 Street Cleaning
23.5-3 Time Limit Parking
23.5-4
Vehicles Parked More Than Twenty-Four (24)
Consecutive Hours
23.5-5 DELETED 4/18/1983
23.5-6 Vehicles for Sale
23.5-7 Loading Zone
23.5-8 All Night Parking
23.5-9 DELETED
23.5-10 Cab Stands - Bus Stands
23.5-11 Parking Motor Vehicles on Private Property
23.5-12 Spaces for Persons with Disabilities
23.5-13 Owner of Vehicle Responsible
23.5-14 Parkng After Snowstorms
23.5-15 Meaning of "Abandoned Vehicle"
23.5-16
Authority of Police to Remove Vehicles; Grounds
for Removal
23.5-17 Notice to Owner of Towed Vehicle
23.5-18 Notice to Secretary of State When Owner Unknown
23.5-19
Authority of Police to Relocate Vehicle in
Emergency
Division 6 - Condition and
Equipment of Vehicles 23.6-1 Clear Vision
23.6-2 Gas and Smoke
23.6-3 Unnecessary Noise
23.6-4 Driving Unsafe Vehicles Prohibited
23.6-5 Spilling Loads
23.6-6 Brakes
23.6-7 Horn
23.6-8 Lamps on Vehicles Owned by Firemen
23.6-9 Lights
23.6-10 Muffler
23.6-11 Non-Skid Devices
23.6-12 RESERVED
23.6-13 RESERVED
23.6-14 RESERVED
23.6-15 Motorcycles & Trailers; Light Required
Division 7 - Low Speed Vehicles 23.7-1 Definitions
23.7-2 Operation of a Low Speed Vehicle
23.7-3 Required Equipment
23.7-4 Penalty
Division 8 - Bicycles 23.8-1 Serial Number
23.8-2 Brakes and Lights
23.8-3
Provisions of this Chapter Applicable to Bicycle
Riders
23.8-4 Required Use of Bicycle Lanes
23.8-5
Bicycle Riders Required to Consider Bicycle Lanes as
Roadways
Division 9 - Signs 23.9-1 Posting of Signs
23.9-2 Authority to Post Signs
Division 10 - Specific Events 23.10-1 Permit Required
23.10-2 Definitions
23.10-3 Interference with Specific Event
23.10-4 Application for Permit
23.10-5 Time of Day
23.10-6 Conditions Precedent
23.10-7 Issuance or Denial of a Permit
23.10-8 Highway Closure Requests
23.10-9 Preference of Applications
23.10-10 Issuance of Multiple Permits
23.10-11 Reconsideration
23.10-12 Contents of Permit
23.10-13 Suspension or Revocation
23.10-14 Appeal
23.10-15 Violation - Penalty
23.10-16 Severability
Division 11 - Penalty 23.11-1 Penalty for Parking Violations
23.11-2 General Penalties
23.11-3 Arrests
23.11-4 Prima Facie Proof
24.1-1 Declaration of Policy
24.1-2 Definitions
24.1-3 Prohibited Acts in Housing
24.1-4
Prohibited Discriminatory Practices in Employment,
Public Accommodations and Financing
24.1-5 Citizen Protection
24.1-6 Equal Employment Oportunity Compliance
24.1-7 Duties of Commission on Human Relations
24.1-8 Complaints
24.1-9 Enforcement Procedure
24.1-10 Severability
Division 1 - General 25.1-1 Datum Plane
25.1-2 Corporate Seal
25.1-3 Fiscal Year
25.1-4
Payment of Interest and Fees on Outstanding
Obligations and Fines; Refunds
25.1-5
25.1-6 Disposition of Property
25.1-7 Definitions and Interpretation
Division 2 - Emergency Services
and Disaster Operations 25.2-1 Establishment and Purpose
25.2-2 Definitions
25.2-3 Director/Coordinator
25.2-4 Functions
25.2-5 Services as Mobile Support Team
25.2-6 Agreements with other Political Subdivisions
25.2-7 Communications
25.2-8 Emergency Action
25.2-9 Compensation
25.2-10 Reimbursement by State
25.2-11 Purchases and Expenditures
25.2-12 Local Disaster Emergency and Civil Emergency
25.2-13 Oath
25.2-14 Office
25.2-15 Appropriation - Levy of Taxes
25.2-16
Financial Responsibility for Alleviating Emergency
Situations
Division 3 - Land Annexation 25.3-1 Prohibition
25.3-2 Requirement
25.3-3 Invalidating Annexation
CHAPTER 24 - HUMAN RELATIONS
CHAPTER 25 - MISCELLANEOUS
25.3-4 Disconnection
25.3-5 Compliance with Other Provisions
25.3-6 Copies of Plat
25.3-7 Annexation Application Fees
Division 4 - State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act 25.4-1
25.4-2
25.4-3
25.4-4
25.4-5
25.4-6
25.4-7
25.4-8
25.4-9
25.4-10
Division 5 - Adoption of
Procedures for Remote
Participation 25.5-1 Definition of Meeting
25.5-2 Remote Participation Policy
Division 6 - Gross Receipts Utility
Tax 25.6-1
25.6-2
25.6-3
25.6-4
25.6-5
25.6-6
25.6-7
25.6-8
25.6-9
25.6-10
25.6-11
25.6-12 Enterprise Zone Refund
25.6-13
Division 7 - Tax Upon the Use and
Privilege of Renting a Hotel or
Motel Room 25.7-1 Definitions
25.7-2 Tax
25.7-3 Books and Records
25.7-4 Transmittal of Tax Revenue
25.7-5 Collection
25.7-6 Proceeds of Tax and Fines
25.7-7 Penalties
25.7-8 Separability
Division 7.5 - Short Term Rental
Tax Law 25.7-5.5 Definitions
25.7-5.10 Tax Imposed
25.7-5-15 Collection by Intermediary
25.7-5.20 Collection by Operator
25.7-5.25 Transmittal of Tax
25.7-5.30 Recordkeeping; Inspection of Records
25.7-5.35 Proceeds
25.7-5.40 Penalities
Division 8 - Home Rule Gas Use
Tax 25.8-1 Title
25.8-2 Definitions
25.8-3 Tax Imposed
25.8-4 Complementary Relation to Normal Occupation Tax
25.8-5 Collection of Tax
25.8-6 Books and Records
25.8-7 Rules and Regulations
25.8-8 Penalty Provisions
Division 9 - Home Rule Municipal
Retailer and Service Occupation
Tax 25.9-1 Imposition of Tax
25.9-2
25.9-3 Disposition of Certain Proceeds
25.9-4 DELETED 2/21/1994
Town of Normal Use Tax 25.10-1 Nature of Tax
25.10-2 Definitions
25.10-3 Imposition of Tax - Collection by Sellers
25.10-4 Exemptions
25.10-5 Certificate of Registration
25.10-6
Tax Returns; Payments; Collection Fees; Deposition
of Collection
25.10-7 Resale Number
25.10-8 Payment by Purchaser-Lessor
25.10-9 Filing; Penalties; Suit for Collections
25.10-10 Records; Audits
25.10-11 Process; Service
25.10-12 Rules and Regulations
25.10-13 Error; Claim for Credit; Hearing
25.10-14 Deficiency Demand; Notice; Hearing
25.10-15 Investigation; Hearing; Evidence
25.10-16 Testimony; Perjury
25.10-17 Subpoenas; Contempt
25.10-18 Privacy
25.10-19 Services of Notices
25.10-20 Corporations; Officers
25.10-21 Violations; Penalties
25.10-22 Legislative Intent - Severability
Division 11 25.11-1 Entitlement
25.11-2 Definitions
25.11-3 Imposition of Tax
25.11-4 Liability for Payment
25.11-5 Collection of Tax
25.11-6 Rules and Regulations
25.11-7 Filing of Return
25.11-8 Failure to Pay, Collect, or Remit Tax
25.11-9 Records
25.11-10 Exemptions
25.11-11
Suspension or Revocation of Licenses for Failure to
Comply; Hearing
25.11-12 Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
25.11-13 Penalty
Division 12 - Tax Upon the
Privilege of Using or Consuming
Electricity 25.12-1 Tax Imposed
25.12-2 Exceptions
25.12-3 Additional Taxes
25.12-4 Collection
25.12-5 Reports to Municipality
25.12-6 Credit for Over-Payment
25.12-7 Penalty
25.12-8 Books and Records
25.12-9 Definitions
Division 13 - Local Government
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights 25.13-1 Title
25.13-2 Scope
25.13-3 Definitions
25.13-4 Notices
25.13-5 Late Payment
25.13-6 Payment
25.13-7 Certain Credits and Refunds
25.13-8 Audit Procedure
25.13-9 Appeal
25.13-10 Hearing
25.13-11 Interest and Penalties
25.13-12 Abatement
25.13-13 Installment Contracts
25.13-14 Statute of Limitations
25.13-15 Voluntary Disclosure
25.13-16 Publication of Tax Ordinances
25.13-17
25.13-18 Application
25.13-19 Severability
25.13-20 Effective Date
25.13-21 Codification
Division 14 - Telecommunications
Tax 25.14-1 Title
25.14-2 Definitions
25.14-3 Tax Imposed
25.14-4 Collection of Tax by Retailers
25.14-5 Filing Returns and Remittances by Retailers
25.14-6 Registration
25.14-7 Obligation of Taxpayers to File Returns and Pay Tax
25.14-8 Resale Numbers
25.14-9 Maintaining Books and Records
25.14-10 Rules and Regulations
25.14-11 Severability
25.14-12 Status of Illinois Municipal Code Section 8-11-17
25.14-13 Penalty
25.14-14 Late Payment Fee
25.14-15 Overpayment of Tax
Division 15 - Food and Beverage
Tax 25.15-1 Definitions
25.15-2 Imposition of Tax
25.15-3 Liability for Payment
25.15-4 Collection of Tax
25.15-5 Rules and Regulations
25.15-6 Filing of Application
25.15-7 Filing of Return
25.15-8 Failure to File Return and Pay Tax
25.15-9 Financial Records
25.15-10 Failure to Remit; Licensing
25.15-11 Violations; Penalties
Division 16 - Fees 25.16-1 Purpose
25.16-2
25.16-3
25.16-4
25.16-5 Fees Hereby Imposed by the Town
25.16-6 Conflict with Other Code Sections
25.16-7 Waiver of Fees
Division 17 - Liner Housing 25.17-1 Use of Adjacent Parking Garage
25.17-2 Pedestrian Ingress and Egress
Division 18 - Normal Motor Fuel
Tax 25.18-5 Definitions
25.18-10 Tax Imposed
25.18-15 Collection of Tax by Motor Fuel Retailer
25.15-20 Required Returns and Remittance of Tax
25.15-25 Recordkeeping; Inspection of Records
25.18-30 Registration of Motor Fuel Retailers
25.18-35 Compensation of Motor Fuel Retailer
25.18-40 Penalty
CHAPTER 26 - EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES
Division 1 - Illinois Power
Company d/b/a AmerenIP 26.1-1
26.1-2
26.1-3
26.1-4
26.1-5
26.1-6
26.1-7
26.1-8
26.1-9
26.1-10
26.1-11
26.1-12
26.1-13
26.1-14
26.1-15
26.1-16
26.1-17
26.1-18
Division 2 - Northern Illinois Gas
Company 26.2-1 Definitions
26.2-2 Grant of Franchise
26.2-3 Term
26.2-4 Use of Public Right-of-Way
26.2-5 Consideration for Use of Public Right-of-Way
26.2-6 Accounts and Records
26.2-7 Substitution of More Favorable Provisions
26.2-8 Indemnification
26.2-9 Insurance
26.2-10 Cure
26.2-11 Force Majeure
26.2-12 Notice
26.2-13 General Provisions
26.2-14 Municipality Authority Reservation
26.2-15 Consent Agreement
Exhibit A
Division 3 - GTE North 26.3-1
26.3-2
26.3-3
26.3-4
26.3-5
26.3-6
26.3-7
26.3-8
26.3-9
26.3-10
26.3-11
26.3-12
26.3-13
Division 4 - Corn Belt Energy
Corporation 26.4-1
26.4-2
26.4-3
26.4-4
26.4-5
26.4-6
26.4-7
26.4-8
26.4-9
26.4-10
26.4-11 RESERVED
26.4-12 RESERVED
26.4-13 Franchise Fee
26.4-14
26.4-15
26.4-16
26.4-17
16.4-18
26.4-19
26.4-20
ACCEPTANCE
Division 5 - CATV DELETED 10/19/1998
Division 5.1 - Community Antenna
Television Systems 26.5.1-1 Definition of Terms
26.5.1-2 Grant of Authority
26.5.1-3 Construction and Maintenance of the Cable System
26.5.1-4 Service Obligations
26.5.1-5 Oversight and Regulation by Town
26.5.1-6
Transfer of Cable System or Franchise or Control of
Grantee
26.5.1-7 Insurance and Indemnity
26.5.1-8 Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access
26.5.1-9 Enforcement of Franchise
26.5.1-10 Miscellaneous Provisions
Division 5.2 - CMN-RUS, Inc.,
d/b/a Metronet 26.5.2-1 Definition of Terms
26.5.2-2 Grant of Authority
26.5.2-3 Construction and Maintenance of the Cable System
26.5.2-4 Service Obligations
26.5.2-5 Oversight and Regulation by Town
26.5.2-6
Transfer of Cable System or Franchise or Control of
Grantee
26.5.2-7 Insurance and Indemnity
26.5.2-8 Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access
26.5.2-9 Enforcement of Franchise
26.5.2-10 Miscellaneous Provisions
Division 6 - Sprint
Communications Company, L.P. 26.6-1
26.6-2
26.6-3
26.6-4
26.6-5
26.6-6
26.6-7
26.6-8
26.6-9
26.6-10
26.6-11
26.6-12
26.6-13
26.6-14
26.6-15
26.6-16
26.6-17
Division 7 - MCI
Telecommunications Corporation 26.7-1
26.7-2
26.7-3
26.7-4
26.7-5
26.7-6
26.7-7
26.7-8
26.7-9
26.7-10
26.7-11
26.7-12
26.7-13
26.7-14
26.7-15
26.7-16
26.7-17
26.7-18
Division 8 - BroMenn Healthcare 26.8-1
26.8-2
26.8-3
26.8-4
26.8-5
26.8-6
26.8-7
26.8-8
26.8-9
26.8-10
26.8-11
26.8-12
26.8-13
26.8-14
26.8-15
26.8-16
26.8-17
Division 9 - Summit
Communications, Inc. 26.9-1
26.9-2
26.9-3
26.9-4
26.9-5
26.9-6
26.9-7
26.9-8
26.9-9
26.9-10
26.9-11
26.9-12
26.9-13
26.9-14
26.9-15
26.9-16
26.9-17
26.9-18
26.9-19
26.9-20
26.9-21
Division 10 - Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee 26.10-1 Definitions
26.10-2 Registration of Telecommunications Providers
26.10-3
Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee
26.10-4
Collection, Enforcement, and Administration of
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance
Fees
26.10-5 Compliance with Other Laws
26.10-6 Existing Franchises and Licenses
26.10-7 Penalities
26.10-8 Enforcement
26.10-9 Severability
Division 11 - Level 3
Communications, LLC 26.11-1
26.11-2
26.11-3
26.11-4
26.11-5
26.11-6
26.11-7
26.11-8
26.11-9
26.11-10
26.11-11
26.11-12
26.11-13
26.11-14
26.11-15
26.11-16
26.11-17
26.11-18
26.11-19
26.11-20
26.11-21
Division 12 - McLeodUSA
Telecommunications Services, Inc 26.12-1
26.12-2
26.12-3
26.12-4
26.12-5
26.12-6
26.12-7
26.12-8
26.12-9
26.12-10
26.12-11
26.12-12
26.12-13
26.12-14
26.12-15
26.12-16
26.12-17
26.12-18
26.12-19
26.12-20
26.12-21
Division 1 - General 27.1-1 Title
27.1-2 Construction of Words
27.1-3 Penalties
27.1-4 Officers or Employees
27.1-5 Intent
27.1-6 Reference to Code
27.1-7 Penalties - Amendments
27.1-8 Recording Amendments
27.1-9 Severability
Division 2 - Printing 27.2-1 Authorization
27.2-2 Distribution of Copies
27.2-3 Presentation of Copies
27.2-4 Sale of Code
Division 3 - Repealing Clause 27.3-1 Repeal of General Ordinances - Exceptions
27.3-2 Pending Suits
27.3-3 DELETED 11/18/1996
Division 4 - Effective Date 27.4-1 Time of Taking Effect
Division 5 - Re-Adoption of the
Municipal Code 27.5-1
Division 1 - Special Flood Hazard
Area Development Regulations 28.1-1 Purpose
28.1-2 Definitions
28.1-3 Base Flood Elevation
28.1-4 Duties of the Town Engineer
28.1-5 Development Permit
28.1-6
Preventing Increased Flood Heights and Resulting
Damages
28.1-7 Protecting Buildings
28.1-8 Subdivision and Other Development Requirements
28.1-9 Variances
28.1-10 Disclaimer of Liability
28.1-11 Penalty
28.1-12 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
28.1-13 Separability
28.1-14 Effective Date
Division 2 - Stream Buffer
Regulations 28.2-1 Findings
CHAPTER 27 - THE CODE
CHAPTER 28 - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
28.2-2 Purpose
28.2-3 Definitions
28.2-4 Obligation to Comply
28.2-5 Application for Permit
28.2-6 Design Standards for Buffers
28.2-7 Buffer Management & Maintenance
28.2-8 Enforcement Procedures
28.2-9 Variances
28.2-10 Conflict with Other Codes and Regulations
28.2-11 Severability
Division 3 - Erosion, Sediment
Control and Grading Regulations 28.3-1 Findings
28.3-2 Purpose
28.3-3 Definitions
28.3-4 General Principles
28.3-5 Site Development Permit
28.3-6 Design and Operation Standards and Requirements
28.3-7 Enforcement
Entire Index Revised September 2019
SEC. 1.1-1
CHAPTER 1 - ELECTIONS
SEC. 1.1-1 ELECTIONS. There shall be held on the first Monday in March, l970, and on
the first Monday in March of every two (2) years thereafter, an election to elect persons to those
offices specified in 65 ILCS 5/3-5-1 and 65 ILCS 5/3-5-4, as said law now stands or may hereafter
be amended. (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 1.1-2 PLACE OF ELECTIONS. The Town Council shall designate the places in
which elections shall be held and shall appoint the judges thereof and shall cause notice of such
elections to be printed in a newspaper published in the Town of Normal. Such notice shall provide
the time and the place of elections and of the officers to be elected and any other questions to be
voted upon and shall be published in accordance with the statutes made and provided by the State of
Illinois.
SEC. 1.1-3 CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS. The Town Council shall be responsible, along
with the Town Clerk, for the conduct of elections. They shall see to the publication of all notices, to
the appointment of all judges, to the establishment of polling places, to the printing of ballots, to the
final canvass of the election returns and the declaration of results, etc. The elections shall be
conducted as provided for by Statute, Chapter 10 ILCS 1992, and as later amended. (Amended
6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 1.1-4 ELIGIBILITY. All persons who are registered voters and entitled to vote at
any general election for state officers, and who have a permanent abode within the Town of Normal
and who meet the requirements of the State Statutes, may vote at any election for Town officers or
any special election for other corporate purposes.
SEC. 1.1-5 DETERMINING WINNER. The person with the highest number of votes for
any office shall be declared elected. In the case of a tie in the election for any Town officers, it shall
be determined by lot in the presence of the Town Council, in such manner as directed by Statute.
SEC. 1.1-6 NOTIFICATION. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, within 5 days after
the result of the election is declared, or any appointment made by the Town Council, to cause to be
notified all persons elected or appointed to office. Unless such persons shall respectively qualify
within 10 days after such notice is given, the office shall become vacant. Said qualification for
office shall consist of taking an oath and posting a bond as set forth in this chapter. Existing office
holders shall remain in office until their successors have been elected or appointed, as the case may
be, and qualified as provided in this Code.
SEC. 1.1-7 OATH. All officers of the Town of Normal, whether elected or appointed,
shall, within 10 days of such appointment or election and before they enter upon the duties of their
respective offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:
SEC. 1.1-7(Cont.1)
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of the State of Illinois and the Ordinances of the Town of
Normal and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
________________________ in the Town of Normal, Illinois, to the best of my
ability."
Said oath shall be executed in writing and shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of
Normal.
SEC. 1.1-8 BOND. Before entered upon his duties of office, each officer appointed shall
execute a bond in the amount hereinafter provided conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his respective office and with sureties to be approved by the Town Council.
OFFICE BOND
President $ 5,000.00
Trustee None
City Manager 10,000.00
Building Commissioner 3,000.00
Plumbing Inspector 2,500.00
Director of Public Works 2,000.00
Town Attorney 2,000.00
Assistant Town Attorney 1,000.00
Electrical Inspector 2,000.00
(Amended June 2, 1972)
Town Clerk 10,000.00
Assistant Town Clerk 10,000.00
Chief of Police 2,500.00
Town Marshal 2,500.00
Deputy Marshal 1,000.00
Treasurer (an amount of money not less than three times the latest Federal census population
or any subsequent census figure of the Town of Normal used for Motor Fuel
Tax purposes.)
The Town of Normal shall pay the premium, if any, on the furnishing of said bonds.
(Amended 3/2l/77)
SEC. 1.1-9 ADOPTION. That the adoption of this Code, 10 ILCS 5/4-24, 1992 Edition,
has heretofore been adopted and the Town Clerk has heretofore been instructed to, within ten (10)
days after the adoption of the aforesaid section, file in the office of the County Clerk of McLean
County, Illinois, a certified copy of the said ordinance of adoption, which act has been completed,
and accordingly the elections of the Town of Normal shall be so governed. (Amended 6/7/93 by
Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 1.1-10 PRECINCTS. In furtherance of this Code and in the implementation of the
aforesaid section, the Town Council of the Town of Normal does declare one precinct in the Town
of Normal. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 1.1-11
SEC. 1.1-11 LIMITATIONS ON POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a liquor license or CATV franchise, holder
of any such license or franchise, partner in a partnership holding or applying for such
a license or franchise, officer, member of the Board of Directors, General Manager,
Registered Agent or stockholder with an ownership interest in excess of 5% of any
corporation holding or applying for such a license or franchise, or officer, agent,
associate, representative or employee of a holder or applicant for any such license or
franchise on behalf of any such liquor license applicant, holder, partner, officer,
board member, manager, agent of 5% stockholder shall become liable for or pay or
make any contribution directly or indirectly toward the campaign fund or expenses
of any nominee or candidate for the office of President of the Board of Trustees or
member of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
B. Any person, firm or corporation, applicant, holder, partner, officer, board member,
manager, agent, 5% stockholder, associate, representative or employee violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing
the investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $500.00, provided however, that all actions seeking imposition of fines only
shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil
Practice Act. Repeated offenses in excess of three within any 180-day period may
also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term
not to exceed six months under the procedure set forth in SEC. 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure
in a separate proceeding. (Added 9/18/78)
SEC. 2.1-1
CHAPTER 2 - OFFICERS, ELECTED AND APPOINTED
DIVISION 1 - PRESIDENT
SEC. 2.1-1 ELECTION - TERM OF OFFICE. The Town President shall be elected for
a term of four (4) years and he shall be the President of the Board of Trustees, as provided by
Statute. The inauguration of any newly elected President shall take place at the first regular meeting
of the corporate authorities in the month of May following such election. (Amended 3/1/93 by Ord.
No. 4115)
SEC. 2.1-2 DUTIES. He shall be the chief executive officer of the Town and shall
perform all such duties as may be required by him by Statute or Ordinance. He shall have the
power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any Town officer or employees at any
reasonable time.
SEC. 2.1-2.5 COMPENSATION. The President shall receive a salary in an amount fixed
from time to time by ordinance. Beginning on December 1, 2018, the salary for the President is as
follows:
A. For each term of office beginning before the 2021 municipal election, the salary is
$18,000 per year, payable monthly while in office.
B. For each term of office beginning after the 2021 municipal election, the salary is
$32,000 per year, payable monthly while in office.
(Amended 10/15/73)(Renumbered 12/1/75)(Amended 6/21/76)(Amended 2/7/77)(Amended
2/2/81)(Amended 4/20/81 - Eff. May, 1985)(Amended 2/15/88)(Entire Section Amended 12/17/18
by Ord. No. 5771)
SEC. 2.1-3. If the President is unable to perform the duties of the office through either
death, absence from the Town for physical or mental disability for such a length of time or of such
severity as would reasonably require the appointment of a fully empowered replacement, the Board
of Trustees may elect one of its members President pro tem. The President pro tem shall have all
the powers, duties, responsibilities and authority of the President. (Amended 12/1/75)
SEC. 2.1-4 NOTE. The President and Board of Trustees at times are referred to in this
Code as the Town Board, the Town Council, the Board, the Council, the Corporate Authority, or
other comparable language. In such situations or cases, no distinction or differentiation is intended.
(Amended 12/1/75)
SEC. 2.2-1
DIVISION 2 - BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SEC. 2.2-1 ELECTION. The Trustees shall be elected in accordance with SEC. 1.1-1 of
this Code and the Statutes made and provided therefore. The inauguration of any newly elected
Trustee shall take place at the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities in the month of May
following such election. (Amended 3/1/93 by Ord. No. 4115)
SEC. 2.2-2 COMPENSATION. Each member of the Board of Trustees shall receive a
salary in an amount fixed from time to time by ordinance. Beginning on December 1, 2018, the
salary for each member of the Board of Trustees is as follows:
A. For each term of office beginning before the 2021 municipal election, the salary is
$4,800 per year, payable monthly while the Trustee is in office.
B. For each term of office beginning after the 2021 municipal election, the salary is
$6,800 per year, payable monthly while the Trustee is in office.
(Amended 10/15/73)(Renumbered 12/1/76)(Amended 6/21/76)(Amended 2/7/77)(Amended
2/2/81)(Amended 4/20/81 - Eff. May, 1985)(Amended 2/15/88)(Entire Section Amended 12/17/18
by Ord. No. 5772).
SEC. 2.3-1
DIVISION 3 - APPOINTED OFFICERS
SEC. 2.3-1 APPOINTMENT. At the second regular meeting of the Town Council held in
the month of March of each year, or as soon thereafter as convenient, the Town Council, with the
President of the Town, shall jointly make the appointment of all appointive members of Boards and
Commissions as required by State Statute and as provided for in this Code. Those officers holding
present appointments, and all those hereafter appointed, shall have their appointments automatically
renewed each March without further action of the Town Council, unless the party or parties in
question, or the Town Council, shall terminate said employment.
All appointive officers of the Town shall serve for a term of one year commencing with the
fiscal year of April 1 following the time of appointment as hereinbefore set out or until their
successors are appointed and qualified provided, they may be removed from office for any good
cause shown. In the case of a vacancy in any of said appointive officers for any cause, an officer
shall, as soon as possible, be appointed in the same manner to serve for the remainder of the
unexpired fiscal year. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-2 BOND. Before entering upon his duties of office, each officer appointed shall
execute a bond in the amount hereinafter provided conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his respective office and with sureties to be approved by the Town Council.
OFFICE BOND
President $ 5,000.00
Trustee None
City Manager 10,000.00
Building Commissioner 3,000.00
Plumbing Inspector 2,500.00
Electrical Inspector 2,000.00
Director of Public Works 2,000.00
City Attorney 2,000.00
Assistant City Attorney 1,000.00
Town Clerk 10,000.00
Assistant Town Clerk 10,000.00
Chief of Police 2,500.00
Town Marshal 2,500.00
Deputy Marshal 1,500.00
Treasurer (An amount of money not less than
three times the latest Federal census population or any subsequent census figure of the Town of
Normal used for Motor Fuel Tax purposes.)(Amended 3/21/77)
The Town of Normal shall pay the premium, if any, on the furnishing of said bonds.
(Amended 12/3/73)
SEC. 2.3-3
SEC. 2.3-3 COMPENSATION. All officers appointed under this Code shall receive such
compensation as the Board of Trustees and the President of the Town jointly shall fix from time to
time by ordinance or resolution. All officers and assistants heretofore appointed shall serve and
retain their same powers, duties and salary until April 1, 1969, or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
SEC. 2.3-4 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - OFFICE CREATED. The office of Municipal
Manager is hereby created.
SEC. 2.3-5 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - APPOINTMENT. The Town Council shall
appoint a Municipal Manager, who shall be the administrative head of the Municipal Government
of the Town of Normal and who shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all
departments. He shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs and need not be a resident
of the Town of Normal when appointed. The Municipal Manager shall be appointed for an
indefinite term. In the case of the absence or disability of the Manager, the Town Council may
designate a qualified administrative officer of the Town of Normal to perform the duties of the
Manager during such absence or disability.
SEC. 2.3-6 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE. A Manager
may at any time be removed from office by a majority vote of the members of the Town Council.
SEC. 2.3-7 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - DUTIES AND POWERS. The powers and
duties of the Municipal Manager shall be:
A. To enforce the laws and ordinances within the Town.
B. To appoint and remove all directors of departments. No appointment shall be made
upon any basis other than that of merit and fitness.
C. To exercise control of all departments and division thereof created by said Article V
of the Revised Cities and Villages Act of Illinois and by any ordinances of the Town
and by this ordinance and all amendments thereto.
D. To have all the powers and exercise all the duties granted by Statute to municipal
clerks and comptrollers with respect to the preparation of the report of estimated
funds necessary to defray the expenses of the Town for the fiscal year for the
consideration of the corporate authorities prior to the preparation of the annual
appropriation ordinance.
E. To attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the discussions;
but with no right to vote.
F. To recommend to the Council for adoption such measure as he may deem necessary
or expedient.
G. To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town or its inhabitants
and any contract or public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed.
SEC. 2.3-7(Cont.1)
H. To make in the ordinary course of business all purchases of materials, services and
supplies necessary for the Town, as provided for in the Annual Budget and as
provided in the Town's Purchasing Manual. (Amended 6/3/74)(Amended
11/21/77)(Amended 10/19/87)(Amended 4/6/98)
I. To have and exercise the power, authority, and duty of any director of a department
or division thereof prescribed by this ordinance or any amendment thereof during the
time when the office of any such director shall be vacant or no person shall have
been appointed thereto.
J. To prepare such regular and special reports as are necessary for the efficient
operation of the Town government, including an agenda for each Council meeting
whether such meeting be regular or special, and such agenda to be prepared and
distributed in advance of said meeting to all necessary parties.
K. To conduct and prepare the necessary studies and/or research to help the Council
make its policy decisions.
L. To prepare an annual budget for the presentation and adoption by the Council, and
shall further work with the City Officials in helping to prepare information for the
necessary appropriation and levy ordinances.
M. To assume and do all other duties as specifically delegated and assigned to him by
said Council.
N. To prepare and submit to the Town Council, at monthly intervals, reports which will
advise said Council of the financial condition and future needs of the Town, and in
so doing he may make such other recommendations as he may deem desirable.
O. To recommend to the Council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office.
P. To recommend to the governing body from time to time adoption of such measures
as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, welfare, or safety of the
citizenry or for the future improvement of the administrative services.
Q. To prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of the various departments of the
Town and divisions thereunder.
R. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by said Article V of the Revised
Cities and Villages Act of Illinois by this ordinance or any ordinance or resolution of
the Town Council.
S. To authorize a change or changes in any contract with the Town provided a written
determination is made that:
SEC. 2.3-7(Cont.2)
1. The circumstances said to necessitate the change(s) in performance were not
reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed;
2. Were not within the contemplation of the contract as signed; or
3. Are in the best interest of the Town. The City Manager shall promptly
report to the Council all change orders which authorize or necessitate an
increase or decrease in either the cost of a contract by ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or more or the time of completion by thirty (30) days or more.
(Added 7/3/89)
SEC. 2.3-8 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - SALARY. Compensation of the Municipal
Manager shall be as determined by the Town Council.
SEC. 2.3-9 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - VACATION AND EMPLOYMENT
RESTRICTIONS. The Municipal Manager shall be subject to the vacation schedule as authorized
by the City Council, but not less than the provisions in existence in the Personnel Code for all other
Town employees. He shall, likewise, be subject to the same sickness and disability provisions as
other Town employees. He shall devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
(Amended 7/16/73)
SEC. 2.3-10 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS. The Municipal
Manager shall be paid for the use of his own private vehicle when used exclusively for Town
business at the per mile rate established by the Town Council for compensated travel by other Town
officials and/or employees, and he shall keep accurate records of same which shall be subject to
Council approval prior to payment or the Town may provide a vehicle to be used by the City
Manager for Town business. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-11 MUNICIPAL MANAGER - BOND. The Manager shall furnish a surety
bond in the amount of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) or such additional sum as may be
established by the Town Council, which bond shall be approved by said Council. Said bond to be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as such Municipal Manager, and the
premium on the bond shall be paid by the Town.
SEC. 2.3-12 EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES. The
executive and administrative powers and duties of the Town shall be distributed and exercised
through the departments and divisions thereof as provided by the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal of l969 and as created and ordinances heretofore passed and approved by the Town Council
and by reference hereto are made a part hereof as if the same were stated herein.
SEC. 2.3-13 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS - POWERS, DUTIES AND SALARIES. The
powers, duties, and salaries of an appointive officer and employee shall be in accordance with the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal of 1969 and in accordance with ordinances passed and
approved by the Town Council and are by reference made a part hereof as if the same were stated
herein.
SEC. 2.3-14
SEC. 2.3-14 AUDIT. At the close of each fiscal year the Town Council shall cause an
independent audit of all accounts of the Town of Normal to be made by an accountant or
accountants authorized to practice accounting under the laws of the State of Illinois.
SEC. 2.3-15 CITY MANAGER - FINALITY OF ACTION. All acts and things done by
the City Manager pursuant to this Code shall, unless otherwise especially provided, be final and
conclusive unless and until superseded by action of the President and/or Board of Trustees.
(Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-16 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION - APPOINTMENT. There
is hereby created, and continued as heretofore, the position of Director of Parks and Recreation,
who shall be appointed by the City Manager in accordance with Statutes made and provided
applicable to the managerial form of municipal government. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-17 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION - DUTIES. It shall be the
duty of the Director of Parks and Recreation to see to the overall administration of the recreation
program of the Town, to be in charge of all parklands, to be the supervisor of all buildings and/or
equipment belonging to said Town's Parks and Recreation Department and in general to be the chief
administrative officer of the Town for said Department. He shall answer solely to the City Manager
or the Town Council, as the case might be, and he shall have sole jurisdiction over the issuance of
permits for the use of the Town's park facilities. His salary shall be as established by resolution of
the Town Council and subject to the same controls as those affecting the other department heads.
SEC. 2.3-18 BUILDING COMMISSIONER - APPOINTMENT. There is hereby
created, and continued as heretofore, the position of Building Commissioner, who shall be
appointed by the City Manager in accordance with Statutes made and provided applicable to the
managerial form of government. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-19 BUILDING COMMISSIONER - DUTIES. It shall be the duty of the
Building Commissioner to see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to buildings
and zoning and to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered, as frequently as may be
necessary to insure compliance with the Town ordinances.
SEC. 2.3-20 BUILDING COMMISSIONER - STOP ORDER. The Building
Commissioner shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair
of buildings in the Town, when such work is being done in violation of any provisions of an
ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance. Work shall not be resumed after
the issuance of such order, except on the written permission of the Commissioner, provided that if
the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such
written stop order may be served by a policeman. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-21 BUILDING INSPECTOR - PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any order of the Building Inspector shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00
for each day on which any work in violation of such stop order is done.
SEC. 2.3-22
SEC. 2.3-22 PLUMBING INSPECTOR - APPOINTMENT. There is hereby created,
and continued as heretofore, the position of Plumbing Inspector, who shall be appointed by the City
Manager in accordance with Statutes made and provided applicable to the managerial form of
municipal government. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-23 PLUMBING INSPECTOR - DUTIES. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing
Inspector to see to the enforcement of all provisions of the ordinances relating to plumbing and
plumbing equipment; and to make such inspections and perform such tests as may be necessary in
the enforcement of such ordinances.
SEC. 2.3-24 PLUMBING INSPECTOR - STOP ORDER. The Plumbing Inspector
shall have the power to order work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of plumbing
equipment when such work is being done in violation of any ordinance. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such a stop order except on written permission of the Plumbing Inspector;
provided that if the stop order is an oral one it shall be followed by a written stop order within one
hour. Such written stop order may be served by any policeman.
SEC. 2.3-25 PLUMBING INSPECTOR - PENALTY. Any person, or corporation
violating or failing to comply with any of the terms and requirements of this article shall be fined a
sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00, or be imprisoned for not to exceed six (6) months or
both such fine and such imprisonment. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall
be considered as a separate and distinct offense and shall be publishable as such.
SEC. 2.3-26 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - OFFICE CREATED. There is
hereby created the office of Director of Public Works, being a continuation of the former office of
Superintendent of Public Works. The Director shall be appointed by the City Manager. (Amended
3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-27 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - DUTIES. The Director of Public
Works is responsible for the organizing, directing and coordinating the activities of several divisions
comprising the Public Works Department including municipal engineer, problems relating to the
design, construction, and maintenance of streets, sewers, and other public works structures, the
cleaning of streets, the collection and disposal of refuse and garbage and the maintenance of
mechanical equipment and building. (Amended 3/7/72)(Amended 4/18/88)
SEC. 2.3-28 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - MOTOR FUEL TAX. All repairs,
construction or reconstruction of any and all streets and of all adjuncts and appurtenances thereto
which may be paid in whole or in part out of money received by the Town from the State of Illinois
as its share of Motor Fuel Tax shall be under the control of the Director of Public Works.
(Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-29 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR - APPOINTMENT. There is hereby created,
and continued as heretofore, the position of Electrical Inspector, who shall be appointed by the City
Manager in accordance with Statutes made and provided applicable to the managerial form of
municipal government. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-30
SEC. 2.3-30 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR - DUTIES. It shall be the duty of the
Electrical Inspector to see to the enforcement of all provisions of the ordinances relating to electrical
installations and electrical equipment and to make such inspections and perform such tests as may
be necessary in the enforcement of such ordinances.
SEC. 2.3-31 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR - STOP ORDER. The Electrical Inspector
shall have the power to order work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of electrical
equipment or installations when such work is being done in violation of any ordinance. Work shall
not be resumed after the issuance of such a stop order except on written permission of the Electrical
Inspector; provided that if the stop order is an oral one it shall be followed by a written stop order
within one hour. Such written stop order may be served by any policeman.
SEC. 2.3-32 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR - PENALTY. Any person, firm or
corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the terms and requirements of this article shall
be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00, or be imprisoned for not to exceed six (6) months
or both such fine and such imprisonment. Each day that any such violation or failure continues
shall be considered as a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
SEC. 2.3-33 LEGAL DEPARTMENT - COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATION.
All of the legal activities of the Town government are assigned to the Law Department of said
Town. The Legal Department shall consist of a licensed attorney at law to be known as the
Corporation Counsel. The Corporation Counsel shall be the responsible head of the Legal
Department with the full authority to direct the carrying on of its activities. He shall be appointed
by the City Manager, and his activities shall be authorized and supervised by the City Manager.
The Corporation Counsel shall at the time of his appointment be a practicing member of the
Bar of McLean County, Illinois, and be of good standing therein and otherwise qualified by law to
serve as legal officer of the Town. He shall devote such of his time and energies to the discharge of
his official duties as such duties may from time to time be required. The Corporation Counsel shall
be required upon conclusion of his terms of office to turn over official Town files and records to his
successor in office. (Amended 1/5/73)(Amended 3/5/80)
SEC. 2.3-34 LEGAL DEPARTMENT - SUITS AND ACTIONS. The Corporation
Counsel shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the Town
may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer
of the Town on behalf of the Town or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Town.
(Amended 3/5/80)
The Corporation Counsel may, with the approval of the City Manager, employ outside legal
counsel to attend to the legal affairs of the Town in the event that attorneys within the Legal
Department are unable to attend to such affairs due to a specialized nature of the legal matter, when
a hearing officer or attorney is required and attorneys in the department have a conflict, or when
otherwise authorized by the City Manager.
In the event the outside counsel is representing the Town, the City Manager is authorized,
on behalf of the Town, to waive such matters as necessary to enable such outside counsel to
SEC. 2.3-34(Cont.1)
represent other clients doing business or otherwise interacting with the Town on matters unrelated
to the outside counsel’s representation of the Town.
(Entire Division Amended 5/21/07 by Ord. No. 5136)
SEC. 2.3-35 LEGAL DEPARTMENT - ADVICE. The Corporation Counsel shall be the
legal advisor to the Town and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the Town
whenever requested to do so by any Town official. Upon request by the President, or the Town
Council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing.
The Corporation Counsel shall
1. advise and assist in the drafting of all Town ordinances, order, regulations, and
contracts to which the Town is expected to become a party;
2. approve all ordinances as to form before the same are submitted to the Town
Council;
3. approve all contracts before the same are signed by the proper officials;
4. be responsible for the handling of any and all legal affairs of the Town and;
5. be responsible for the prosecution of violations of Town ordinances before Courts
having jurisdiction to try such offenses and in addition, shall have such other duties
as may be assigned to him, provided that outside counsel may be hired with Council
approval for special projects. (Amended 3/5/80)
SEC. 2.3-36 LEGAL DEPARTMENT - JUDGMENTS. It shall be the duty of the
Corporation Counsel to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered
in favor of the Town and of all similar interlocutory orders. (Amended 3/5/80)
SEC. 2.3-37 LEGAL DEPARTMENT - COMPENSATION. The City Attorney shall
receive such annual salary as is provided by ordinance and the same shall apply to the Assistant City
Attorney. Additional compensation shall be paid for the usual services in the issuance and sale of
municipal securities, being bond issues, of either revenue or general obligation forms; for obtaining
of easements for the acquisition of property; and all matters pertaining to special assessments.
Expenses incurred for travel and similar incidental expenses applicable to the business of the Town
shall be reimbursed.
SEC. 2.3-38 TOWN CLERK - OFFICE CREATED. The office of the Town Clerk,
heretofore established by Ordinance as an appointive office, is hereby retained. The Clerk shall be
appointed by the City Manager, and receive such compensation as may be provided by Ordinance.
SEC. 2.3-39 TOWN CLERK - DUTIES. The Town Clerk shall be the recording officer
of the municipality and have custody of all documents, books, records and papers pertaining to the
Town or departments thereof, not specifically assigned to some other officer or department and shall
be the keeper of the official seal of said Town. The Clerk must attend all meetings of the Town
SEC. 2.3-39(Cont.1)
Council, or Board, and keep the records of the proceedings thereof, and where required, to see to the
publication of all ordinances, resolutions and notices requiring same. The Town Clerk shall be
immediately in charge of the Deputy Clerk and shall be responsible for his acts. The Clerk shall
furnish to the various departments of the State of Illinois all records and data so required or directed
by Statute to be furnished. The Clerk of said Town shall keep the Town offices open during such
hours as may be directed by the Town Council. All documents filed with the Clerk
may be evidenced by certified copies and the passage and publication of ordinances and notices
may be proved by such certificate. Said Clerk shall perform all duties prescribed by the Town
Council of said Town or by law or ordinance, under the supervision of the City Manager. The Clerk
shall not, however, be responsible for preparation of a report of estimated funds necessary to defray
the expenses of the Town for the fiscal year for the consideration of the Board of Trustees prior to
the preparation of the Annual Budget or Appropriation Ordinance. (Amended 4/3/72)(Amended
11/15/76)
SEC. 2.3-40 TOWN CLERK - INDICES. The Town Clerk shall keep and maintain a
proper index to all documents and records kept by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof
may be had.
SEC. 2.3-41 TOWN CLERK - VACANCY. In case the office of Town Clerk shall
become vacant for any reason, the City Manager shall appoint a successor. (Amended
4/3/72)(Amended 11/15/76)
SEC. 2.3-42 TOWN TREASURER - OFFICE CREATED. There is hereby created the
office of Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
receive such compensation as may be provided by ordinance. (Amended 12/3/73)
SEC. 2.3-43 TOWN TREASURER - EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR. The Town
Treasurer shall be ex officio collector and shall perform all duties of that office.
SEC. 2.3-44 TOWN TREASURER - GENERAL DUTIES. The Town Treasurer shall
perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by Statute or ordinance, and shall perform such
other duties and functions as assigned by him by the Town Council or the City Manager. It shall be
the duty of the Town Treasurer to see to the accounting, bookkeeping and collection of funds; to
make preparations for the disbursing of revenue; to receive all money paid in to the Town, whether
directed from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer or employee as
may receive it; to pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the President and
Town Clerk; to supply the Town Clerk and the Town Council and all other officers of said Town all
data pertaining to the Town's finances when so requested; to be responsible for the maintenance of
records of the Water and Sewer Department and to be responsible for the preparation and collection
of water and sewer charges. The Town Treasurer shall not retain any fees or other stipends received
from the performance of his duties, but the same shall become the property of the Town.
SEC. 2.3-45 TOWN TREASURER - DEPOSIT OF FUNDS IN DESIGNATED
DEPOSITORIES. The following financial institutions are designated depositories of and for the
Town of Normal Funds:
Busey Bank (Added 8/16/93)
SEC. 2.3-45(Cont.1)
Central Illinois Bank of McLean County (Added 8/16/93)
Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service Program (CDARS) – Any participating
bank as determined by the Finance Director (Added 10/6/08)
Chase Bank (Added 10/17/88)(Amended 3/16/92)(Amended 2/5/07)
Commerce Bank (Added 10/17/88)(Amended 3/20/95)
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (Added 5/1/89)
First State Bank of Bloomington (Amended 3/16/92)(Amended 8/16/93)
First Tennessee Bank (Added 1/5/04)
Freestar Bank (Added 10/16/95)(Amended 2/5/07)
Heartland Bank & Trust Co. (Added 8/16/93)
Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund (Added 10/20/97)
LaSalle National Bank (Added 7/21/86)(Amended 3/16/92)
Main Street Bank (Amended 3/16/92)(Amended 2/5/07)
Northern Trust Company of Chicago (Added 3/2/87)
PNC Bank (Added 1/19/99)(Amended 5/3/10)
Regions Bank (Added 1/19/99)(Renamed 3/21/05)
Soy Capital Bank and Trust Company (Added 3/21/05)
State Farm Bank, F.S.B. (Added 11/17/03)
The Illinois Funds (Added 8/6/97)
US Bank (Added 8/7/00)(Amended 5/6/02)
Depositories herein designated shall, at all times, comply with the laws of the State of
Illinois with reference to the requirements of depositories and shall promptly furnish such
statements to the Town of Normal as are required by State Law. (Amended 3/7/72)(Amended
8/7/78)
SEC. 2.3-46 TOWN TREASURER - RECORDS. He shall keep records showing all
money received by him, showing the source from which it is received and purpose for which it is
paid and he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the Town.
SEC. 2.3-47 TOWN TREASURER - ACCOUNTING. The Treasurer shall keep such
books and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance, and he shall keep them in the
manner required by the Board of Trustees.
SEC. 2.3-48 TOWN TREASURER - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND. All moneys
received on any special assessment shall be held by the Treasurer as a special fund to be applied
only to the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefore, together with interest thereon, for
which the assessment was made and said money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to
reimburse the Town for money expended for such improvements. Payment on bonds or vouchers
shall be in accordance with the statutes and the laws and the Treasurer shall keep his books and
accounts in such a manner so that proper appropriation in payments in principal and interest can be
made and ascertained.
SEC. 2.3-49 TOWN TREASURER - WARRANTS AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
All warrants drawn on the Treasurer must be signed by the President and countersigned by the
Clerk, stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and the person to
SEC. 2.3-49(Cont.1)
whom payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid except as may be provided by statute. Money
shall not be transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another, after it has been collected or paid,
except as may be ordered by the President and Board of Trustees or except in the manner and form
prescribed by statutes. The Town Treasurer, or his designated agent, may electronically transfer
Town funds either for investment purposes, or for the payment of Town debts, or for any other
usual and customary purpose provided such electronic transfer of funds is approved by the Clerk,
the Clerk's designee, or President of the Board of Trustees. Such transfer shall be reported monthly
to the President and Board of Trustees for authorization or ratification. In the absence of the Clerk
or Deputy Clerk, the City Manager or Assistant City Manager may also authorize the electronic
transfer of funds. (Amended 2/21/94 by Ord. No. 4208)(Amended 2/16/98 by Ord. No.
4494)(Amended 2/21/05 by Ord. No. 4996)
SEC. 2.3-50 CHIEF OF POLICE - OFFICE CREATED. There is hereby created the
office of the Chief of Police for the Town of Normal, Illinois.
SEC. 2.3-51 CHIEF OF POLICE - APPOINTMENT. The Chief shall be appointed by
the City Manager; provided that if the person appointed Chief was at the time of such promotion a
member of the Department, he shall retain his status and rank while serving as Chief and shall revert
to such status and rank when his term as Chief has ended. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 2.3-52 CHIEF OF POLICE - DUTIES. The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of
the Town Jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records
and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or
by the Town Council. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police Department
of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve subject to the
order of the Chief of Police.
SEC. 2.3-53 CHIEF OF POLICE - RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Chief of
Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations not inconsistent with rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners as he shall deem advisable; such rules
when approved by the Town Council shall be binding upon such members. Such rules and
regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment being worn or
carried, hours of service, vacations all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency
of the Department.
SEC. 2.3-54 HEALTH INSPECTOR - OFFICE CREATED. There is hereby created
the office of Health Inspector for the Town of Normal. The Chief of Police shall serve as ex officio
Health Inspector.
SEC. 2.3-55 HEALTH INSPECTOR - DUTIES. The Health Inspector shall enforce all
ordinances containing provisions for the protection of public health; he shall make inspections of
food stuffs and of the premises used for storing or selling of food stuffs; he shall enforce all
provisions as may be provided by ordinance; he shall perform such other duties and functions as is
required by statute or ordinance.
SEC. 2.3-56
SEC. 2.3-56 HEALTH INSPECTOR - REPORT. The Health Inspector shall make such
reports to the Board of Trustees as may be required. He shall also make recommendations for
rulings, orders or ordinances respecting the public health whenever he is requested to do so or
whenever he deems it advisable or necessary.
SEC. 2.3-57 HEALTH INSPECTOR - COMPENSATION. No additional
compensation shall be paid the Chief of Police for his duties as Health Inspector for the Town of
Normal.
SEC. 2.3-58 TOWN ENGINEER.
A. Appointment and qualifications. There is hereby created and continued as
heretofore the office of Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall be appointed by
the City Manager and shall be a licensed professional engineer in the State of
Illinois.
B. Duties. The Town Engineer shall be under the supervision of the City Manager and
shall be responsible for all engineering questions and duties of the Town assigned to
him. The Town Engineer shall attend meetings of the corporate authorities and give
opinions, verbal and written, when requested. He shall also be the engineer for the
Board of Local Improvements and shall attend all meetings of said Board. The
Engineer shall be responsible for field inspection for all new construction except as
specifically excluded by the Board of Trustees. (SEC. 2.3-58 added
1/2/73)(Renumbering revised 12/3/73)(Amended 2/7/78, Eff. 4/1/78)(Amended
4/18/88)
SEC. 2.3-59 INFORMATION SERVICES.
A. Appointment. There is hereby created and continued as heretofore, the position of
Director of Information Services, who shall be appointed by the City Manager in
accordance with Illinois law and Town ordinances applicable to the managerial form
of government.
B. Duties. The Director of Information Services shall be under the supervision of the
City Manager and shall be responsible for information storage, processing, and
retrieval as those duties are assigned from time to time by the City Manager.
(SEC. 2.3-59 added 3/17/97 by Ord. No. 4445)
SEC. 2.3-60 DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
A. Appointment. There is hereby created and continued as heretofore, the position of
Director of Human Resources, who shall be appointed by the City Manager in
accordance with Illinois law and Town ordinances applicable to the managerial form
of government.
B. Duties. The Director of Human Resources shall be under the supervision of the City
Manager and shall be responsible for providing a comprehensive human resources
management system as those duties are assigned and delineated from time to time by
the City Manager. (SEC. 2.3-60 added 3/17/97 by Ord. No. 4445)
SEC. 3.1-1
CHAPTER 3 - COUNCIL MEETINGS AND ORDINANCES
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 3.1-1 MEETINGS OF THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
A. Regular Meetings. The Town Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first and
third Monday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) p.m., provided however if the
meeting date shall fall on a legal holiday or on the day of a Municipal Election in the
Town, the Council shall meet on the day following at seven o'clock (7:00) p.m.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Normal City Hall Building or in
such other location as provided by the Town Council.
B. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the President or any three
Trustees upon at least twenty-four (24) hours notice, in writing, to all members of
the Council or by an announcement of the time and place of the special meeting at a
regular, special or adjourned meeting.
C. Workshop or Study Meetings. Workshop or study meetings at which no final action
of the corporate authority can be taken may be called by the President or any three
Trustees by an announcement of the time and place of such workshop or study
meeting made at any regular, special or adjourned regular or special meeting of the
Council, or by at least twenty-four (24) hours notice in writing to all members of the
Council.
D. Meetings Open to the Public. All regular, special, adjourned, study or workshop
meetings of the Town Council shall be open to the public, except in those instances
where closed or executive sessions may be lawfully held.
E. Public Notice. Public notice of all meetings of the Town Council shall be made as
provided by law.
(Entire SEC. 3.1-1 Amended 1/6/86)
SEC. 3.1-2 RULES OF PROCEDURE. Except as otherwise provided in this Division,
all meetings of the President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal shall hereafter be
conducted pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, 9th, 1990 Edition, published by
Scott, Foresman and Company, copies of which have been and remain on file in the office of the
Town Clerk. (Amended 12/1/75)(Amended 11/17/97 by Ord. No. 4481)
SEC. 3.1-3 QUORUM. A majority of the Trustees authorized to hold office or three
Trustees and the Town President shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
(Amended 12/1/75)
SEC. 3.1-4
SEC. 3.1-4 AGENDA.
A. Material to be Considered. No item shall be added to the agenda of a regularly
scheduled Council meeting less than one (1) week before the meeting date. No
documents will be considered in connection with any item appearing on the agenda
unless those documents are given to the City Manager at least one week immediately
preceding such meeting. The Council, by majority vote of those present at any
meeting may waive this requirement and consider items not on the agenda or may
receive materials not previously made available.
B. Order of Agenda. The order in which business is presented to the Council at
Regular, Special or Adjourned Regular or Special Meetings is as follows:
1. Call to Order
2. Roll Call
3. Pledge of Allegiance
4. Omnibus Vote Agenda
5. Items Removed from Omnibus Vote Agenda
6. General Orders
7. New Business
8. Concerns
9. Adjournment
(Amended 12/1/75)(Amended 4/5/76)(Amended 5/2/88)
C. Omnibus Vote Agenda. The City Manager of the Town of Normal, in preparing the
Agenda for Council Meetings may include regular, recurring or routine matters
under the heading "Omnibus Vote Agenda." No item requiring more than a simple
majority vote shall be placed on an omnibus vote agenda. In the City Manager's
Report distributed with the Agenda, the Manager shall recommend a specific action
with respect to each item on the omnibus vote agenda. The President or any
member of the Board of Trustees may remove any number of items from the
omnibus vote agenda by making such a request to the Chair. Upon such a request,
the item shall be removed from the omnibus vote agenda and shall be considered,
debated and voted upon prior to consideration of items listed as General Orders.
The action recommended by the Manager with respect to all items remaining on the
omnibus vote agenda may be taken by a single motion made, seconded and
unanimously adopted by roll call vote of those members present. In the minutes of
the meeting, the Clerk shall record the action taken for each item acted upon as part
of the omnibus vote agenda, and enter the words "omnibus vote" in lieu of entering
the names of the members of the Board of Trustees voting "yea" and of those voting
"nay." The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words
"omnibus vote" in the minutes shall in all intents and purposes and with the like
effect be as if the vote in each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays and
separately recorded in the journal. (Amended 4/5/76)(Amended 5/2/88)
SEC. 3.1-5
SEC. 3.1-5 PRESIDING OFFICER. In the absence of the President, the President pro
tem, if one has been appointed, shall be the presiding officer. In the absence of the President and
the President pro tem, the members of the Board of Trustees present having the longest continuous
prior service as Trustee immediately preceding the meeting at which the President and President pro
tem are absent shall be the presiding officer. (Amended 12/1/75)
SEC. 3.1-6 PROCEDURAL RULES.
A. Regular, Special or Adjourned Meetings.
1. Reading of Items. It shall not be necessary to read any item of business,
including but not limited to minutes, bills, resolutions or ordinances before
action by the corporate authority, if such items of business have been
distributed in written or printed form to the members voting on the item
before the vote thereon is taken. The reading of items not so distributed may
be waived by a majority vote of those present. A vote on an item shall be
prima facia proof that the provisions of this Section have been complied with
fully and completely.
2. Role of the Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall chair all meetings
of the Council and shall be entitled to vote last on all ordinances, resolutions
or motions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presiding officer shall be
entitled to take part in discussions of matters pending and unresolved before
the Council.
3. Parliamentarian. The Corporation Counsel, or in the absence of the
Corporation Counsel, the presiding officer, shall be the parliamentarian. The
President or any Trustee may appeal a ruling of the presiding officer to the
parliamentarian. The President or any Trustee may appeal the ruling of the
parliamentarian to the entire Council, as an appeal of a ruling of the Chair.
4. Votes. Every member present when a question is put shall vote either "aye"
or "nay" unless a member has an interest in the matter under consideration
which would constitute a conflict of interest. In such a case, the member
may request to be excused from voting. Such a request shall be made prior
to any discussion on the item for which the request is made. Any person
excused from voting shall not take part in the discussion of the item before
the Council. Passed votes, abstentions or similar actions or silence of a
member present and not excused shall be counted with the majority of those
votes cast.
SEC. 3.1-6(Cont.1)
5. Workshop or Study Meetings. Workshop or study meetings are intended to
be informal information gathering sessions. For that reason, no formal rules
of procedure are established. However, at any point in a workshop or study
meeting, a majority of those members of the Council present may request
that the rules of order for regular or special meetings, to the extent that they
are applicable to a meeting at which no final action of the corporate authority
can be taken, shall be in effect. (Amended 12/1/75)
SEC. 3.2-1
DIVISION 2 - ORDINANCES
SEC. 3.2-1 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES - EFFECTIVE DATES. All
Ordinances of the Town imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any
appropriation shall (1) be printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the Town
Council, or (2) be published at least once, within ten days after passage, in one or more newspapers
published within the Town. No such ordinance shall take effect until it is so published.
Except when otherwise required by the laws of the State and except local improvement
Ordinances, and except an Ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or
safety, which contains a statement of its urgency and is passed by a vote of at least four members of
the Council, no Ordinance passed by the Council shall go into effect until ten days from the time of
its passage and or publication, where publication is so required. (Amended 6/4/73)
SEC. 3.2-2 RECORD AND MEMORANDUM OF ORDINANCES REQUIRED. The
Town Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all Ordinances passed by the
City Council. Immediately following each Ordinance, the Town Clerk shall make a memorandum
of the date of the passage and the publication, where required, of the Ordinance.
SEC. 3.2-3 RECORD AND MEMORANDUM OF ORDINANCES REQUIRED, TO
BE PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF CONTENTS, ETC. The record and memorandum
required by the preceding Section, or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and of the publication or posting of Ordinance.
SEC. 3.2-4 PROOF OF ORDINANCES. The contents of all Town Ordinances, the date
of passage and the date of publication or posting, where required, may be proved by the certificate
of the Town Clerk, under the seal of the Town.
Whenever Town ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and purport to be
published by authority of the Town Council, such book or pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of
the contents, passage and legal publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in such
book or pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals.
SEC. 3.2-5 ORDINANCE TO BE SIGNED. All ordinances passed by the Town Council
must be signed by the President and Town Clerk before recording.
SEC. 3.2-6 PRICE AND COST OF ORDINANCES PRINTED IN BOOK, ETC.
FORM. Printed copies containing this Code and any ordinance imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment, or forfeiture or making any appropriation which may be printed in book or pamphlet
form, published by authority of the Town Council shall, so long as such books or pamphlets are in
supply, be available for distribution to the public.
The City Manager may impose a reasonable price commensurate with the cost of the
printing thereof for the distribution of such book or pamphlet to the public. (Amended 6/2/72)
SEC. 3.2-7
SEC. 3.2-7 EFFECT OF REPEAL OR REPEALING ORDINANCE. When any
ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall
not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so
expressly provided.
SEC. 4.1
CHAPTER 4 - LIQUOR
SEC. 4.1 PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide administration for
licenses and permits and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor for the general welfare of this community.
SEC. 4.2 DEFINITIONS. The following terms in this Article shall be construed
according to the definitions given below:
A. Alcoholic Liquor. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquor containing more than
one-half of 1% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage purposes.
B. Applicant. Any person seeking to obtain a license pursuant to this Chapter 4 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
C. Beer. Beer means the beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any
infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.
D. Brewpub. Brewpub means a person who manufactures beer only at a designated
premises to make sales to importing distributors, distributors and to non-licensees
for use and consumption only, who stores beer at the designated premises, and who
is allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises, provided that a brewpub
licensee shall not sell for off-premise consumption more than 50,000 gallons per
year. (Added by Ord. No. 5065 on April 3, 2006)
E. Cash Bar. A cash bar is any place in which alcohol is sold either on a per drink basis
or any other means by which the consumer of alcohol is charged for the
consumption or the privilege of consuming alcohol.
F. Catering Service. Catering service is the serving, mixing, pouring or supplying of
alcoholic beverages for compensation as an incidental part of a food service that
serves prepared meals (excluding snacks as a primary meal) other than at a licensed
liquor establishment, and excluding a Cash Bar.
G. Church. Any building where regular public worship is held or those functions and
facilities normally associated with a church are conducted or available.
H. Club. An association recognized by the laws of this State as a not for pecuniary
profit institution, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for
the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their
guests and seating space to accommodate a minimum of 75 persons.
SEC. 4.2(Cont.1)
I. Drive-Up Window. A drive-up window shall mean any window, door, or other
structure or device which allows for the sale delivery of alcoholic liquor to a vehicle
without the driver being required to exit the vehicle. (Added 9/7/04 - Ord. No. 4965)
J. Hotel. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for
adequate pay to travelers and guests, in which 35 or more rooms are used for
sleeping accommodations of such guests. This definition of “hotel” includes motels
and motor hotels.
K. Keg. A cask, barrel, or container having a capacity of more than four gallons.
L. Minors. Minors are any persons under 21 years of age.
M. Occupancy Capacity. The number of persons permitted to be in an area as
determined by the Fire and Building Codes of the Town of Normal.
N. Original Package. A bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, or other receptacle or
container whatsoever used, corked, or capped, sealed, and labeled by the
manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
O. Person. Person is any natural person, partnership, corporation, association,
organization, trust or other entity.
P. Private Employee Party. An assembly of persons at a licensed retail establishment
composed solely of employees of said establishment and spouses of employees or in
lieu of a spouse, one guest, at which alcoholic liquor permitted to be sold during
regular hours, may be consumed, possessed or made available, but not sold.
Q. Private Rental Party. An assembly of persons at a licensed retail establishment at a
time when that area of the establishment is not open to the public, and is limited to
invited guests of the individual or entity sponsoring the party.
R. Retail Sale. The sale for the use or consumption not for resale.
S. Restaurant. Any public place which is kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are sold and served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served to the public and where the sale of liquor is incidental
to the principal purpose of the sale of food. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No.
4942)(Amended 2/6/2017 by Ord. No. 5679)
T. Sale. Sale means a transfer, exchange or barter in any manner by any means
whatsoever for a consideration and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal proprietor, agent, servant, or employee. Sale includes to
keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
SEC. 4.2(Cont.2)
U. Set-Up Establishment. A set-up establishment means any public or private place or
person
1. not holding a liquor license pursuant to this ordinance, in a place open to the
public, which sells, gives away, pours, stores, or otherwise dispenses liquor
or provides mix, ice, water, or soft drinks for the purpose of consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises, or
2. which holds a liquor license and, after the hours which it is permitted to be in
operation, engages in any of the activities in the immediately preceding
subsection.
V. Wine. “Wine” means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as defined in “An Act Relating to
Alcoholic Liquors” approved January 31, 1934, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
W. Wine Tasting. An event in which wine, beer or other alcoholic liquor is served in
small quantities for consumption on the premises as a sample of product being sold
by a license holder. Wine tastings may be for free, for a fixed price for any quantity
consumed, or sold by the drink.
SEC. 4.3 PROHIBITIONS.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or keep for sale, or possess for sale, alcoholic liquor
or beer, except under the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated
within this Chapter and the laws of the State of Illinois. A license issued by the
Normal Local Liquor Commissioner shall be required prior to the sale of alcoholic
liquor within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal in accordance with the
terms of this Chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a catering service in the Town of
Normal without first obtaining a license pursuant to the Municipal Code of the Town
of Normal.
C. It shall be unlawful to operate a set-up establishment in the Town of Normal, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to act as an agent, barkeeper, clerk, or servant of
another for a set-up establishment.
D. No person may operate any establishment in a manner other than consistent with
documents submitted in application for the liquor license and the license issued by
the Commissioner. The sale of alcoholic liquor at locations in licensed
establishments except as approved by the Liquor Commissioner is prohibited.
E. No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of
such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age
SEC. 4.3(Cont.1)
of twenty-one (21) years or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him
to be a habitual drunkard.
F. Except during approved private employee parties, it shall be unlawful for any
licensee to permit or allow any bottle, glass, cup, pitcher, tumbler, or other container
of or containing alcoholic liquor to remain in the possession of any customer or at
any location accessible to customers before or after the hours during which the sale
of such alcoholic liquor is permitted.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age to represent that he or she is of lawful age for the
purposes of buying, accepting, or receiving alcoholic liquor from a licensee.
H. No individual, partnership or corporation shall give away any alcoholic liquor for
commercial purposes or in connection with the sale of non-alcoholic products or to
promote the sale of non-alcoholic products.
I. No licensee shall give or offer to give away, alcoholic liquor in connection with the
sale of non-alcoholic products or to promote the sale of non-alcoholic products.
However, nothing in this section shall prevent a licensee from giving away alcoholic
liquor in connection with the sale of a hotel room.
J. No licensee shall give or offer to give away any alcoholic liquor in connection with
any drawing or game of chance, nor shall any licensee in connection with any
drawing or game of chance sell or offer to sell alcoholic liquor at less than the
customary retail value of such alcoholic liquor.
K. Except as provided in SEC. 4.10 (L), it shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder
to permit or allow anyone to commit gambling in a licensed establishment.
Gambling as used herein is defined in the same manner the term is used and defined
in the Illinois Criminal Code, as amended (720 ILCS 5/28). Notwithstanding the
foregoing, it shall remain unlawful in a licensed establishment to possess an antique
slot machine, to engage in charitable games, to engage in the game commonly
known as “bingo,” and to engage in pull tabs or jar games, even though such
activities may be exempted from the definition of gambling in the state statute.
(Amended 3/20/06 by Ord. No. 5063)
L. No person holding a distributor’s license from the State of Illinois shall use his
equipment to deliver alcoholic liquor, except to persons holding a license pursuant to
this Chapter for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor.
M. No person shall possess or consume alcohol in a licensed establishment unless that
person has in his or her possession an authentic photo identification such as an
Illinois Driver’s License or Identification Card showing the person to be at least 21
years of age or older.
SEC. 4.3(Cont.2)
N. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall consume alcoholic liquor while on duty
at a licensed establishment, nor shall any licensee or employee of a licensee perform
work at a licensed establishment while under the influence of alcohol. The
foregoing shall not prohibit, however, a licensee or an employee of a licensee at a
brewpub from customary sampling of beer during the brewing, fermentation and
conditioning procedures and for other quality control tests provided such licensee or
employee is not under the influence of alcohol. (Added 4/19/04 by Ord. No.
4942)(Amended 4/3/06 by Ord. No. 5065)
O. It is unlawful for any licensee, or any employee or agent of a licensee, to sell or
serve alcoholic liquor at a drive-up window.
(Amended 08/05/19 by Ord. No. 5791) (Added 9/7/04 by Ord. No. 4965)
(SEC. 4.3 Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5250, Effective August 1, 2009)
SEC. 4.3.3 CURBSIDE PICKUP AND DELIVERIES.
A. No Licensee may deliver or serve alcoholic liquor for off-premises consumption
outside of the interior of the licensed premises except as provided in this Section
4.3.3.
B. The holder of a Class A license may assist customers in placing alcoholic liquor
inside of their vehicle after the alcoholic liquor has been purchased inside a
licensed establishment.
C. The holder of a Class A license with a licensed premises of 10,000 square feet or
more may allow online purchases of alcoholic liquor and curbside pickup of those
purchases if all of the following requirements are met:
1. The licensee has registered its curbside-pickup service with the Town in
the form and manner required by the Town Clerk.
2. The licensee’s employee or agent making the curbside delivery has
completed all BASSET training required for making deliveries of
alcoholic liquor under the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
3. The licensee’s employee or agent making the curbside delivery is at least
21 years of age.
4. The licensee may not take an online order for alcoholic liquor from any
person that reasonably knows to be less than 21 years of age. The licensee
must have reasonable processes in place to ensure that persons under the
age of 21 are not allowed to place online orders for alcoholic liquor.
5. The licensee’s employee or agent making the curbside delivery must
verify that the person to whom the delivery is made is 21 years or older.
SEC. 4.3.3(Cont.1)
6. Curbside delivery made not be made to any person who is intoxicated.
Curbside delivery may not be made to a vehicle if any occupant of that
vehicle is intoxicated.
7. The curbside delivery must occur on the licensed premises. It may not
occur on any public right of way.
8. The curbside delivery may not occur outside of the hours where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is authorized for a Class A license.
D. The holder of a Class A license with a licensed premises of 10,000 square feet or
more may allow online purchases of alcoholic liquor and delivery of those
purchases if all of the following requirements are met:
1. The licensee has registered its delivery service with the Town in the form
and manner required by the Town Clerk.
2. The licensee’s employee or agent making the delivery has completed all
BASSET training required for making deliveries of alcoholic liquor under
the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
3. The licensee’s employee or agent making the delivery is at least 21 years
of age.
4. The licensee may not take an online order for alcoholic liquor from any
person that reasonably knows to be less than 21 years of age. The licensee
must have reasonable processes in place to ensure that persons under the
age of 21 are not allowed to place online orders for alcoholic liquor.
5. The licensee’s employee or agent making the delivery must verify that the
person to whom the delivery is made is 21 years or older. The employee
agent making the delivery must require identification, proof of age and the
signature of the individual to whom delivery is made. The licensee must
maintain a record of all deliveries, which must include the name of the
delivery driver, name of the purchaser, the address where delivery was
made, the name, date of birth, and signature of the person to whom
delivery was made, and a list of all alcoholic liquor items delivered. The
licensee must retain the delivery record for at least 6 months and must
make the record available for examination and copying immediately upon
request by the Town of Normal Police Department or the Local Liquor
Commissioner.
6. Delivery made not be made to any person who is intoxicated.
7. The delivery may not occur outside of the hours where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is authorized for a Class A license in the Town of
Normal.
SEC. 4.3.3(Cont.2)
E. Any violation of this Section is a violation of the conditions of the licensee’s
Class A license. In addition to any other penalty under Section 4.18, the Local
Liquor Commissioner may suspend or revoke the licensee’s authority to provide
curbside pickup or delivery under this subsections (C) or (D) of this Section. Any
such revocation or suspension must be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 4.18.
F. A retailer that is licensed by the City of Bloomington to sell and deliver alcoholic
liquor may make deliveries to locations in the Town of Normal if the retailer
meets all requirements of subsection (D) of this Section, with the exception that
the retailer must hold a “Class A” liquor license; instead, the retailer must hold a
Bloomington license that permits off-premises consumption. The delivery under
this subsection (F) may occur:
1. Through October 1, 2019; and
2. After October 1, 2019 if (i) the City of Bloomington has adopted
regulations to allow the delivery of alcoholic liquor by licensees of the
Town of Normal to locations in the City of Bloomington and (ii) the City
of Bloomington has adopted regulations to provide that a violation of
subsection (D) of this Section is a violation of the retailer’s license.
G. If the City of Bloomington has adopted regulations to allow the delivery of
alcoholic liquor by licensees of the Town of Normal to locations in the City of
Bloomington, then it is a violation of the licensee’s Class A license if it makes a
delivery to a location in the City of Bloomington in contravention of any
regulation of the City of Bloomington regarding delivery.
H. The restrictions of subsection D do not apply to alcoholic liquor that is shipped
through the US Mail or any interstate freight shipping company.
(SEC 4.3.3 Added 08/05/19 by Ord. No. 5791 effective August 15, 2019)
SEC. 4.3.5 RESTAURANT REQUIREMENTS.
A. The availability of food in licensed establishments promotes moderation by
encouraging people to eat while they drink — or better yet, to view alcohol
consumption as a complement to a meal. The distinction is not an insignificant
one. Consumption of food lessens the intoxicating effects of liquor. Just as
important, though, is encouraging a public attitude in which liquor is seen as an
accompaniment to food, rather than an activity that is indulged in for its own sake.
The requirements of this Section apply to all holders of Restaurant licenses.
B. A restaurant must keep its kitchen open and be serving meals from 5:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. on any day the restaurant is open for business and at all times between 11:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. when alcohol is being served.
SEC. 4.3.5(Cont.1)
C. A Restaurant must make available to its patrons in all areas where alcohol service is
available an offering of at least five different meals during a regular meal period,
which must last at least three hours. At least three out of the five different meals
used to meet the minimum meal requirement must include a main course or entrée
(substantial food item) that has been prepared or cooked on the premises in some
manner beyond the simple re-heating of a pre-cooked frozen food or carry-out item
obtained from a business other than the licensed premises. A business may have
fewer than five different meals in the premises or in an area if the Commissioner
determines that the clearly dominant emphasis in the premises or in the area is food
service after 5:00 pm.
D. At all times other than required meal periods and in all areas where alcohol service is
available, businesses must make available to their patrons an offering of at least five
different substantial food items.
E. Dining Seats during Required Meal Periods: The licensed premises must have at
least 30 dining seats during required meal periods. Seats at counters in entertainment
areas and at bars do not qualify as dining seating. A premises may have less than 30
dining seats if the Commissioner determines that the clearly dominant emphasis of
the premises is food service at all times and in all areas where alcohol service is
available when open to the public.
F. A restaurant must contain a kitchen that has adequate operating equipment and staff
to meet the food service requirements under subsection C. A kitchen is deemed to
have adequate equipment if it contains all of the following fully operational
equipment:
1. A commercial-grade grill or range.
2. A commercial-grade oven.
3. A range hood.
4. A commercial-grade deep fryer.
G. The Commissioner may grant an exception from any of the requirements under
subsections C, D, E, and F if the Commissioner determines that the clearly dominant
emphasis in the premises is food service. If the Commissioner grants an exemption
under this subsection and it is later determined that the clearly dominant emphasis in
the premises is not food service, then the licensee is in violation of this Section and
is subject to revocation, suspension, or other penalty for violations under this
Chapter.
H. Each Restaurant licensee must keep a record of all food items sold such that a
determination that the restaurant is serving meals regularly can be made.
I. Definitions. As used in this SEC. 4.3.5:
Substantial food items means food items prepared or cooked on the licensed
premises and that are typically served as a main course or entrée. Some examples
SEC. 4.3.5(Cont.2)
could include but are not limited to items such as fish, steak, chicken, pasta, pizza,
sandwiches, dinner salads, hot dogs, soup, and sausages. Side dishes, appetizer
items, dessert items, and snack items such as popcorn, peanuts, chips and crackers
do not qualify as substantial food items.
Meal means a substantial food item offered together with at least one side dish or a
substantial food item with two or more side dishes available to order separately. Side
dishes include but are not limited to vegetables, fruit, salad, rice, french fries and
bread.
Different means substantial food items that the Commissioner determines differ in
their primary ingredients or method of preparation. For example, a turkey sandwich
differs from a salami sandwich, a beef burger differs from a turkey burger, a
pepperoni pizza differs from a cheese pizza, and fried chicken differs from baked
chicken. Different sizes of the same item are not considered different under this rule.
For example, a large cheese pizza is not different from a small cheese pizza and a
large hot dog is not different from a small hot dog.
Dining seats means seating at indoor tables or food counters located in areas of the
licensed premises regularly open to the public where the Commissioner determines
that each table top or seating area provides a minimum space that will accommodate
a place setting consisting of a plate or dish, glassware, napkin and utensils for each
seat.
(Entire SEC. 4.3.5 Added 2/6/2017 by Ord. No. 5679)
SEC. 4.4 NORMAL LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSION AND COMMISSIONER.
A. Commissioner. The President is the Normal Local Liquor Commissioner (referred
throughout this Chapter as Commissioner), and his duties, powers, and functions are
set forth in this Chapter.
B. The Commissioner may appoint other persons to assist him in the exercise of the
powers and performance of the duties herein provided for such Local Liquor
Commissioner. In the event that the President makes such an appointment, the
parties so named shall be considered to be the Normal Local Liquor Commission
and shall act by majority vote, which act shall be an aide to the Commissioner and
used by him as such in performing his administrative powers, functions, and duties.
In all other respects, where action of the Commission is not contrary to state statute,
the President and members of the Commission shall constitute one body acting by
majority vote.
C. The Chairman of the Commission shall be the Commissioner, and in his absence the
Chairman of the Commission shall be determined as set forth in SEC. 3.1-5 of this
Code. Members of the Commission shall not be paid. Any expense incurred by the
Commission may be paid from the Town general fund from monies budgeted to
SEC. 4.4(Cont.1)
Boards and Commissions in the manner prescribed by administrative regulation
upon presentation of the bill to the Town Clerk.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Commissioner or at
such times as the Chairman of the Commission may determine. Anything to the
contrary, notwithstanding, the Commission shall meet at a time determined by the
Commissioner on the third Monday of January, March, July, and October of each
calendar year for the regularly scheduled meetings.
D. Powers of The Local Liquor Commissioner. The Local Liquor Commissioner shall
have the following powers, functions and duties:
1. To receive applications, investigate applicants and grant or renew Liquor
Licenses.
2. To receive complaints from any citizen within its jurisdiction that any of the
provisions of this Code have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in a manner hereinafter provided.
3. To authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this Chapter have been or are being violated and at such time to examine
such premises of said licensee, including books and records in connection
therewith.
4. In response to complaints or upon reports from an investigating agent of the
Commissioner to conduct hearings on alleged violations of this Chapter and
to examine or cause to be examined under oath complaints, license holders,
and other interested parties. Furthermore, the Commissioner may examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any licensee under this
Chapter and may hear testimony and take proof as to the performance of the
licensee’s duties and for such purposes may issue subpoenas. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Commissioner
under this Chapter, he may authorize the Commission to act on his behalf.
For the purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this Chapter,
the Commissioner may, at his discretion or at the request of one or more
members of the Commission, hold public hearings at any time within the
Town concerning any matter embraced within this Chapter.
5. To issue written reprimands to license holders, to fine license holders, and/or
to suspend or revoke any liquor license(s) in the manner provided herein for
any of the following reasons:
a. That the licensee has violated any of the laws of the United States
relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor or any of the provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, or of this Chapter, or any applicable
SEC. 4.4(Cont.2)
rules and regulations adopted by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or by the State Commission, or has violated any
Town ordinance, State or Federal law.
b. The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the
application for such license or in any change of ownership
application or request or affidavit for the renewal of any license.
Making a false statement shall include not making a complete
statement of all relevant facts which relate to the situation.
c. The permitting of any violation of state law or Normal Municipal
Code by any person upon the licensed premises.
d. Failure to use and maintain the licensed premises in compliance with
all codes and regulations pertaining to health and safety applicable
within the Town of Normal, including but not limited to Building,
Plumbing, Electrical, and Fire Codes, Zoning Ordinances, McLean
County Health Ordinances, and all regulations and orders of the
McLean County Health Department.
e. The refusal of any licensee to testify under oath to all relevant and
material questions propounded to him at any hearing conducted by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
f. Suspension or revocation of the license of the licensee by the State
Commission.
g. Permitting any illegal gambling device or equipment to be located on
the licensed premises. (Amended 11/19/2012 by Ord. No. 5462)
h. Failure to adhere to any changes or requirements imposed as a
condition of being issued a license by the Liquor Commissioner.
6. To cause the initiation of legal proceedings under the penalty provisions
hereof.
7. To notify the Illinois Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not For Profit Corporation Act (805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.) or a
foreign corporation functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of
authority issued under that Act has violated the Illinois Liquor Control Act
or Chapter 4 of this Code by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic
liquors without a retailer’s license.
8. Following submission to and review by the Liquor Commission, the Liquor
Commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this Chapter, which shall be necessary to carry on his functions
and duties to the end that the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the
SEC. 4.4(Cont.3)
Town of Normal shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of
alcoholic liquor shall be fostered and promoted, and to distribute copies of
such rules and regulations to all licenses affected thereby.
9. To take any and all action necessary and incidental to the furtherance of his
duties and functions, as set forth in this Chapter.
10. To issue temporary emergency orders regulating, restricting, or prohibiting
the sale of alcoholic liquor in all or a part of the Town of Normal whenever
an emergency exists or is reasonably anticipated. Prior to issuing an
emergency order, the Liquor Commissioner shall execute a finding
describing the nature and extent of the emergency or the reasonably
anticipated emergency. Any emergency order issued pursuant to such
finding shall be reasonably related to the protection of property from damage
or destruction, the protection of persons from injury, the promotion of
temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor, or otherwise rationally
related to the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
Normal. Emergency orders shall be effective from the time of issuance for a
period not to exceed 48 hours. The order shall be publicly disseminated,
delivered to affected licensees, and filed with the Town Clerk. No person
shall disobey an emergency order. (Subsection 10 Added 3/21/2011 by Ord.
No. 5376)
E. Liquor Commission Secretary. The Town Clerk shall be the secretary to and shall
keep for the Commissioner a complete record of all licenses issued by the
Commissioner under this Chapter, minutes of meetings and hearings held by or
under the direction of the Commissioner, and shall cause to be deposited all receipts
and shall perform such other duties as Secretary to the Commission as determined
by the Commissioner.
SEC. 4.5 APPLICATIONS.
A. Applications for license shall be made in writing to the Commissioner, signed by the
applicant, if an individual, by all participating parties of a partnership, or by a duly
authorized officer thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by affidavit, and shall be
submitted to and filed with the Town Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the
issuance of any license. The applicant shall, at the time of application, file with the
Town Treasurer, a non-refundable filing fee in the amount of $100.00 by certified
check, cashier’s check, bank money order, personal money order, or postal money
order. Applicants for license shall contain the following information, documents
and statements:
1. The name, birth date (if a natural person) and mailing address of the
applicant. Articles of Incorporation, Partnership Agreement, Charter or
similar document reflecting the legal existence of the entity seeking the
License. The mailing address of the principal office of the applicant. The
name under which the applicant intends to do business in the Town.
SEC. 4.5(Cont.1)
2. The name, birth date and address of the resident agent, any participating
partner of a partnership applicant, any board member or officer of a
corporation or other association applicant, any person who owns an interest
of 5% or more in the applicant entity including any person who owns a 5%
or more interest in an entity which owns a 5% or more interest in an
applicant entity.
3. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to
be operated under such license, and evidence that the licensee owns said
premises or has a lease thereon for the full term for which the license is
requested. In the event the applicant has a lease for the premises, a
photostatic copy of the lease shall be attached to the application. The
application shall include three (3) copies of plans showing the lay-out of the
interior of the premises to be licensed. The plans are to include the location
of all tables, chairs, fixtures and other items. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No.
4942)
4. A statement whether applicant, any participating partner of a partnership
applicant, any board member or officer of a corporation or other association
applicant, any person who owns an interest of 5% or more in the applicant
entity including any person who owns a 5% or more interest in an entity
which owns a 5% or more interest in an applicant entity has made similar
application for a similar other license on premises other than described in
this application, and the disposition of such application.
5. A statement as to whether or not the applicant , any participating partner of a
partnership applicant, any board member or officer of a corporation or other
association applicant, any person who owns an interest of 5% or more in the
applicant entity including any person who owns a 5% or more interest in an
entity which owns a 5% or more interest in an applicant entity has ever been
convicted of any state or Federal felony.
6. A statement as to whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof or by the Federal Government held by the applicant, any
participating partner of a partnership applicant, any board member or officer
of a corporation or other association applicant, any person who owns an
interest of 5% or more in the applicant entity including any person who owns
a 5% or more interest in an entity which owns a 5% or more interest in an
applicant entity has been revoked, and the reasons therefore.
7. A statement of the business and employment history for the past ten (10)
years of the applicant, any participating partner of a partnership applicant,
any board member or officer of a corporation or other association applicant,
any person who owns an interest of 5% or more in the applicant entity
including any person who owns a 5% or more interest in an entity which
owns a 5% or more interest in an applicant entity.
SEC. 4.5(Cont.2)
8. The applicant, any participating partner of a partnership applicant, any board
member or officer of a corporation or other association applicant, and any
person who owns an interest of 5% or more in the applicant entity including
any person who owns a 5% or more interest in an entity which owns a 5% or
more interest in an applicant entity must file a release for an Illinois State
Police Conviction Information Name Check Request.
9. Three complete sets of building or remodeling plans showing compliance
with all Town Codes and which indicate where liquor will be stored, sold
and served in the building, outdoor garden or other area for which applicant
is seeking a license. For premises licensed for consumption on the premises,
the plans shall include a “floor plan” indicating the nature and location of all
seating. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)
10. Bond. Each and every applicant for a license, or renewal thereof, shall,
simultaneously with the application therefore and prior to the issuance
thereof, execute and deliver a bond in the penal sum of $10,000.00 to the
Town as the obligee. Said bond shall be conditional for the faithful
performance of all provisions of this Chapter and all amendments thereto
and the payment of all fines and penalties by reason of the violation thereof
with security to be approved by the Commissioner. The maximum liability
of any and all sureties on said bonds shall be limited to the penalty thereof,
to-wit, the sum of $10,000.00.
11. Dram Shop Insurance. Each applicant for a license shall furnish,
contemporaneously with the application and bond, evidence of insurance
coverage against Dram Shop liability under 235 ILCS 5/6-21, covering the
proposed licensee and the owner of the premises for a full twelve (12) month
period from the date of the application. Evidence of similar coverage shall
be furnished as a condition for each and every annual renewal of any license
hereunder.
12. Resident Agent. Each licensee shall appoint a natural person as his agent,
who is a resident of McLean County, and at all times advise the Town Clerk
of the name and correct address of such person. Notices, demands and
summons served on said agent shall constitute proper service on the licensee.
13. A statement as to the type of license the applicant wishes to obtain.
14. A detailed statement as to the general nature of the applicant’s anticipated
business, including a financial statement and a business plan. The financial
statement shall include a list of the entity’s assets, debts and anticipated
assets and debts such that a fair assessment can be made of the applicant’s
financial condition. The business plan shall include the applicant’s projected
income by source and expected expenses, including operating costs, capital
costs and other expenses such that a fair assessment of the likelihood of
success can be made. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)
SEC. 4.5(Cont.3)
15. For restaurant license applications, a copy of the proposed menu of food
items that the establishment will offer for sale. (Added 4/19/04 by Ord. No.
4942)
SEC. 4.6 RESTRICTION OF LICENSE. No license shall be issued or reissued to any
applicant or to any applicant employing a resident agent, which applicant, including any
participating partner of a partnership applicant, any board member or officer of a corporation or
other association applicant, any person who owns an interest of 5% or more in the applicant entity
including any person who owns a 5% or more interest in an entity which owns a 5% or more
interest in an applicant entity or resident agent, who is:
A. A person not 21 years old or who is under any legal disability.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he
resides.
C. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law unless
the Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
D. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill
fame.
E. A person who has been convicted or pandering or other crime or misdemeanor
opposed to decency and morality within the last three (3) years.
F. A person whose license issued under this Chapter has been revoked for cause.
G. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder
would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
H. A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall be qualified
to obtain a license.
I. A corporation, if any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason.
J. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law
concerning the manufacture or sale of alcoholic liquor, after the passage of this
Chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond by failure to appear in court to answer
charges for any such violation.
K. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not
have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
SEC. 4.6(Cont.1)
L. Any law enforcing public official, the mayor or member of the Town Council. No
Town regular employee and no member of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the Town’s boundaries.
M. Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer’s
license.
N. Any person who fails to furnish or falsely furnishes information or who fails to make
or falsely makes statements required in the application for license as set forth in this
Chapter.
O. Any person convicted of a violation of selling or furnishing alcohol to a minor
within the preceding five (5) years.
SEC. 4.7 RESTRICTED AREAS.
A. Within the Town of Normal, alcoholic liquors shall be sold at retail only within the
areas zoned as S-1, S-2, C-2, C-3, B-1 and B-2.
B. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one
hundred (100) feet from any church, school, day care center, hospital, home for the
aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval station. The one hundred (100) foot measurement provided in this Section is
measured from the outside perimeter of the establishment in which alcoholic liquor
is permitted to be sold (although not necessarily the outside perimeter of the building
in which the establishment is located or the lot on which the building is placed) and
the perimeter of the lot on which a church, school, day care center, hospital, home
for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any
military or naval station is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing restriction, a
license may be issued within one hundred feet from a church, school, day care
center, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or
children, or any military or naval station with the written consent of the church,
school, day care center, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their wives or children, or military or naval station.
C. No liquor shall be sold, served, or allowed to be consumed on any licensed premises
except in the area approved for such sale and service in the Liquor License granted
by the Town of Normal.
D. No liquor shall be sold, served, or allowed to be consumed on property belonging to
the Town of Normal except at the following locations and under the following
conditions:
1. At the Town of Normal Activity Center One Normal Plaza when an event
permit has been obtained by a Class F (Catering) license holder or when a
Class G (Secondary Premises) license has been obtained, or
SEC. 4.7(Cont.1)
2. At the Children’s Discovery Museum after the Museum is closed to the
general public when an event permit has been obtained by a Class F
(Catering) license holder or a Class G (Secondary Premises) license has been
obtained, and provided such event is a private rental hosted by a person other
than a natural person or a Town sponsored event or such event directly
benefits a Town of Normal program or activity. The Liquor Commissioner
shall have sole discretion in determining whether or not a proposed event
meets the foregoing qualifications.
(Entire Subsection D Added 11/1/04 by Ord. No. 4977) (Subsection D
Amended 2/18/08 by Ord. No. 5177)
3. At Ironwood Golf Course, pursuant to a lawfully issued Liquor License.
(Subsection 3 added 4/7/08 by Ord. No. 5182)
4. On other Town property where alcoholic liquor is authorized to be served by
a Class F (Catering) license or a Class G (Secondary Premises) license. The
decision to grant a license for use on Town Property rests within the sole
discretion of the Local Liquor Commissioner; nothing in this paragraph 4
requires the issuance of a license for alcoholic liquor on Town property. To
receive such a license, the licensee must indemnify, defend, and hold the
Town harmless from any and all losses, and must name the Town as an
additional insured under a general liability insurance policy in an amount no
less than $1million per occurrence. (Amended 08/05/19 by Ord. No. 5791)
(Subsection 4 added 7/6/09 by Ord. No. 5274)
5. At Uptown Station fourth floor when an event permit has been obtained by a
Class F (Catering) license holder or a Class G (Secondary Premises) license
has been obtained, and provided such event is one of the following: (a) a
private rental hosted by a person other than a natural person; (b) a Town
sponsored event; or (c) an event that directly benefits a Town of Normal
program or activity. The Liquor Commissioner shall have sole discretion in
determining whether or not a proposed event meets the foregoing
qualifications and to grant or deny an event permit for Uptown Station.
(Subsection 5 added 7/2/12 by Ord. No. 5447)
6. At the Gateway Plaza when an event permit has been obtained by a Class F
(Catering) license holder or a Class G (Secondary Premises) license has been
obtained, and provided such event is a Town sponsored event or such event
directly benefits a Town of Normal program or activity. The Liquor
Commissioner shall have sole discretion in determining whether or not a
proposed event meets the foregoing qualifications. Gateway Plaza is
defined as that area bounded by the Children’s Discovery Museum, Uptown
Station, the southern right-of-way line of Uptown Circle, and the northern
right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad immediately adjacent to
Gateway Plaza. (Subsection 6 added 4/15/2013 by Ord. No. 5491)
SEC. 4.7(Cont.2)
7. At any portion of Uptown Station that is leased by Illinois State University
for the purposes of operating an art gallery. (Subsection 7 Added 10/6/2014
by Ord. No. 5558)
SEC. 4.8 HEARING ON LICENSE APPLICATION AND GRANTING OF
LICENSE.
A. Notice. Upon the filing of an application for a liquor license, the Commissioner
shall fix a time and place of hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given the
applicant not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing.
B. Hearing and Evidence. The Commissioner shall receive and may require such
evidence as he may deem necessary to make findings based upon the standards and
factual criteria.
C. Standards and Factual Criteria. After hearing, the Commissioner shall grant a liquor
license if he finds that the grant of the license would not be detrimental to the
general welfare of the Town. The Commissioner may deny an application if he
finds one or more of the following:
1. The application does not contain all the information, supporting documents
or fees required by this Chapter.
2. The issuance of the license would be in violation of any part of this Chapter.
3. The applicant does not have sufficient financial assets to maintain the
proposed liquor establishment.
4. The applicant is a convicted felon who has not been adequately rehabilitated.
5. The issuance of the license can reasonably be expected to create excessive
noise, traffic, parking or litter problems.
6. The applicant has a history of problems with regard to violations of health
regulations, laws and ordinances at prior establishments owned or managed
by the applicant.
7. The building in which the applicant seeks to operate does not meet all Town
of Normal building and Zoning code ordinances and regulations.
8. The issuance of the license can reasonably be expected to create a nuisance
such as excessive and repeated breaches of the peace.
9. The applicant has previously had a liquor license revoked or suspended in
this or any other state or jurisdiction.
SEC. 4.8(Cont.1)
10. The applicant is seeking a restaurant license and does not provide sufficient
facilities or menu items to operate as a restaurant.
D. Conditions on Issuance. If the Commissioner finds that any change in the
applicant’s plans is needed to give the Commissioner grounds for finding necessity
for the issuance of such license, the Commissioner may make such a change. A
condition on the granting of a license and the failure of the applicant at any time to
adhere to or perform such condition shall be considered a violation of this Chapter.
SEC. 4.9 TERM OF LICENSE, PAYMENT OF FEES.
A. Term. Liquor licenses are valid, provided all fees are paid up, all other monies owed
the Town are paid, all forms and supplemental information required by the Town
Clerk have been submitted, and all other conditions of this ordinance are met for a
fiscal year beginning April 1 and ending March 31 of the succeeding year.
B. License Fees. Annual license fees are due on the last working day of February for
the period beginning April 1 and ending March 31 of the succeeding year. The
annual license fee may be paid in two installments as provided hereafter only if an
installment fee of $100.00 is paid with the first installment. One-half (l/2) of the
license fee shall be due one month before the beginning of the fiscal year, that is, on
or before the last working day of February. In addition, the remaining one-half (l/2)
of the license fee shall be due on or before the last working day of September.
License fees which are not paid by the aforementioned dates shall be accepted by the
Town Clerk until the date of the next regular meeting of the Commissioner, that is,
the March and October meetings, respectively, provided a penalty of $100.00 is
added for each day the fee is late after the last working day of February or
September, respectively. The Town Treasurer shall not accept any fees for license
renewals after the conclusion of the Commissioner’s regular March or October
meetings, as the case may be. The term “working day” as used herein shall mean
any day the office of the Town Clerk is open for public business. (Amended
2/1/2010 by Ord. No. 5319)
C. License To Be Posted. Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed and hung
in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
SEC. 4.10 CLASSIFICATION AND FEES. All licenses shall be and hereby are
divided into classes. It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor or to operate a liquor establishment
in a manner inconsistent with the terms of the class of license set forth herein:
A. Class A licenses (All liquor- Off premises consumption) shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor in original package at retail on the premises specified, for
consumption off said premises. Class A liquor establishments shall have a minimum
of 1000 square feet of interior space. The annual fee for such license shall be
$3,000.00. Hours (local time) shall be from seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to one
o’clock (1:00) A.M. the following day on Sundays through Thursdays and from
seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to one forty-five o’clock (1:45) A.M. the following day
SEC. 4.10(Cont.1)
on Fridays through Saturdays. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)(Amended
6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5011)
B. Class B license (Beer only- On premises consumption) shall authorize the retail sale
of beer only in restaurants and clubs for consumption only on the premises where
sold. The Licensee may sell beer during the following hours: Monday through
Thursday: 11:00 am to 1:00 am the following day; Friday: 11:00 am to 2:00 am the
following Saturday; Saturday: 9 am to 2:00 am the following Sunday; Sunday: 9 am
to 1:00 am the following Monday; and on December 31, sale is authorized until 2:00
am of January 1. The annual fee for such license shall be as follows: (Amended
4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942) (Amended 02/19/18 by Ord. No. 5729)
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of up to 100 persons $ 750
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of more than 100 persons $1000
Clubs $ 500
C. Class C licenses (Beer and wine only- On premises consumption) shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine only in restaurants, public or private golf courses, and
clubs for consumption only on the premises where sold. The restaurant licensee
may sell beer and wine during the following hours: Monday through Thursday:
11:00 am to 1:00 am the following day; Friday: 11:00 am to 2:00 am the following
Saturday; Saturday: 9 am to 2:00 am the following Sunday; Sunday: 9 am to 1:00
am the following Monday; and on December 31, sale is authorized until 2:00 am of
January 1. A golf course licensee may sell beer and wine during the following hours:
Sunday through Thursday: 7:00 am to 1:00 am the following day; Friday and
Saturday: 7:00 am to 2:00 am the following day; and on December 31, sale is
authorized until 2:00 am of January 1. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Class C
License holder may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed
bottle of wine for off-premise consumption provided that the patron has purchased a
meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the licensed
premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the
premises shall be securely sealed by the licensee prior to the removal from the
premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof bag. The licensee
shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron. The annual fee for
Class C license shall be as follows: (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)(Amended
11/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5460) (Amended 02/19/18 by Ord. No. 5729)
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of up to 100 persons $1500
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of more than 100 persons $2000
Clubs $ 500
Golf Course $ 100
(Subsection C Amended 2/18/08 by Ord. No. 5177)
D. Class D licenses (All liquor-On premises consumption) shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor by only restaurants or clubs for consumption on the premises where
sold. The licensee may sell alcoholic liquor during the following hours: Monday
through Thursday: 11:00 am to 1:00 am the following day; Friday: 11:00 am to 2:00
SEC. 4.10(Cont.2)
am the following Saturday; Saturday: 9 am to 2:00 am the following Sunday;
Sunday: 9 am to 1:00 am the following Monday; and on December 31, sale is
authorized until 2:00 am of January 1. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Class D
License holder may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed
bottle of wine for off-premise consumption provided that the patron has purchased a
meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the licensed
premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the
premises shall be securely sealed by the licensee prior to the removal from the
premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof bag. The licensee
shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron. The annual license
fee for such licenses shall be as follows: (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)
(Amended 11/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5460) (Amended 02/19/18 by Ord. No. 5729)
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of up to 100 persons $2500
Restaurants with an occupancy capacity of more than100 persons $3000
Clubs $ 600
E. Class E licenses (Hotels) shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor by hotels for
consumption on the premises where sold. A Class E license (Hotels) permits “minibars”
in private rooms, catering on premises, cash bars at private rental parties, room
service, and restaurants. A restaurant in a hotel shall be limited to the following
hours: Monday through Thursday: 11:00 am to 1:00 am the following day; Friday:
11:00 am to 2:00 am the following Saturday; Saturday: 9 am to 2:00 am the
following Sunday; Sunday: 9 am to 1:00 am the following Monday; and on
December 31, sale is authorized until 2:00 am of January 1. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a Class E License holder may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and
partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premise consumption provided that the
patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the
meal on the licensed premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be
removed from the premises shall be securely sealed by the licensee prior to the
removal from the premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof
bag. The licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron.
The annual license fee for such license shall be as follows: (Amended 4/19/04 by
Ord. No. 4942)( Amended 11/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5460) (Amended 02/19/18 by
Ord. No. 5729)
Hotel $3000
F. Class F licenses (Catering) shall authorize the holder thereof to provide catering
services. The annual license fee for such license shall be $100.00 for those persons
who do not hold another classification of license and $25.00 for any person having
any other type of liquor license issued by the Town of Normal. The Town of
Normal will recognize catering licenses issued by the City of Bloomington, but only
to the extent that the City of Bloomington recognizes catering license issued by the
Town of Normal. Alcohol may be served on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays and Thursdays from eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00)
A.M. the following day, and on Fridays and Saturdays from eleven o’clock (11:00)
SEC. 4.10(Cont.3)
A.M. to two o’clock (2:00) A.M. the following day. On December 31st service is
authorized until two o’clock (2:00) A.M. the following day. The following shall
also apply: (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)
1. All Class F holders must obtain an event permit from the Liquor
Commissioner or his designee prior to engaging in catering services. The
event permit must be applied for at the Town Clerk’s office at least twentyfour
(24) hours before the event together with payment of a $10.00
registration fee. The following information shall be supplied: location of the
event, estimated number in attendance, name of person or organization
sponsoring the event, proof of dram shop insurance for premises, and how
the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors will be controlled. The
Class F license holder will also be required to provide information regarding
restroom and parking facilities for guests if the estimated number in
attendance exceeds fifty (50) persons.
2. All requirements of a Mass Gathering permit, if required by the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal, must be met.
3. The Class F license holder will immediately cease the sale and serving of
alcohol at an event if the Town of Normal Police Department informs the
license holder that a violation of any of the following City Ordinances has
occurred at the event:
a. The Class F license holder has knowingly served alcohol to a person
under the age of 21 at the event in violation of the Municipal Code of
the Town of Normal.
b. Open and notorious possession or consumption of alcohol by more
than 3 or more persons has occurred at the event in violation of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal and the license holder is
aware of the violations or reasonably should have been aware of the
violations.
c. The event is in violation of the Town’s Mass Gathering Ordinance.
d. A violation of the sound amplification device restrictions, SEC. 17.5
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, has occurred and that
a prior warning or issuance of a notification of a violation failed to
abate the problem.
4. An event permit may be denied for any of the following reasons:
a. Required information is missing.
b. The application is not timely filed.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.4)
c. A prior event sponsored by the individual or organization sponsoring
this event violated Town ordinances or caused a disturbance.
d. A prior event catered by this Class F license holder violated Town
ordinances.
e. The Liquor Commissioner or his designee determines that the
provisions for parking, restrooms or the prevention of delivery of
alcohol to underaged persons are inadequate and that a substantial
risk to the public health and welfare would result if the license were
issued.
5. In the event that an event permit is denied, the Town Clerk shall immediately
notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may request a hearing on
the denial which shall be held in front of the Liquor Commissioner or his
designee as soon as practical after the demand for hearing.
6. A Class F license does not authorize the sale of alcohol at a cash bar.
G. Class G licenses (Secondary Premises) shall authorize a current holder of a Class A,
B, C, D, E, or M liquor license and a Class O liquor license holder that is not
licensed for Video Gaming to sell alcohol on any approved non-residential premises
other than the premises covered by the existing license for a period of three (3) days
or less as determined by the Local Liquor Commissioner provided the following
shall also apply: (Amended 6/5/06 by Ord. No. 5076)(Amended 06/18/18 by Ord.
No. 5741)
1. All of the terms and conditions of the license holder’s primary license shall
extend to and apply to the license issued. A Class G License shall allow the
license holder to operate a cash bar. Any violation of the terms of the G
license shall be considered a violation of the license holder’s primary license
and shall subject the license holder to penalties and/or sanctions directed at
the primary license. Any violation of the G license may also be sanctioned
by denial of future G licenses.
2. Before issuing such license, application must be made to the Clerk’s office
seven (7) working days in advance with the following: proof of Dram Shop
Insurance covering the premises licensed under the G license, location of the
event, estimated number in attendance, name of person or organization
sponsoring the event, and how the sale of alcohol to minors will be
controlled. The G license holder will also be required to provide information
regarding restroom and parking facilities for guests.
3. All requirements of a Mass Gathering permit, if required by SEC. 4.32 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, must be met.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.5)
4. The G license holder will immediately cease the sale and serving of alcohol
at an event if the Town of Normal Police Department informs them that a
violation of any of the following City Ordinances has occurred at the event:
a. The G license holder has knowingly served alcohol to a person under
the age of 21 at the event in violation of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal.
b. Open and notorious possession or consumption of alcohol by three
(3) or more persons has occurred at the event in violation of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal and the license holder is
aware of the violations or reasonably should have been aware of the
violations.
c. The event is in violation of the Town’s Mass Gathering Ordinance.
d. A violation of the sound amplification device restrictions, SEC. 17.5
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, has occurred and that
a prior warning or issuance of a notification of a violation failed to
abate the problem.
5. The G License may be denied for any of the following reasons:
a. Required information is missing.
b. The application is not timely filed.
c. A prior event sponsored by the individual or organization sponsoring
this event violated Town ordinances or caused a disturbance.
d. Violations of Town ordinances or state law occurred at a prior event
for which a Class G license had been issued to this license holder.
e. The Liquor Commissioner determines that the provisions for
parking, restrooms or the prevention of delivery of alcohol to
underaged persons are inadequate and that a substantial risk to the
public health and welfare would result if the license were issued.
6. In the event that an event permit is denied, the Town Clerk shall immediately
notify the applicant of the Denial. The applicant may request a hearing on
the denial which shall be held in front of the Liquor Commissioner or his
designee as soon as practical after the demand for hearing.
7. The fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
day of the event and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each immediate subsequent
day of the same event.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.6)
8. No license holder shall be issued more than twelve (12) G licenses in any
twelve (12) month period.
9. The Town of Normal may issue a Class G license to an applicant holding a
City of Bloomington Liquor License of a kind similar to the Town of
Normal’s Class A, B, C, D, or E License, but only if the City of
Bloomington recognizes a Town of Normal license for the City of
Bloomington’s provisions which are similar to those of the Town of
Normal’s Class G (Secondary Premises) license.
H. Class H licenses (Outdoor gardens and sidewalk cafes) shall authorize a current
holder of a Class B, C, D, E, M, or O liquor license to sell alcohol outdoors for
consumption in an approved area of the premises or immediately adjacent to the
premises other than the area of the premises covered by the liquor license or in an
on-street café approved under SEC. 8.1-9(D). The Liquor Commissioner may
require the erection of fences, walls or similar barricades prior to issuance of a Class
H license. The Liquor Commissioner may consider the effect on parking, traffic and
pedestrian traffic in determining whether to grant a Class H license. The Liquor
Commissioner may also restrict or prohibit the use of sound amplifying devices as a
condition of a Class H. License. The annual license fee for a Class H license shall be
$250. (Amended 6/5/06 by Ord. No. 5076)(Amended 05/21/18 by Ord. No. 5739)
I. Class I (Wine tasting) licenses shall authorize a current holder of a Class A, B, C, D,
E, or M liquor license to hold wine tasting on their premises. The annual fee for a
Class I license shall be $50.00 and shall permit any number of wine tastings on
premises with no additional fee. No person other than a current holder of a class A,
B, C, D, E, or M liquor license shall hold a wine tasting for profit in the Town of
Normal. For events occurring other than at the licensed premises, the fee for an
event permit for a wine tasting shall be $50 per day. Class I licenses (Wine tasting)
shall authorize the holder thereof to hold wine tastings. Alcohol may be served from
eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00) A.M. the following day. On
December 31st service is authorized until two o’clock (2:00) A.M. the following day.
The following shall also apply: (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No. 4942)(Amended
6/5/06 by Ord. No. 5076)
1. All Class I holders must obtain an event permit from the Liquor
Commissioner or his designee prior to the wine tasting if the wine tasting is
to be held at a location other than the licensed premises. The event permit
must be applied for at the Town Clerk’s office at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the event. The following information shall be supplied: location of
the event, estimated number in attendance, name of person or organization
sponsoring the event, proof of dram shop insurance for premises, and how
the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors will be controlled. The
Class I license holder will also be required to provide information regarding
restroom and parking facilities for guests if the estimated number in
attendance exceeds fifty (50) persons.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.7)
2. The Class I license holder will immediately cease the sale and serving of
alcohol at an event if the Town of Normal Police Department informs the
license holder that a violation of any of the following City Ordinances has
occurred at the event:
a. The Class I license holder has knowingly served alcohol to a person
under the age of 21 at the event in violation of the Municipal Code of
the Town of Normal.
b. Open and notorious possession or consumption of alcohol by more
than 3 or more persons has occurred at the event in violation of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal and the license holder is
aware of the violations or reasonably should have been aware of the
violations.
3. An event permit may be denied for any of the following reasons:
a. Required information is missing.
b. The application is not timely filed.
c. A prior event sponsored by the individual or organization sponsoring
this event violated Town ordinances or caused a disturbance.
d. A prior event catered by this Class I license holder violated Town
ordinances.
e. The Liquor Commissioner or his designee determines that the
provisions for parking, restrooms or the prevention of delivery of
alcohol to underaged persons are inadequate and that a substantial
risk to the public health and welfare would result if the license were
issued.
4. In the event that an event permit is denied, the Town Clerk shall immediately
notify the applicant of the denial. The applicant may request a hearing on
the denial which shall be held in front of the Liquor Commissioner or his
designee as soon as practical after the demand for hearing.
J. Class J licenses (One day extended premises) shall authorize a current holder of a
Class B, C, D, E, or M liquor license to sell alcohol for consumption in an approved
area of the premises other than the area of the premises covered by the liquor license
on a date certain. The Liquor Commissioner may require information similar to that
required for Class K licenses prior to the issuance of a Class J Liquor license. The
Liquor Commissioner may deny a Class J license for the same reasons that a Class K
license may be denied. The Liquor Commissioner may require the erection of tents,
fences, walls, or similar barricades as a condition of the issuance of a Class J license.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.8)
The license fee for a Class J license shall be $25 per day. (Amended 6/5/06 by Ord.
No. 5076)
K. Class K licenses (One day license) shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises specifically defined in the liquor license application
and thereby approved by the Commissioner when the license is issued, at a fund
raising activity or event, the net proceeds from which will be used for charitable,
civic, benevolent, or humane purposes. Any licensee may sell alcoholic liquor from
the hour of eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. to the hour of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. the
following day. On December 31st, the sale is authorized to two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
the following day. The amount of the license fee for such a Class K One-Day
alcoholic liquor license shall be $100.00. Class K licenses shall be subject to the
following additional requirements:
1. General Regulations. Applicants for and holders of Class K One Day
Alcoholic Liquor licenses shall be subject to all the regulations, procedures
and provisions specified in this Section in addition to the regulations,
procedures and provisions applicable generally to liquor license applicants or
license holders enumerated in this Chapter.
2. Eligibility Requirements for Class K One Day Alcoholic Liquor Licenses.
Applicants for Class K One Day Alcoholic Liquor Licenses must be civic,
service, charitable, fraternal or social organizations, groups or entities
generally recognized as such in the community, with a degree of permanence
and continuity demonstrated by not less than three years of continuous prior
local organized existence. One responsible consenting member of the
organization, group or entity for each 100 persons reasonably expected at the
event for which the Class K One Day Alcoholic Liquor License is sought
shall be named as co-applicant and co-licensee along with the organization,
group or entity; provided, however, that not less than three nor more than
twelve such persons shall be named as such co-applicants and co-licensees.
No such license shall be granted to any group or entity having received
another such license during the previous six-month period.
3. Application Procedure.
a. Application Forms. Application for Class K One Day Alcoholic
Liquor licenses shall be made on forms provided by the Town Clerk
and shall provide the following information:
(1) The name of the civic, service, charitable, fraternal or social
organization, group or entity seeking the license.
(2) The names and signatures of from three to twelve responsible
current members of the organization, group or entity with the
number of such signers dependent upon the number of
persons expected at the event for which the One Day
SEC. 4.10(Cont.9)
Alcoholic Liquor license is sought, who will be co-licensees
with the organization, group or entity.
(3) A description of the location at which the One Day Alcoholic
Liquor license will be utilized.
(4) The date on which the One Day Alcoholic Liquor license will
be utilized.
(5) A description of the activity or event in connection with
which the One Day Alcoholic Liquor license will be utilized,
specifying the nature of the proposed entertainment, if any.
(6) An estimate of the number of persons expected in attendance.
(7) A description of the proposed procedures for handling the
following:
(a) Sale of alcoholic liquor
(b) Identification check
(c) Traffic control
(d) Vehicular parking
(e) Pedestrian control
(f) Site and vicinity clean-up
(g) Accounting
(8) A description of the way in which the net proceeds from the
event will be used for charitable, civic, benevolent, or
humane purposes.
b. Application Submission. The completed application form shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk not more than sixty (60) nor less
than fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which the license, if granted,
will be utilized.
c. Application Fee. The applicant shall pay a $25.00 non-refundable
license application fee at the time of filing the license application.
4. Application Review. After preliminary review by the Town staff, the license
application, staff report and recommendation shall be submitted to the
Commissioner for approval or disapproval. The Commissioner shall
approve or disapprove the application not less than fourteen (14) days prior
to the date on which the license, if granted, would be utilized. The
Commissioner may deny a license if he finds any one or more of the
following:
SEC. 4.10(Cont.10)
a. The issuance of a license is likely to cause any one or more of the
following: traffic problems, parking problems, excessive noise, trash
or a disturbance of the peace.
b. There is insufficient means to prevent the service of alcohol to
minors a prior.
c. A prior license involving this applicant (including members of
applicant’s group or association) resulted in problems such as noise,
traffic congestion, parking difficulties, trash, drinking by minors, or a
disturbance of the peace.
d. A prior license involving this location resulted in problems such as
noise, traffic congestion, parking difficulties, trash, drinking by
minors, or a disturbance of the peace.
e. A lack of complete application information.
5. Post-Approval, Pre-Issuance Requirements.
a. The applicant shall acquire and submit to the Town Clerk a Dram
Shop Insurance Policy insuring the licensed group, organization or
entity, each of the responsible individuals named as co-licensees and
the Town of Normal, Illinois as named insureds. The amounts of
such coverage shall not be less than:
$100,000 bodily injury per person
$300,000 bodily injury per occurrence
$100,000 means of support
$100,000 property damage.
b. The applicant shall submit a Release of Liability and Indemnification
Agreement through which the group, organization of entity and each
of the responsible individuals named as co-licensees will release and
agree to indemnify the Town of Normal from any and all liability
arising from the issuance of the One Day Alcoholic Liquor license or
any event or occurrence held or happening in connection therewith.
c. The applicant shall submit an agreement by the group, organization
or entity and each of the responsible individuals named as colicensees
obligating the up and those individuals to restore the
licensed premises and vicinity to approximately the same condition
as existed prior to the holding of the event at which the One Day
Alcoholic Liquor license will be utilized. This agreement shall be
secured by the posting of a $250,000 cash escrow account or a
corporate surety bond in a like amount, payable to the Town of
Normal in the event such restoration is not done or completed.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.11)
d. The applicant shall pay the $50.00 non-refundable license application
fee.
e. The applicant shall notify the McLean County Health Department of
the endency of the activity and shall request a health inspection of the
premises on which the license will be issued.
6. License Issuance. After approval by the Commissioner of the license
application, the Town Clerk shall grant a One-Day Alcoholic Liquor License
jointly to the group, organization or entity and the responsible individuals
named as co-licensees. As co-licensees, the organization and each of the
named individuals assume the duties, responsibilities and obligations of a
liquor license holder under the provisions of this Chapter and specifically
assume responsibility for implementing the proposed use of the One-Day
Alcoholic Liquor License in the manner proposed in the approved One-Day
Alcoholic Liquor application.
7. Responsibilities of License Holders. Failure by the organization, group or
entity, any of its members, agents, or employees or any of the responsible
individuals named as co-licensees to adhere to the regulations of this Chapter
and the procedures for the sale of alcoholic liquor, identification check,
traffic control, vehicular parking, pedestrian control, site and vicinity cleanup,
indicated in the approved application shall subject the licensed
organization, group or entity, and each of the responsible individuals named
as co-licensees to the penalty provisions of this Chapter.
L. A Class L (Pari-mutuel Betting Parlor) shall authorize a current holder of a class B,
C, D or E liquor license to permit pari-mutuel betting to occur on the premises
provided that the following conditions are met:
1. The License holder, or a person contracted with the license holder, is
authorized by the State of Illinois pursuant to State law (230 ILCS 5/1 et
seq.) to operate a pari-mutuel system of wagering.
2. No electronic/mechanical gambling devices shall be permitted in the betting
parlor. For purposes of this section, “electronic/mechanical gambling
devices” shall mean all slot machines, keno machines, video poker
machines, and other similar devices which can be used for gambling but
shall exclude terminals for the placement of authorized pari-mutuel bets.
Video gaming terminals licensed under the Video Gaming Act and Division
14 of Chapter 22 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal may be
located on the premises outside of the betting parlor.
3. No one under the age of 21 shall be permitted in the betting parlor.
4. The betting parlor shall be in separate room, divided from any other area of
the restaurant or hotel by a solid wall.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.12)
5. Pari-mutuel betting, video gaming as set forth under item 2, and the sale of
State of Illinois Lottery tickets shall be the only form of gambling permitted
on the premises.
6. The Licensee shall not knowingly permit persons under the influence of
alcohol to gamble.
7. The Licensee will create and maintain a list of people who have requested
that they not be permitted on the premises. The licensee may not permit a
person on such list to enter the premises. The licensee will participate in any
state, federal, or industry lists of people who wish to be barred from
gambling establishments.
8. The Licensee will not have an ATM machine on the premises.
9. The Licensee will provide a clearly visible area in the vicinity of the
principle entrance to the premises where gambling addiction counselors and
others who provide gambling addiction services may place brochures and
other advertising and/or educational materials.
10. The Licensee will display in a prominent location on the premises signs
written in block letters of no less than one inch in height with the following
messages:
GAMBLING CAN BE ADDICTIVE.
DO NOT GAMBLE MORE THAN YOU CAN AFFORD TO LOSE.
THIS PREMISES MAINTAINS A LIST OF PERSONS WHO WISH TO
BE BARRED FROM THE PREMISES. SEE ANY EMPLOYEE IF YOU
WISH TO BE INCLUDED ON THAT LIST.
11. A payment of an annual fee of $250.00.
(Entire Subsection L Added 3/20/2006 by Ord. No. 5063)(Amended 06/18/18 by Ord. No.
5741)
M. Class M licenses (Brewpub) shall authorize only restaurants to manufacture beer
only on the premises specified in the license, to make sales of the beer manufactured
on the premises to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use
and consumption both on and off the said premises provided that sales for
consumption off said premises shall be made in original packages, to store the beer
upon the premises, and to sell and offer alcoholic liquor for sale at retail from the
licensed premises during the following hours: Monday through Thursday: 11:00 am
to 1:00 am the following day; Friday: 11:00 am to 2:00 am the following Saturday;
Saturday: 9 am to 2:00 am the following Sunday; Sunday: 9 am to 1:00 am the
SEC. 4.10(Cont.13)
following Monday; and on December 31, sale is authorized until 2:00 am of January
1. A brewpub licensee shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than 50,000
gallons of beer per year. The annual license fee for such licenses shall be as follows:
Restaurant with an occupancy capacity of up to 100 persons $2,500
Restaurant with an occupancy capacity of more than 100 persons $3,000
(Entire Subsection M Added 4/3/2006 by Ord. No. 5063) (Amended 02/19/18 by
Ord. No. 5729)
N. Class N License (Stadium License – Beer Only Inside Stadium, All Liquor in
Private Suites Only) shall authorize the retail sale of beer only throughout the
interior of a stadium for consumption only inside the stadium. The interior of the
stadium shall mean any point beyond which a ticket for admission is required. For
events in which no ticket is required, the interior of the stadium shall mean that area
for which a ticket is normally required during ticketed games or events. A Class N
license shall also authorize the retail sale of all liquor in designated private suites for
consumption in those designated private suites only. The Class N license shall be
issued on the following conditions:
1. Hours of Operation. Beer or other liquor may be sold only on days when a
game or other event is scheduled. Beer or other liquor sales may commence
no sooner than one hour prior to the scheduled start of the game or event.
For baseball games, all beer sales, except those in the designated private
suites, will stop after the seventh inning. For all other events, all beer or
liquor sales will cease upon the conclusion of the event. All liquor or beer
sales in the designated private suites will cease upon the conclusion of the
baseball game or other event. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no liquor or
beer will be sold between the hours of midnight, twelve o’clock (12:00) a.m.
and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
2. Place of Sale. Beer may be sold throughout the interior of the stadium for
consumption inside of the stadium. The license holder shall take adequate
means to prevent beer sold in the stadium from being removed from the
inside of the stadium. Liquor other than beer may be sold only in the private
designated suites for consumption in those suites only. The license holder
shall take adequate means to prevent liquor sold in the private suites from
being removed from the private suites.
3. Other Conditions:
a. Beer in plastic or paper cups only. Except for beer sold in the
private suites, beer will be sold in plastic bottles, plastic cups, or
paper cups only. No glasses, glass bottles, or aluminum bottles or
cans of beer will be permitted to be sold in the general interior
stadium area. Beer may be sold in cups, glasses, glass bottles, plastic
bottles, aluminum bottles or cans in the private designated suites, but
SEC. 4.10(Cont.14)
no glasses, glass bottles, aluminum bottles or cans may be removed
from the private designated suites.
b. Prevention of consumption of alcohol by minors. Licensee shall
employ a sufficient number of persons at events which alcohol is
sold to monitor and prevent the consumption of alcohol by minors
and to prevent the removal of alcohol from the stadium. In no event
shall this be fewer than two persons. These required monitors may
not have as an additional duty the sale of beer or alcohol during the
event. There shall be sufficient monitors such that the entire
stadium is regularly monitored during the event.
c. Exterior premises clean-up. As a condition of the Class N license,
the license holder shall remove all trash and debris from the parking
lots and exterior of the premises no later than 10:00 a.m. on the day
following a game or other event at which beer or other liquor was
sold.
4. Cost. The Class N license shall cost $3,000.00 per year.
(Entire Subsection N Added by Ord. No. 5336 on 4/19/2010)
O. Class O License (Limited Hours) shall authorize the sale of beer and wine for
consumption on the premises where sold and also authorize the sale of beer and
wine in an original package at retail on the premises specified for consumption off
said premises, subject to the following conditions:
1. Sale of beer and wine shall take place only between the hours of 1:00 p.m.
and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday,
and between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
All hours are prevailing time.
2. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed on the licensed
premises at any time, unless accompanied by his or her parent(s) or legal
guardian, or unless one of the following when working on the premises:
employees, contractors and their employees, vendors, and entertainers
(pursuant to a valid entertainment permit).
3. Food shall be prepared on site and be offered to customers during all hours
of operation. As used herein “prepared” is not limited to assembly of
original ingredients for cooking, but also includes the assembly, cooking and
preparing of frozen or packaged items as in usual or customary in the
industry.
4. The licensed premises must operate a kitchen during all hours beer and wine
is sold, which shall include, at a minimum, the following:
SEC. 4.10(Cont.15)
a. A cooler for storage of food
b. A food preparation table
c. A convection oven
d. A microwave oven
5. The Class O license holder may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and
partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premises consumption provided the
patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine
with the meal on the licensed premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine
that is to be removed from the premises shall be securely sealed by the
licensee prior to the removal from the premises and placed in a transparent,
one-time use, tamper-proof bag. The licensee shall provide a dated receipt
for the bottle of wine to the patron.
6. The annual fee for such license shall be $3,000.00.
(Entire Subsection O Added 7/21/2014 by Ord. No. 5553)
P. Class P License (Taproom) authorizes a licensed brewer under Section 5-1 of the
Liquor Control Act of 1934 to make retail sales of beer manufactured on the
premises for consumption both on and off the premises. All of the following
requirements apply:
1. The retail sale of beer is limited to the beer manufactured on the premises
and is permitted:
a. on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from
1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.; and
b. on Fridays and Saturdays from 1:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.
2. The portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the retail sale of beer must
be segregated from the remainder of the premises and may not consist of
more than 25% of the total gross square footage area of the physical
premises. The retail sale and consumption of beer is limited to the retail
portion of the licensed premises. The portion of the licensed premises
dedicated to the manufacturing of beer must be segregated from the
remainder of the premises and may not be generally accessible to the public.
3. No more than 3 beer servings may be served to any customer for onpremises
consumption in one day, and each serving is limited to either:
a. by the glass, having a capacity of not more than 16 ounces;
b. by the bottle, having a capacity of not more than 12 ounces; or
c. by the flight, having not more than 4 glasses with each glass not
having more than 4 ounces.
4. All applicable taxes, including sales tax, must be collected and paid on all
revenue realized from the retail sale of beer.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.16)
5. Video gaming, as defined in the Video Gaming Act, is not permitted on the
licensed premises.
6. The annual license fee for a Class P license is $500.00.
(Entire Subsection P was Added 9/6/2016 by Ord. No. 5655)
Q. Class Q License (Public College/University) authorizes a Public Higher Education
Institution to sell, offer or keep for sale, or possess for sale alcoholic liquor or beer,
or use the services of any vendor for those purposes, at any event that is (i)
conducted by the Institution and (ii) located on property owned by the Institution.
All of the following provisions apply:
1. A “Public Higher Education Institution” means any of the following:
a. Illinois State University;
b. the Illinois State University Foundation;
c. Community College District #540; and
d. The Heartland Community College Foundation.
2. The annual license fee for a Class Q license is $100.00.
(Entire Subsection Q Added 2/6/2017 by Ord. No. 5679)
R. Class R Licenses (Movie Theater–On Premises Consumption) authorizes the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the premises only, incidental to
the operation of a Movie Theater. Alcoholic liquor may be consumed throughout
the Movie Theater, including in the Movie Theater Auditorium, but may not be
taken off the premises. Hours are Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and
Thursdays from 7:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. the following day, and on Fridays and
Saturdays from 7:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. the following day. On December 31, sale
is authorized to 2:00 A.M. the following day. The Movie Theater may remain
open to the public during hours in which alcoholic liquor may not be sold, but no
person may possess alcoholic liquor during those hours. The Movie Theater may
not serve alcoholic liquor at any time that it does not serve food.
The restrictions of Section 4.19(B) do not apply to a licensee under this Section to
the showing any film or video feed that is classified with a rating of not greater
than "R" by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) or similar
commercial film industry organization, or that would otherwise meet such ratings
standards based on its content.
For the purposes of this subsection R:
Movie Theater means any building to which the public is invited and pays
consideration for the purpose of viewing motion pictures.
Movie Theater Auditorium means the portion or portions of a movie theater
where patrons are seated for the actual viewing of motion pictures.
SEC. 4.10(Cont.17)
The annual fee for Class R license is $1,500.
(SEC 4.10R Added 08/05/19 by Ord. No. 5791, Effective August 15, 2019)
SEC. 4.11 LICENSE LIMITATIONS. The following limitations shall apply to Liquor
License holders, and it is unlawful for licensed establishments to violate the following restrictions:
A. Restaurant Licenses. All holders of Restaurant licenses must be in compliance with
the requirements set forth under SEC. 4.3.5. (Amended 4/19/04 by Ord. No.
4942)(Amended 2/6/2017 by Ord. No. 5679)
B. Sanitary conditions. All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for
the storage of such alcoholic liquor for such sales, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions regulating
conditions of the premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption, as regulated by the McLean County Board of Health.
C. Display of fetal alcohol syndrome warning. Any holder of a license to sell alcoholic
liquor in the Town of Normal shall post and maintain in a conspicuous location at
the main point of ingress to the liquor establishment a warning sign regarding the
effects of fetal alcohol syndrome, as required by state statutes and regulations.
(Amended 7/18/2011 by Ord. No. 5393)
SEC. 4.12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
A. A license issued under provisions of this Chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and license and only under
the conditions and restrictions imposed in this Chapter on the particular class of
license described therein. No license may be transferred in any way, including but
not limited to, through the sale of the assets of a firm, partnership, or corporation.
B. Death or Bankruptcy of Licensee. A license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall not be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution nor shall be
subject to be pledged or encumbered. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
the State or transfer to the State, but shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and
the trustees of any licensee who is insolvent or has filed bankruptcy may continue to
operate under the license until the expiration of the lease, but no longer than six
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. Upon the death
of a licensee, if the executor or administrator does not continue the business under
such license, and upon the bankruptcy of a licensee, if the Trustee does not continue
the business under the license, there shall be a refund made of that portion of the
license for any period in which the executor, administrator or Trustee cannot or does
not operate, provided that prior to making any refund, the Town Treasurer shall
determine whether the licensee owes the Town any money, and if it is determined
that the licensee owes the Town any money, the Town Treasurer shall withhold
payment of any refund until all monies owed the Town have been paid in full.
SEC. 4.13
SEC. 4.13 REFUNDS OF LICENSE FEES AND RENEWALS OF LICENSES.
A. There shall be no refund of any license fee paid hereunder except as provided under
this subsection. If a refund is granted under this subsection, it shall meet the
following conditions:
1. The licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages and return its liquor
license to the Town Clerk. When the aforementioned events have been
completed, the licensee shall be entitled to a refund of its license fee less
20% for administrative costs less that percentage of the original fee which
has been utilized due to the passage of time prorated on a monthly basis with
any portion of a month constituting an entire month.
2. Prior to making any refund, the Town Treasurer shall determine whether the
licensee owes the Town any money and if the licensee owes the Town any
money, the Town Treasurer shall withhold payment of any refund until all
monies owed the Town have been paid in full.
B. Any licensee hereunder shall have and be given the opportunity for a renewal or reissuance
of such license at the same place upon compliance with the provisions of
this Code now in force, or which may hereafter be enacted, governing the issuance
of such licenses, and such licensee may not assign or convey the right to a renewal
or re-issuance thereof to another person, firm or corporation.
C. All licensees, desiring to renew existing liquor licenses, shall make application for
such renewal or re-issuance on or before the last day of February. Said application
shall consist of either a fully executed original application for liquor license or an
affidavit properly executed on a form provided by the Town Clerk, certifying that
the information contained in the original application remains correct and unchanged,
and further certifying that the bond and dram insurance policy remain in full force
and effect for the full renewal period of the liquor license. Additionally, all licensees
desiring to renew existing liquor licenses shall meet the following conditions:
1. Satisfaction of any and all debts owed to the Town of Normal.
2. Receipt of a report from the City Manager indicating licensee and licensee’s
facilities comply with all applicable Town Codes and that licensee has not
had repeated violations of this Act, repeated violations of other Municipal
ordinances, or repeated violations of State laws or disturbances of the peace.
SEC. 4.14 PRIVATE PARTIES.
A. It shall be unlawful to hold a private employee party, except on the following terms
and conditions:
1. No more than one private employee party shall be held in any retail sale
establishment per calendar year.
SEC. 4.14(Cont.1)
2. No private employee party shall continue past 3:00 A.M.
3. Written notice must be submitted to the Town twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of any private party. Written notice shall be in the form of an
application available from the Town Clerk. The application shall then be
submitted to the Liquor Commissioner for his approval or disapproval. The
written notice shall contain the following information:
a. Name of person making request.
b. Relation to retail license holder.
c. Address of person and telephone number.
d. Location of party.
e. Address of establishment and telephone number.
f. Date and hours of activity.
g. A statement whether alcoholic beverages will be served and if so by
whom.
h. A brief explanation of the proposed activity.
i. An estimate of the number of persons to attend.
j. A statement whether the activity will be supervised, and if so by
whom.
k. A statement whether entertainment will be provided, and if so, a brief
description of the type of entertainment and the name of the person
responsible for the cost of the entertainment.
l. The notification shall contain an affirmation as to its truthfulness and
shall be dated and signed by a retail liquor establishment licensee or
resident agent.
4. A private employee party shall be subject to all terms and conditions of this
Chapter, not inconsistent herewith.
B. It shall be unlawful to hold a private rental party, except on the following terms and
conditions:
1. The service of liquor at a private rental party shall cease at 1:00 o’clock
A.M.
SEC. 4.14(Cont.2)
2. Private rental parties shall be limited to invited guests only.
3. Written notice must be submitted to the Town twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of any private rental party. Written notice shall be in the form of an
application available from the Town Clerk. The application shall then be
submitted to the Liquor Commissioner for his approval or disapproval. The
written notice shall contain the following information:
a. Name of person or entity sponsoring the event.
b. Relation to retail license holder.
c. Address of person and telephone number.
d. Address of establishment and telephone number.
e. Date and hours of activity.
f. A statement whether alcoholic beverages will be served and if so by
whom.
g. A brief explanation of the proposed activity.
h. An estimate of the number of persons to attend.
i. A statement whether the activity will be supervised, and if so by
whom.
j. A statement whether entertainment will be provided, and if so, a brief
description of the type of entertainment and the name of the person
responsible for the cost of the entertainment.
k. The notification shall contain an affirmation as to its truthfulness and
shall be dated and signed by a retail liquor establishment licensee or
resident agent.
4. A private rental party shall be subject to all terms and conditions of this
Chapter, not inconsistent herewith.
SEC. 4.15 EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERAGE PERSONS. Individuals employed by
licensed establishments must be at least 19 years of age to sell, serve, mix, pour or handle alcoholic
liquor. It shall be unlawful for any individuals under 19 years of age to sell, serve, pour or mix
alcoholic liquor in a licensed establishment. It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to
employ or permit any individual under 19 years of age to sell, serve, pour or mix alcoholic liquor.
SEC. 4.16 ACTS OF AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE;
KNOWLEDGE. Every act or omission, of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
SEC. 4.16(Cont.1)
the provisions of this Act by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any
licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer and licensee, and said employer or
licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done omitted by
him personally.
SEC. 4.17 DEMAND FOR IDENTIFICATION. For the purpose of preventing the sale
or delivery of alcoholic liquor to any persons under the age of 21 years, any licensee or his agents or
employees shall have the right, before making such sale or delivery, to demand presentation of a
valid drivers license, showing evidence of age and identity, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his official duties or some other form of identification issued by the Secretary of
State or other public officer in the performance of his official duties, showing evidence of age and
identity. Any person in the premises offering alcoholic liquor for retail sale, shall, upon the demand
of the person in charge of such premises, or of any law enforcement officer, show such written
evidence of age and identity. If any such person fails to do so, he or she shall be regarded as a
person underage and not entitled to purchase alcoholic liquor. If a licensee or his agent or employee
demands presentation of identification in the form required herein, showing evidence of age and
identity issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties, and if the identification
required herein shows the prospective recipient to be at least the lawful age required for the
purposes of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor and if a sale of alcoholic liquor is made
in reasonable reliance thereon, then the licensee shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of this
Chapter even if in fact, the age of the recipient is less than the lawful age for the purposes of
buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor. In any hearing before the Commissioner, the
burden of proving that a demand for identification as required herein was made, that such required
identification was shown the content of the required identification presented and the reasonableness
of the reliance thereon shall be on the licensee. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if
the agent or employee accepted the written evidence of identification knowing it to be false or
fraudulent.
No person shall transfer, alter or deface any written evidence of age or identity issued by a
public officer in the performance of his official duties, use such evidence of another, carry or use
false or forged identification or obtain such written evidence by means of false information.
SEC. 4.18 HEARINGS. License may be revoked or suspended, a fine imposed or a
reprimand issued by the Commissioner only after a public hearing as follows:
A. No license shall be revoked or suspended nor shall a fine be imposed or a reprimand
issued except after a public hearing with a three-day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. It shall be deemed
sufficient notice if the notice is sent by regular mail to the licensee’s resident agent.
The public hearing may be held by the Commissioner or by a hearing examiner
appointed by the Commissioner. The hearing examiner shall present a written report
of his findings and recommendations to the Commissioner within thirty (30) days
after the public hearing.
B. If the Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community,
he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion
SEC. 4.18(Cont.1)
and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than
seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period,
except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business
or businesses, on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such
other business or businesses.
C. The Commissioner shall review the report of the examiner, if any, and shall within
sixty (60) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license
should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined or reprimanded,
or any combination of fine, suspension or revocation state the reason or reasons for
such determination in a written order and the amount of the fine, the period of
suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such order
upon the licensee.
D. The licensee, after receipt of such order of fine, suspension or revocation, shall have
the privilege within a period of twenty (20) days after the receipt of such order of
suspension or revocation of appealing the order to the State Liquor Control
Commission for a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the order of the
Commissioner. If the licensee who receives an order of suspension or revocation
from the Commissioner, has no prior suspension or revocation, the licensee may
continue to operate until the State Commission has ruled on the Licensee’s appeal of
the Commissioner’s order. If the licensee who receives an order of suspension or
revocation from the Commissioner, has a prior suspension or revocation, the
licensee must cease to engage in the business until the Commissioner’s order is
terminated by its own provisions or reversed. If the State Commission confirms the
Commissioner’s order to suspend or revoke the license at the first hearing, the
appellant shall cease to engage in the business for which the license was issued until
the Commissioner’s order is terminated by its own provisions or reversed upon
rehearing or by the Courts.
E. Hearing Procedures.
1. The licensee shall at all times be afforded due process including the right to
subpoena witnesses in his own behalf, the right to hear witnesses and
evidence given against him, the right to counsel, the right to crossexamination,
and the right to demand a written specification of charges
against him in advance of the hearing.
2. Witnesses shall be sworn, but in all other respects the hearings shall be
informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply including rules
prohibiting hearsay.
3. A certified court reporter shall at the public hearing take the complete record
of all evidence, testimony and comments and, upon notification by the
Commissioner, shall prepare a certified official record of the proceedings
suitable for filing with the State Liquor Control Commission and that all
reviews of the proceedings of the Commissioner be “on the record” so that
SEC. 4.18(Cont.2)
the State Commission’s scope of review is limited to those three (3)
instances stated therein. The cost of taking and preparing the certified
official record of the proceeding shall be shared equally between the
Commissioner and the Licensee, with payment of the Licensee’s share to be
made to the Town at or before the time the Order of the Commissioner
becomes effective, provided, however, if the Order action or decision of the
Commissioner is reversed by the State Commission or a court of law, any
such payment made by the Licensee shall be returned.
F. No person shall make a false statement to the Commissioner.
G. Reprimands, Fines, Suspensions, Or Revocation.
1. After public hearing as provided herein, and if the Commissioner determines
that any of the grounds for fine and/or suspension or revocation of a license
exist of this Chapter, the Commissioner may do any of the following:
a. Direct a written reprimand to the licensee. A copy of said reprimand
shall be made a part of the liquor license application file which is
preserved in the office of the Town Clerk.
b. Impose a fine against the licensee. Any fine imposed shall not
exceed $10,000.00 for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation for which a separate
fine may be assessed.
Fines shall be payable in the manner indicated in any order which
results from a hearing, or as the Liquor Commissioner may otherwise
specify in writing, and the failure to pay any part of a fine as so
indicated or specified may result in the license being summarily
suspended or revoked by the Liquor Commissioner. The licensee
may request a hearing on such action; but, pending a hearing and a
decision thereon by the Liquor Commissioner, the license shall
remain suspended or revoked. It shall be the duty of each licensee
who cannot make a fine payment as indicated or specified to request
a hearing at the earliest possible time to explain the situation and
request that license(s) not be suspended or revoked, as provided for
herein, or for any other reason. Any fine may be collected in court as
provided by law.
c. May suspend the liquor license of such licensee for a period of not
more than 150 days.
d. May revoke the liquor license of such licensee.
SEC. 4.18(Cont.3)
2. In making his determination to reprimand, fine, suspend or revoke, or in
determining the amount of a fine imposed or the length of a suspension
imposed, the Commissioner may consider any of the following:
a. The nature of the violation.
b. The record of the licensee with regard to violations.
c. Past action of the Commissioner in comparable situations.
d. The factual situation and circumstances surrounding the violation.
SEC. 4.19 ENTERTAINMENT.
A. Permits. An entertainment permit shall authorize entertainment which may consist
of but shall not be limited to talking, reading, listening, singing, posing, walking,
dancing, or wrestling. Entertainment may include but shall not be limited to the
personal appearance of amateur or professional entertainers, waiters, waitresses,
hosts, hostesses, or dancers if such person(s) act(s) in that capacity without regard to
whether such person is paid any compensation by the liquor control licensee or
wine/beer licensee, his agent, or employees.
1. Conditions. Such permits shall be issued only to establishments having a
regular seating capacity as enumerated earlier in this ordinance at tables in
accordance with existing City and Public Health and Fire Prevention
Ordinances and Statutes and upon such terms and conditions imposed by the
Liquor Commissioner.
2. Term. Such a permit shall be issued for a term expiring on the next 31st day
of March following issuance.
3. Cancellation. Permits may be canceled for cause which is defined as that
which adversely affects the protection of the public from:
a. Open and notorious conduct consisting of violent, abusive, indecent,
or profane behavior with respect to language, quarreling, singing, or
fighting;
b. Any other disorderly conduct which disturbs or promotes breaches of
the peace;
c. Conduct which otherwise affects the community safety, health,
accepted moral standards, and/or welfare.
4. Notice of Hearings. No permit shall be canceled, except after a public
hearing by the Commissioner with a three day written notice to the licensee
according the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
SEC. 4.19(Cont.1)
B. Prohibited Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any liquor licensee, agent or employee
to provide, suffer or permit any conduct or entertainment within a liquor
establishment in such a manner as to expose to public view:
1. Male or Female genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region, or
pubic hair region.
2. Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
3. Any device, film, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the above listed body parts.
4. The use of tassels, pasties, stars, or transparent material for coverage of the
above listed body parts.
5. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, or any other sexual acts prohibited by law.
6. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals.
7. Excretory functions as part or in connection with any activities set forth
above.
C. Penalty. Violation of this SEC. 4.19 Entertainment will be considered grounds for
fine and/or suspension or revocation of a licensee.
SEC. 4.20 MASS GATHERINGS.
A. Definitions. The following words and terms, whenever used in this Section, shall be
interpreted as herein provided:
1. Fence. Any barrier or partition with principal dimensions of height and
length clearly defining the perimeters of a mass gathering and designed to
control ingress and egress. A fence shall include but not be limited to
existing buildings, walls, hedges, and structures.
2. Mass Gathering. Any outdoor or open air gathering of three hundred (300) or
more persons at which alcoholic liquor is consumed, provided such alcoholic
liquor is not sold at the gathering by a person or persons holding a liquor
license issued by the Town of Normal.
3. Security Guard. Any person clearly identified as security personnel,
provided such person does not consume alcoholic liquor while on duty at the
mass gathering.
4. Sponsor. To allow, permit, conduct, hold, maintain, encourage, organize, or
promote a mass gathering.
SEC. 4.20(Cont.1)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor a mass gathering unless a permit has
been obtained from the Town of Normal for the sponsoring of such mass gathering.
C. Application for Permit. Written application for a permit to sponsor a mass gathering
shall be made to the Chief of Police or his designee. The application may be
submitted at any time, but at least seven (7) days prior to the date upon which the
mass gathering is to be held. Such application shall be on forms provided by the
Town and shall have attached thereto plans, documents, and other material required
by this Division. The application shall be forwarded to the appropriate police
department personnel for an investigation with reference to all applicable Town
codes and laws. The permit application shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
requesting the permit.
2. The name and address of all persons acting as sponsors of the mass
gathering.
3. The name, address, and telephone number of the person acting as
chairperson or otherwise responsible for the conduct of the mass gathering.
4. The purpose of the mass gathering and the estimated number of attendees.
5. The date or dates the mass gathering is to be conducted and the hour or hours
the mass gathering will commence and terminate.
6. The number, type (flush type or portable chemical), and location of toilet
facilities to be provided for use during the mass gathering.
7. The name and address of any concessionaires or vendors doing business at
the mass gathering.
8. Whether any live or recorded music will be provided.
9. Whether alcoholic beverages will be sold at the mass gatherings.
10. A statement as to the number and type of refuse collection containers that
will be available at the mass gathering.
11. A statement explaining the availability of adequate lawful parking within the
immediate area of the mass gatherings.
12. A statement explaining arrangements made for the presence of any security
guard(s).
13. A site plan indicating the location of fencing and points of ingress to and
egress from the mass gathering.
SEC. 4.20(Cont.2)
14. A statement explaining applicant’s legal interest in the mass gathering site
and submission of evidence by deed, lease, or other document verifying such
interest.
D. Conditions Precedent to Granting of Permit. No permit shall be issued under this
Division unless the following conditions are met:
1. Toilet facilities. The applicant shall provide a minimum of one toilet facility
for each seventy-five (75) attendees. Toilet facilities shall be located within
the mass gathering perimeters or within one hundred (100) feet thereof, and
be identified as open for use by attendees.
2. Waste management. Refuse collection containers shall be placed within the
perimeters of the mass gathering and at the point or points of egress from the
mass gathering. Containers shall be durable and non-absorbent. Heavyweight
paper or plastic sacks designed specifically for storage or refuse may
be used. The total capacity of the containers shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) gallons for each fifty (50) attendees.
3. Clean-up. The applicant shall post a clean-up deposit or bond in the amount
of one hundred dollars ($100) to secure compliance with the clean up
provisions of this Section.
4. Traffic and parking control. The applicant shall have made provision for
adequate lawful parking within the immediate area of the mass gathering site
so that traffic will not be disrupted and that emergency vehicles shall have
access to the site.
5. Security and public safety. The applicant shall provide at least one clearly
identified security guard for every fifty (50) attendees or fraction thereof
approved in the permit. Such security guard(s) shall be in attendance from
one half-hour before and until one half-hour after the time of the mass
gathering, as approved for any given day.
6. Mass gathering site. The mass gathering site shall be fenced in such a
manner so that attendees are familiar with the lawful perimeters of the site,
and also to assist the sponsor in restricting the mass gathering to those
persons invited to attend.
7. Interest in mass gathering site. The applicant shall demonstrate a legal
interest in the mass gathering site by means of a deed, lease agreement, or
other document stating such interest.
8. No beverages served in glass bottles will be permitted.
9. No mass gathering shall commence before eleven (11) o’clock a.m. or
continue past one (1) o’clock a.m.
SEC. 4.20(Cont.3)
E. Issuance or Denial of Permit; Appeal.
1. Issuance. The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue a permit within
seven (7) days following receipt of the application for a permit if, based
upon an evaluation of the information provided or information obtained by
an investigation made by the Town, it is determined that the proposed mass
gathering complies with the requirements of this Division, all other Town
ordinances, and applicable state law. The permit issued by the Chief of
Police or his designee shall detail the following:
a. Dates and hour of operation of the mass gathering;
b. Number of attendees permitted at the mass gathering;
c. Number and location of toilet facilities required in connection with
the mass gathering;
d. Size and location of refuse collection containers required in
connection with the mass gathering;
e. Notice that the permittee shall be responsible for clean-up;
f. Number and location of parking spaces or parking areas required in
connection with the mass gathering;
g. Number of security guard(s) required in connection with the mass
gathering;
h. Location and type of fencing required in connection with the mass
gathering;
i. A list of all other permits, licenses, or registrations required by the
Town in order to hold a lawful gathering, including, but not limited
to, any of the following:
(1) Street closure permit
(2) Specific events permit
(3) Sound amplification permit
(4) Business permit or registration
j. Notice that issuance of a mass gathering permit does not constitute
waiver of requirements imposed under other Town ordinances or
state law.
2. Denial. The Chief of Police or his designee shall deny a permit within seven
(7) days following receipt of the application for a permit if any information
supplied by the applicant is false or intentionally misleading, if issuance of a
SEC. 4.20(Cont.4)
permit violates or will cause a violation of the terms of this applicant’s lease
arrangements for use of the mass gathering site, or if the proposed mass
gathering violates any of the conditions of this Division, any other Town
ordinance, or any applicable state law, or if the mass gathering is likely to
cause significant traffic, noise, litter, health, or disturbances of the peace, or
if a mass gathering previously sponsored by the applicant (including any
members of the applicant association) has caused significant problems
regarding noise, traffic, litter, health, unlawful possession or consumption of
alcohol by minors, or disturbances of the peace or that significant problems
regarding noise, traffic, litter, health, unlawful possession or consumption of
alcohol by minors, or disturbances of the peace have occurred at this location
within the past two years. The Chief may also deny a Mass Gathering
permit if a permit has been granted in the past year for any location within
1500 feet of the proposed location and the Chief finds that the issuance of a
Mass Gathering permit would unduly disrupt the quiet of the area of the
proposed Mass Gathering. The Chief may also deny a permit if one or more
such permits have been issued within 48 hours of the time being requested
and the Chief reasonably believes that there are insufficient police resources
available to monitor the Mass Gathering. Such denial shall be in writing and
enumerate the specific reason or reasons for the denial. Notice of the denial
shall be given to the applicant by personal service of by U.S. Mail, first class
postage prepaid.
3. Appeals. The denial of a permit by the Chief of Police or his designee
pursuant to the provisions of this Division may be appealed to the City
Manager by the applicant. Such appeal shall be in writing, filed with the
City Manager within five (5) days of the mailing or personal service of the
decision of the Chief of Police or his designee and must specify objections to
the decision of the Chief of Police or his designee. The City Manager or his
designee shall within seven (7) days act upon the appeal by conducting a
hearing and making a decision on such appeal. The City Manager or his
designee shall notify the applicant personally of the time and place of said
hearing. If the City Manager or his designee determines that a permit should
be issued, then he shall issue a permit. If the City Manager or his designee
determines that a permit should not be issued, then he shall inform the
applicant of his decision in writing specifying his reasons therefore. All
decisions of the City Manager of his designee shall be final and reviewable
only in the courts in accordance with applicable law.
F. Post-Gathering Procedures.
1. Clean-up. The applicant shall be responsible for placing all refuse in
appropriate containers, making it ready for removal within twelve (12) hours
following the conclusion of the mass gathering.
2. Post-gathering inspection. Within twelve (12) hours following the
conclusion of the mass gathering, the Chief of Police shall cause an
SEC. 4.20(Cont.5)
inspection to be made at the mass gathering site to determine compliance
with this section.
3. Deposit, refund, or bond termination. If the permittee has complied with this
section the Chief of Police shall authorize return of the clean-up deposit or
termination of the clean-up bond. The clean-up deposit shall be returned
within five (5) days from such authorization.
4. If, upon inspection, the Chief of Police determines that the permittee has
failed to comply with clean-up provisions, the Chief of Police may cause
trash and debris at the site to be placed in appropriate containers, making it
ready for removal. The permittee shall be responsible for the cost of such
cleanup. The Town may order forfeiture of the clean-up deposit or bond and
apply all or a portion of the same towards the clean-up cost incurred by the
Town.
5. Clean-up deposit or bond forfeiture. The City Manager or his designee shall,
prior to ordering forfeiture of any clean-up deposit or bond, give notice to the
permittee. Such notice shall be by regular mail. Permittee may, within five
(5) days of the mailing of said notice, file a written request with the City
Manager or his designee for an administrative hearing. Failure to request a
hearing shall result in forfeiture of the clean-up deposit or bond.
6. Hearing. Upon request for an administrative hearing, the City Manager or
his designee shall schedule a time at which the permittee may present
evidence indicating by a preponderance of the evidence that the permittee
complied with the terms of the clean-up provisions. Reasonable notice of
said hearing shall be provided to permittee.
7. Decision. If the City Manager or his designee determines that the permittee
has met his burden of proof, then he shall order the clean-up deposit or bond
returned to the permittee. If the City Manager or his designee determines
that the permittee has not met the burden of proof, then he shall order the
clean-up deposit or bond forfeited to the Town. All decisions of the City
Manager or his designee shall be final and reviewable only in the courts in
accordance with applicable law.
G. Necessity For Other Permits. Obtaining a permit under this Division shall not
excuse any person from compliance with any other applicable statute, ordinance, or
regulation, or the necessity of obtaining any other permit or license required by law.
H. Permit Not Transferable. No permit issued under the provisions of this Section shall
be transferable.
I. Permittee Present At All Times. The permittee shall be present at the mass
gathering site during the entire period, from one half-hour prior to the scheduled
SEC. 4-20(Cont.6)
mass gathering time to one hour after the close of the mass gathering, as approved
for any given day.
J. Failure To Comply With Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person granted a
permit pursuant to the terms of this Division to violate any of the terms or conditions
enumerated in such permit.
K. Refusal To Obey Order To Disperse. Any person who refuses to obey a lawful
order of a police officer to orderly disperse from a mass gathering site shall be in
violation of this Section.
L. No Permit - Effect. No person shall knowingly participate in or attend a mass
gathering unless a written permit has been obtained from the City Manager, Chief of
Police, or their designee. Upon verbal notice from a police officer of the Town of
Normal that no permit has been issued for the mass gathering, any person who
refuses or fails to orderly disperse shall be in violation of this Section.
M. Admission. The permittee shall not admit any person to a mass gathering if such
admission results in a greater number of persons present than allowed by the permit.
N. Proximity To Schools, Churches, Hospitals, Etc. No mass gathering shall be held in
a location which is closer than one hundred (100) feet from any school when in
session, church of synagogue when services are being held, hospital or nursing
home, unless such gathering is sponsored by the affected school(s), church(es),
synagogue(s), hospital(s), or nursing home(s).
SEC. 4.21 SALE, POSSESSION, AND TRANSPORTATION OF KEGS.
A. No licensee shall sell alcoholic liquor in a keg without first having obtained the
signature of the purchaser on an adult responsibility form provided by the Town.
The licensee shall retain one copy of the form and provide one copy of the form to
the purchaser. The licensee shall retain copies of all such forms for a period of not
less than three months from the date of sale and produce any and all forms for
inspection by the Liquor Commissioner, his designee, or police officers.
B. Any person who purchases alcoholic liquor in a keg from a licensee in Normal must
sign an adult responsibility form provided by the licensee/seller at the time and point
of sale. The form shall contain the following:
1. The licensee’s name, address, and phone number.
2. The purchaser’s name, address, and phone number.
3. The driver’s license number or other identification used by the licensee to
identify the purchaser.
4. The location the keg is to be used.
SEC. 4.21(Cont.1)
5. The date and signature of the purchaser.
6. The following statement:
As purchaser of a keg of alcohol, I understand that I am responsible for the
proper use of the contents of the keg.
I agree that the contents of the keg will not be sold to another person. This
includes selling cups, tickets, or charging admission to an event at which the
alcohol may be “given” away.
I understand that the legal drinking age in Normal is 21 and that the contents
of the keg will not be furnished to any person under 21 years of age, except
as allowed by ordinance.
I understand that I am required to keep a copy of this Adult Responsibility
Form with the keg at all times and to provide a copy to the Police upon
request.
I understand that if I do not produce a copy of this form when requested by
police, or if the contents of the keg are sold or furnished to a minor, I will be
held to have violated a Town Ordinance.
C. Any person who purchases alcoholic liquor in a keg in another jurisdiction other
than Normal shall sign an adult responsibility form as required in that jurisdiction.
D. Any person in possession of a keg containing alcoholic liquor shall keep any
required adult responsibility form in the same location as the keg at all times and
shall have the form readily available for inspection until the keg is returned to
licensee.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed manufacturer, wholesale
distributor, or licensed liquor retailer to possess a keg containing alcohol in the
Town of Normal in a manner other than as provided by this Section.
F. Presumptions.
1. If a keg is found to be on any residential premises, and no adult
responsibility form is produced, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that
any resident of the dwelling unit in which the keg is found is in possession of
the keg in violation of this Section. A person so charged shall have the
burden of proving that he did not have unlawful possession of the keg.
2. If any keg is used in the unlawful sale of alcohol, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that the person signing the adult responsibility form is
responsible for the unlawful sale of alcohol. The Town shall have the
burden of proving that the keg was used in the unlawful sale of alcohol and
SEC. 4.21(Cont.2)
the Defendant was the person signing the adult responsibility form. The
Defendant shall have the burden of proving that he had no knowledge of the
unlawful sale of alcohol and took reasonable means to prevent the unlawful
sale of alcohol.
3. If any keg is used in the unlawful furnishing of alcohol to a minor, there shall
be a rebuttable presumption that the person signing the adult responsibility
form is responsible for the unlawful furnishing of alcohol to a minor. The
Town shall have the burden of proving that the keg was used in the unlawful
furnishing of alcohol to a minor and the Defendant was the person signing
the adult responsibility form. The Defendant shall have the burden to prove
that he had no knowledge of the unlawful furnishing of alcohol and took
reasonable means to prevent the unlawful furnishing of alcohol.
G. Hours of Sale and Transportation of Kegs. No person shall transport alcoholic
liquor stored in a keg on any public street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. unless such person holds a distributor’s license from the State of Illinois. No
license holder shall sell a keg after 10:00 p.m.
(New SEC. 4.21 Added 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5250, effective August 1, 2009, remaining Sections
renumbered)
SEC. 4.22 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, upon
conviction shall be fined no less than $100.00 nor more than $3,000.00 for each offense. Each day
upon which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
SEC. 4.23 SEVERABILITY. If any Section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this Division is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Chapter. The Town of Normal hereby declares that it adopted this Division and
each portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one portion be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Entire Chapter 4 Amended 5/19/03 by Ord. No. 4873)
SEC. 5.1-1
CHAPTER 5 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
SEC. 5.1-1 COMPOSITION. The authorized full-time strength of the Police Department
and the number of persons authorized to hold various job classifications within the Department is
established and may be changed from time to time by the corporate authority of the Town by the
adoption of the Annual Budget Document or amendments thereto. (Amended 4/2/73)(Amended
l0/2/78)(Amended 8/17/81)(Amended 9/8/81)(Amended 6/17/85)(Amended 10/20/86)(Amended
3/7/88)(Amended 4/17/89)(Amended 10/7/91)(Amended 8/16/93)(Amended 6/19/95)(Amended
8/19/96)(Amended 3/17/97)(Amended 11/17/97)(Amended 3/1/99)
SEC. 5.1-2 CHIEF - APPOINTMENT. The Chief shall be appointed by the City
Manager; provided that if the person appointed Chief was at the time of such promotion a member
of the Department, he shall retain his status and rank while serving as Chief and shall revert to such
status and rank when his term as Chief has ended. (Amended 3/7/72)
SEC. 5.1-3 DUTIES. It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see
to the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the Town and all statutes applicable therein; and to
preserve order and to prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof.
SEC. 5.1-4 SERVICE PROCESS. No member of the Department except the Chief shall
serve any process, except on the command of the Chief of the Police Department.
SEC. 5.1-5 CONDUCT OF MEMBERS. It shall be the duty of every member of the
Police Department to conduct himself or herself, in a proper and law-abiding manner, at all times,
and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Department shall obey the orders
and directions of his superior.
SEC. 5.1-6 WITNESS FEES. Every member of the Police Department shall appear as
witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or
federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fees for services as a witness in any action of
suit to which the Town is a party; and fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Chief
who shall deposit the same with the Town Treasurer. (Amended 9/19/83)
SEC. 5.1-6.5 FINGERPRINT REQUESTS.
A. The Police Department is authorized to honor requests from persons to be
fingerprinted and to have fingerprint cards prepared for them. These
fingerprint services shall be offered at the time and in the manner as
determined by the Chief.
B. The Chief may require a fee of up to $20 per fingerprint card and may waive
this fee for cards prepared for law enforcement agencies, private-security
agencies, or an agency of the U. S. Military. The Chief shall deposit all such
SEC. 5.1-6.5(Cont.1)
fees to the Town Treasurer. (Added 12/3/18 by Ord. No. 5758)(Amended
12/3/18 by Ord. No. 5758)
SEC. 5.1-7 SPECIAL POLICE. The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, may appoint any reputable person as a Special Policeman to serve for such duration and/or
such conditions as may be designated by the term of the appointment. No such Special Policeman
shall be entitled to any compensation from the Town, nor shall such Special Policeman be
considered an employee of the Town by reason of such appointment. Special Policemen shall obey
all rules of the Police Department applicable to them and may be deprived of their appointment by
the Chief at any time.
SEC. 5.1-8. (Deleted 5/17/04 by Ord. No. 4946)
SEC. 5.1-9 APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS. Appointments to and promotions
within the Police Department, shall be made by the City Manager in the manner provided by law
and pursuant to the Town Personnel Code. (Amended 9/8/81)(Amended 8/16/93)(Amended
12/20/93)(Amended 5/17/04 by Ord. No. 4946)
SEC. 5.1-10 DISCHARGES AND DISCIPLINE. Police officers subject to the terms of
a collective bargaining agreement shall be discharged and disciplined in accordance with the terms
of such agreement. Police officers in the ranks of Lieutenant, Assistant Chief and Chief shall be
discharged and disciplined in accordance with the Town Personnel Policy. (Amended
8/l6/93)(Amended 5/17/04 by Ord. No. 4946)
SEC. 5.1-11 COMPENSATION. The members of the Police Department, including the
Chief of Police, shall receive compensation as provided by resolution or ordinance.
SEC. 5.1-12 ACCIDENT REPORTS. That in all cases where a motor vehicle accident
occurs within the Corporate Limits of the Town of Normal and where under such circumstances the
Statute requires the driver or owner of the car to report the accident to the Secretary of State, another
and separate report is hereby required of such person to be made to the Police Department of the
Town of Normal upon forms of report to be furnished by the Town of Normal.
SEC. 5.1-13 PENALTY. Any person failing to make the report provided for in SEC. 5.1-
12, within 24 hours after the accident to be reported, shall be guilty of a violation of said Ordinance
and shall be fined not less than $3.00 nor more than $50.00 for each offense.
SEC. 5.2-1
DIVISION 2 - TOWN MARSHAL
SEC. 5.2-1 CREATION. There is hereby established the office of the Town Marshal.
The Town Marshal shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Town Marshal, in addition to his duties as Marshal, may be appointed or employed
by the Town to act in any other capacity, provided that such appointment or employment is
compatible with his duties as Marshal.
SEC. 5.2-2 CREATION - DEPUTY MARSHAL. There is hereby established the office
of Deputy Marshal. Deputy Marshal shall be appointed by the President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees in such manner as the corporate authorities shall from time to time
deem necessary.
SEC. 5.2-3 REMOVAL - COMPENSATION. The Town Marshal and the Deputy
Marshal shall serve at the discretion of the President and Board of Trustees and may be removed
from office at the will of the President and Board of Trustees. The Town Marshal and the Deputy
Marshals shall receive such hourly compensation for their services as determined by the corporate
authorities.
SEC. 5.2-4 DUTIES. The Town Marshal when functioning as Marshal and the Deputy
Marshals shall not be considered to be members of the regular police department of the Town and
shall not function on a full-time basis. Uniforms and identification symbols of the Marshal and
Deputy Marshal shall be different and distinct from those used by the members of the regular police
department of the Town. The Marshal and Deputy Marshals shall at all times during the
performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police of the
Town.
SEC. 5.2-5 FIREARMS. Deputy Marshals shall perform such duties as directed by the
Town Marshal or by the corporate authorities. Deputy Marshals shall not carry firearms, except
with the special permission of and when issued by the Chief of Police, and when in uniform and
while in the performance of their duties.
SEC. 5.2-6 POWERS. The Town Marshal and the Deputy Marshal shall be conservators
of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the
peace or are violating any municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the State;
B. To commit arrested persons for examination;
C. To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the
State Criminal Law within the limits of the Town;
D. All statutory and common law powers of Sheriffs;
E. To direct traffic and assist in traffic control;
SEC. 5.2-6(Cont.1)
F. To act as watchmen on special assignments;
G. To assist in parade control and to keep peace in all large gatherings in and about the
community;
H. To assist in Civil Defense matters;
I. To assist in cases of riot, disaster and emergency control; and
J. To perform such other related duties as directed by the Chief of Police of the
corporate authorities.
SEC. 5.2-7 BOND. The Marshal and Deputy Marshals so appointed shall at the time of
their appointment execute to the Town a bond in the amount to be established by the corporate
authorities with sureties to be appointed by the corporate authorities and conditioned as required by
law.
SEC. 5.3-1
DIVISION 3 - AUXILIARY POLICE
SEC. 5.3-1 APPOINTMENT. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to appoint twenty
auxiliary policemen as employees, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Prior
to appointment, all proposed auxiliary policemen shall be fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall
be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification, Washington, D.C. for any possible criminal
record. No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony
or other crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all auxiliary policemen may
be terminated by the Chief of Police. (Revised 3/7/72)
SEC. 5.3-2 REQUIREMENTS. Such auxiliary policeman shall not be members of the
regular Police Department of the Town of Normal. Auxiliary policemen need not be residents of
the Town of Normal. Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary policemen shall be different
and distinct from those used by the regular Police Department and shall be selected and chosen by
the Chief of Police of the Town of Normal. Auxiliary policemen shall, at all times during the
performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police.
SEC. 5.3-3 POWERS. Auxiliary policemen shall have the following powers and duties,
when properly assigned and on duty:
A. To aid or direct traffic in the municipality;
B. To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters;
C. To aid in case of civil disorder;
D. To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the Chief of Police
on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular Police Department
to perform normal and regular police duties;
E. To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the
peace, or are found violating any municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the
state;
F. To commit arrested persons for examination;
G. If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody over night or Sunday in any safe
place, or until they can be brought before the proper magistrate;
H. To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the corporate
authorities may prescribe;
I. To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the
state criminal law within the limits of the Town of Normal, and for this purpose to
have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs.
SEC. 5.3-4
SEC. 5.3-4 CARRYING FIREARMS. Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms
except with the permission of the Chief of Police of the Town of Normal and then only when in
uniform and in the performance of their duties.
SEC. 5.3-5 TRAINING. Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties,
shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by the Chief of
Police of the Town of Normal. Such course of training shall not be less than six hours in duration.
Upon completion of the course of training, the Chief of Police shall file a certificate attesting to the
auxiliary policeman's completion of said course, with the Town Clerk.
SEC. 5.3-6 COMPENSATION. Auxiliary policemen shall receive compensation as
provided by resolution.
SEC. 5.4
DIVISION 4 - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
(Division 4 - Parking Violations Bureau - of Chapter 5, Deleted 8/1/1983 by Ordinance No. 3224)
SEC. 6.1-1
CHAPTER 6 - FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE PREVENTION CODE
DIVISION 1 - FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL
SEC. 6.1-1 CREATION. There has heretofore been created and is hereby continued and
maintained a Fire Department as one of the administrative departments of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 6.1-2 DEPARTMENTAL STRENGTH AND ALLOCATION OF
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL AMONG POSITION CLASSIFICATIONS. The authorized
full-time strength of the Fire Department and the number of persons authorized to hold various job
classifications within the Department is established and may be changed from time to time by the
corporate authority of the Town by the adoption of the Annual Budget Document. The full-time
department may be assisted by not more than ten volunteer, part-time firefighters.
SEC. 6.1-3 APPOINTMENT OF PERSONS TO POSITION CLASSIFICATIONS
WITHIN THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
A. Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Municipal Manager in the
manner provided in the Town's Personnel Code.
B. Assistant Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief position shall be filled by the
appointment of the Fire Chief with the consent of the Municipal Manager in the
manner provided by the Personnel Code of the Town.
C. Battalion Chief. The Battalion Chief position hereby created shall be filled by the
appointment of the Fire Chief with the consent of the Municipal Manager in the
manner provided by the Personnel Code of the Town. (Added 12/16/02 by Ord. No.
4840)
D. Firefighter II. This entry-level and lowest ranking position in the Fire Department
shall be appointed by the Fire Chief with the consent of the Municipal Manager in
the manner provided by the Personnel Code of the Town.
E. Promotional Positions. The following positions are promotional in the Fire
Department:
Captain
Lieutenant
Firefighter II
Appointments to such promotional positions shall be made by the Fire Chief with
the consent of the Municipal Manager in accordance with the terms of any collective
bargaining agreement governing such appointment.
SEC. 6.1-3(Cont.1)
F. Other Appointed Positions. All other authorized full-time positions in the Fire
Department shall be filled by appointment of the Fire Chief, with the consent of the
Municipal Manager in the manner provided in the Personnel Code of the Town.
G. Part-Time Volunteer Firefighters. Part-time volunteer firefighters may be appointed
and removed by the Chief. Persons desiring to serve as volunteer part-time
firefighters shall submit a written application for employment to the Chief. The
Chief may review such applications, interview such applicants and hire those
individuals deemed the best able to perform the duties of part-time volunteer
firefighters. No person shall first be employed as a volunteer part-time firefighter
who is more than 34 years of age or who is unable to pass a physical examination
designed to ascertain whether that person is physically able to perform the duties of
a firefighter. Such examination shall be given by a licensed physician at Town
expense, prior to hiring an individual as a part-time volunteer firefighter.
H. Certification. Within two years from the date of original appointment as a volunteer
part-time firefighter, all part-time volunteer firefighters shall successfully obtain
certification as a Firefighter II from the State of Illinois. Failure to obtain such
certification within the period specified shall be grounds for termination.
(Entire 6.1-3 Amended 5/17/04 by Ord. No. 4946)
SEC. 6.1-4 DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL. Personnel in the Fire
Department shall perform the duties and responsibilities assigned to the current job description for
the position held, as such job descriptions may from time to time be revised and approved by the
corporate authority.
SEC. 6.1-5 PERSONNEL REGULATIONS. Personnel regulations and compensation:
A. Full-Time Members. Except as otherwise provided in a collective bargaining
agreement with the Town, all full-time members of the Department shall be subject
to the Personnel Code provided in Chapter 18 of the Municipal Code.
B. Part-Time Volunteer Firefighters.
1. Training Time. All part-time volunteer firefighters are required to take part
in all training programs assigned by the Chief, which shall include not less
than six hours of training time a month. Part-time volunteer firefighters will
be paid for such training time at the hourly rate established for part-time
volunteer firefighter training time in the Salary Administrative Program, as
that rate is amended from time to time by the corporate authority through the
adoption or amendment of budget documents.
2. Call-In Time. Part-time volunteer firefighters called in by a command
officer for other than training or officer-assigned work-in purposes who
respond to such call shall be paid for such call-in time at the hourly rate
SEC. 6.1-5(Cont.1)
established for part-time volunteer firefighters call-in time in the Salary
Administration Program, as that rate is amended from time to time by the
corporate authority through the adoption or amendment of budget
documents.
3. Officer Assigned Work-In. Firefighter II part-time volunteer firefighters
asked, by a command officer, to work "officer assigned work-in" and
actually performing such services shall be paid for such officer assigned
work-in at the hourly rate established for part-time volunteer firefighters
officer assigned work-in in the Salary Administration Program, as that rate is
amended from time to time by the corporate authority through the adoption
or amendment of the budget document.
SEC. 6.1-6 DISCIPLINE, SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL. The Municipal Manager
with respect to the Fire Chief and the Chief with respect to all other positions in the Department
may discipline, suspend or remove such persons in the following way:
A. For persons subject to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, in accordance
with the applicable terms of the agreement.
B. For persons not subject to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, in
accordance with the Town Personnel Code.
SEC. 6.2-1
DIVISION 2 - FIRE INSPECTOR
SEC. 6.2-1 CREATION. The positions of Fire Inspector having before been created are
continued. Such positions shall be filled by appointment of the Fire Chief with the consent of the
Municipal Manager in the manner provided in the Personnel Code of the Town.
SEC. 6.2-2 FIRE INSPECTORS. Said Fire Inspectors shall have authority to administer
and enforce all Fire Codes and regulations of the Town of Normal and the State of Illinois within
the Town of Normal and specifically, but not limited to the Fire Prevention Code of the National
Fire Protection Association as adopted by the Town of Normal and shall make recommendations to
the Fire Chief as to ordinances desirable for the prevention or elimination of fire hazards. It shall be
the further duty of said Fire Inspectors to inspect all properties on a regular but unscheduled basis
for fire hazards in compliance with fire codes and regulations of the Town of Normal and State of
Illinois. Said inspectors shall maintain records and reports of all inspections, issue orders to
violators and follow up to see that violations are corrected. Said inspectors shall assume and do all
other duties as assigned by the Fire Chief or the City Manager, including the making of necessary
public relation contacts. The compensation for such position shall be as is from time to time
provided by the President and Board of Trustees. Fire Inspectors shall serve as Fire Marshal as that
term is used in the Fire Prevention Code of the National Fire Protection Association.
SEC. 6.3-1
DIVISION 3 - FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
SEC. 6.3-1 CREATION OF THE BOARD. That the Board of Trustees of the firemen's
pension fund be and the same is hereby created as by statute provided consisting five (5) members.
Two members of the Board shall be appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees of the
Town of Normal. Two members of the Board shall be active participants of the pension fund who
are elected from the active participants of the fund. One member of the Board shall be a person
who is retired under the Firemen’s Pension Fund Act who is elected from persons retired under the
Firemen’s Pension Fund act.
SEC. 6.3-2 MEMBERS. The members of said Board chosen from the active firemen of
such municipality and one person chosen from the retired firemen shall be elected as provided by
statute and board rule. The other board members as set forth in said statute shall consist of those
persons appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 6.3-3 POWERS OF BOARD. The Board shall have the powers and duties stated in
40 ILCS 5/4 et seq. Illinois Compiled Statutes as therein provided and as may be hereafter provided.
(Entire Division 3 was Amended 3/6/06 by Ord. No. 5058)
SEC. 6.4-1
DIVISION 4 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SEC. 6.4-1 ADOPTION. This Division shall provide the Town of Normal with rules and
regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the
installation, use, and maintenance of equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises, and open
areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and procedures
for code enforcement; and setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of these
objectives.
This Division shall be known as Fire Prevention Code. This Division adopts NFPA 1, Fire
Prevention Code, of the National Fire Protection Association, and its incorporated standards,
appendices, and codes as published in the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection
Association being particularly the 2015 edition thereof, including all amendments thereto adopted
by the NFPA through their August 2015 meeting, save and except those portions such as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by SEC. 6.4-16 of this Division. The same are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. One copy of the adopted issue of
NFPA 1, Fire Prevention Code, of the National Fire Protection Association, and the adopted
standards, appendices and codes of the National Fire Codes shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Town of Normal.
(Amended 12/4/00 by Ord. No. 4691)(Amended 3/5/07 by Ord. No. 5121)(Amended 8/3/09 by Ord.
No. 5283)(Amended 10/21/13 by Ord. No. 5510)(Amended 1/4/2016 by Ord. No. 5615)
In case any provision of the foregoing Codes are inconsistent or are in conflict with any
other Town Code, the provision that is more restrictive shall prevail. The determination as to which
of said Codes is the more restrictive shall be made in the sole discretion of the Fire Chief of the
Town of Normal, or his duly designated agent for said purpose.
SEC. 6.4-2 DUTY TO OBEY. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this Division,
to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to
comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by the action of
the Chief of the Fire Department in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed
prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises.
Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be
deemed to relieve any of the others.
SEC. 6.4-3 DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION. The Fire Chief of the Normal Fire
Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code. The Fire Chief of
the Normal Fire Department may detail qualified members of the Fire Department as inspectors as
shall from time to time be necessary. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties
placed upon the Fire Chief of the Normal Fire Department, a Division of Fire Prevention in the Fire
Department of the Town of Normal is hereby created.
SEC. 6.4-4 DUTIES. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Division of Fire Prevention
to enforce all laws and ordinances of the Town of Normal, covering the following:
A. The preservation of safety to life and the prevention of fires;
SEC. 6.4-4(Cont.1)
B. The storage, sale, and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials;
C. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire
extinguishing equipment;
D. The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire or other emergency, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live, or
congregate, from time to time, for any purpose;
They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other
sections of this Chapter, and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law, or as
designated by the Fire Chief.
SEC. 6.4-5 INSTRUCTIONS. The Fire Chief of Normal shall prepare instructions for the
Fire Inspectors, and forms for their use in the reports required by this Division.
SEC. 6.4-6. Reserved.
SEC. 6.4-7 PERMIT. Before permits may be issued as required by this Code, the Fire
Inspectors shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings, or storage places
to be used for any such purposes.
SEC. 6.4-8 INSPECTIONS. The Fire Inspectors shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
premises on a periodic basis and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of
the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding or life and property from fire.
SEC. 6.4-9 COMPLIANCE.
A. Whenever any inspection shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other
places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or
unnecessary accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly
flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors,
or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress
of occupants in case of fire, the inspector shall order the same to be removed or
remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant
of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in the
Fire Prevention Code.
B. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period
after the service of the said order shall be liable to penalties as hereinafter provided.
C. The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to
whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally,
or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is
SEC. 6.4-9(Cont.1)
found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the
door to the entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such
an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering
to and leaving with the said person a copy of the said order, or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy by
certified mail to the owner's last known post office address.
D. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure, or land is used in
violation of this Chapter, the proper authorities of the Town, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such an
unlawful erection, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building or structure or land; or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
SEC. 6.4-10 RECORDS. The Fire Inspectors shall compile and keep a record of all fires
and all the facts concerning the same, including injuries, deaths, rescue of persons, statistics as to the
extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by
insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the
Fire Inspectors under the provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 6.4-11 ANNUAL REPORT. The Fire Inspectors shall make an annual report of the
activities of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and shall transmit this report to the Fire Chief of the
Normal Fire Department. The report shall contain all proceedings under the Fire Prevention Code
with such statistics as the Fire Chief may wish to include therein.
SEC. 6.4-12 AMENDMENTS. The Fire Chief of the Normal Fire Department or the Chief
Fire Inspector shall also recommend any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code or ordinance that
shall be desirable.
SEC. 6.4-13 SCOPE. The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall apply equally to
both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as
otherwise specified.
SEC. 6.4-14 SOURCE OF DIVISION. This act shall be deemed in exercise of the police
powers of the Town of Normal for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace,
safety, and welfare, and all the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall be liberally construed
for that purpose.
SEC. 6.4-15 PENALTY.
A. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to
comply with, or resisting or opposing the investigation or enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Code, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first offense and not less than two hundred and fifty dollars
SEC. 6.4-15(Cont.1)
($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second and each
subsequent offense in any 180 day period: provided however, that all actions
seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to
provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1 et seq.). A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person
shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after
notification or knowledge of the existing thereof. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No.
4797).
B. Persons receiving citations for violations of the Fire Prevention Code may settle
certain of those violations as set forth in SEC. 17.2 of the Town of Normal
Municipal Code. (Amended 12/4/00 by Ord. No. 4691)
SEC. 6.4-16 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AMENDMENTS, AND
MODIFICATIONS TO NFPA 1.
A. Amend Section 1.3 Application of NFPA 1 to read as follows:
Section 1.3 Application. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all buildings,
structures, vehicles, marine vessels, premises, and conditions within this jurisdiction.
The provisions of this Code shall apply equally to existing as well as new buildings,
structures, marine vessels, premises, and conditions not in compliance with this
Code may be permitted to continue unless in the opinion of the Fire Chief they
constitute a fire hazard to life or property.
B. Amend Section 1.10 Board of Appeals to read as follows:
Section 1.10 Board of Appeals. As used in NFPA, the term Board of Appeals shall
mean the Building Board of Appeals as established by the Town pursuant to Chapter
11 of the Town of Normal Municipal Code, 1969, as amended.
C. Amend Section 1.16.4 to read as follows:
Section 1.16.4. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or
who fails to carry out an order made pursuant of this Code or violates any condition
attached to a permit, approval, or certificate, shall be subject to the penalties
established by SEC. 6.4-15 of this Division.
D. Add Section 1.16.6 Reinspection Fee to read as follows:
Section 1.16.6 Reinspection Fee. Continuous violations requiring more than one (1)
reinspection shall be subject to a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fine for each and every
subsequent reinspection.
E. Add the following sentence at the end of Section 2.1 General:
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.1)
As the documents or portions thereof are updated, the most current code or section
adopted by the National Fire Prevention Association shall apply.
F. Amend Section 2.2 by deleting “NFPA 5000, Building Construction and Safety
Code, 2015 Edition.”
G. Amend Section 2.4 by deleting “NFPA 5000, Building Construction and Safety
Code, 2015 Edition.”
H. Add Section 3.3.122.1 to read as follows:
Section 3.3.122.1 Designation of Fire Lanes. The following alleys with the width of
each alley shown in parenthesis, are hereby designated as fire lanes:
1. The north-south alley extending between Hovey Avenue and the former
SPCSL Corp. tracks, located in the block bounded by Franklin Avenue on
the east and University Street on the west. (20 feet)
2. The north-south alley extending between Church Street and Cullom Street in
the block bounded by Main Street on the west, Cullom Street on the south,
University Street on the east and Church Street on the north. (20 feet)
3. The alley paralleling the former SPCSL Corp. tracks, said alley extending
between a municipal parking lot on the southwest and Linden Street on the
northeast in the block bounded by East Beaufort Street on the north, Linden
Street on the east, railroad right-of-way on the south and a municipal parking
lot on the west. (22 feet)
4. The south half of the north-south alley extending between Dale Street and
Osage Street in the block bounded by Main Street on the east, Dale Street on
the north, Kingsley Street on the west and Osage Street on the south. (16
feet)
5. The north-south alley extending between Osage Street and Beaufort Street in
the block bounded by Osage Street on the north, University Street on the
east, Beaufort Street on the south and Main Street on the west. (20 feet)
6. The north-south alley extending between Willow Street and Locust Street in
the block bounded by Willow Street on the north, Normal Avenue on the
east, Locust Street on the south, and University Street on the west. (20 feet)
7. The north 396 feet of the north-south alley extending between Locust Street
and College Avenue in the block bounded by Main Street on the west,
Locust Street on the north, University Street on the east and College Avenue
on the south. (20 feet)
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.2)
8. The east-west alley extending between Broadway Avenue and parking lot
adjacent to the west of the SPCSL Corp. right-of-way in the block bounded
by Broadway Avenue on the west, College Avenue on the north, the SPCSL
Corp. right-of-way on the east and North Street on the south. (12 feet)
9. The north-south alley extending between Irving Street and Vernon Avenue
in the block bounded by Fell Avenue on the west, Irving Street on the north,
Broadway Avenue on the east and Vernon Avenue on the south. (20 feet)
10. The north-south alley extending between Irving Street and Vernon Avenue
in the block bounded by Hester Avenue on the west, Irving Street on the
north, Fell Avenue on the east and Vernon Avenue on the south. (20 feet)
11. The alley extending between the SPCSL Corp. right-of-way and continuing
to Vernon Avenue in the block bounded by Hester Avenue on the east,
Vernon Avenue on the south, School Street on the west and the SPCSL
Corp. right-of-way on the north. (20 feet)
12. The east-west alleys extending between Oak Street and Maple Street in the
block bounded by Oak Street on the west, College Avenue on the north,
Walnut Street on the east and Dewey Avenue on the south. (16 feet)
13. The northeasterly-southwesterly alley extending between the SPCSL Corp.
right-of-way and the intersection of College and Linden in the block
bounded by the SPCSL Corp. right-of-way on the west, College Avenue on
the north, Linden Street on the east and Beaufort Street on the south. (10
feet)
(Subsection H Amended 8/3/09 by Ord. No. 5283)(Amended 10/21/13 by Ord. 5510)
I. Add to Section 10.16.3 Decorations and Floats the following:
No float shall be erected over any mechanical vehicle which shall hinder the
occupant from being able to remove himself safely and quickly.
All electrical wiring to decorations shall be on a separate circuit of the proper
capacity to protect all wiring and conform to the electrical code of the Town.
The Fire Prevention Division can reject any display, float, house decoration, or
structure placed in a hazardous location to life, safety, or dangerous to property. The
Fire Prevention Division shall have the authority to have the said structure,
decoration, float, or display removed or replaced at any time.
Any float placed on display must be located at least fifty (50) feet from any building
or structure.
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.3)
The above sections shall prevail to any place within the jurisdiction of the Fire
Department of the Town of Normal. (Amended 8/3/09 by Ord. No. 5283)
J. Add Section 13.1.1.2 Minimum Safety Margin. Any fire sprinkler hydraulic
calculation submitted to the Town of Normal shall have at a minimum 10 psi Safety
Margin.
K. Amend Section 13.2.2.2(1) by deleting the word “three” and substituting the word
“two” in lieu thereof.
L. Amend Section 13.3.1.8.2.1 by deleting the existing language and substituting the
following:
Supervision of automatic sprinkler systems is required for all automatic sprinkler
systems, except for automatic sprinkler systems in a one or two-family dwelling.
Waterflow alarms shall be transmitted to an approved proprietary alarm-receiving
facility, a remote station or a central station.
M. Add Section 13.3.1.8.2.3 Automatic Sprinkler Alarms for Multi-Story Buildings as
follows:
In multi-story buildings that have sprinkler systems, approved floor control valves
with water flow switches shall be provided for each floor. There shall be a white
horn/strobe unit installed in weatherproof housing above each fire connection for
each sprinkler system.
N. Add Section 13.3.1.8.2.4 Automatic Sprinkler Alarms for Multi-Tenant Buildings as
follows:
In sprinklered buildings with multiple tenants an approved control valve with water
flow switches shall be provided for each tenant space. There shall be a white
horn/strobe unit installed in weatherproof housing above each fire connection for
each sprinkler system. An additional amber strobe shall be installed at an approved
exterior location for each unit to be activated by the flow switch for that particular
unit.
O. Add Section 13.3.1.8.2.5 Notification Devices for Sprinkler Alarms in Multi-Tenant
Buildings as follows:
Approved audio/visual devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinker
system. Such devices shall be activated by the flow of water through any flow
switch installed in the sprinkler system. All water flow devices shall activate alarm
notification devices in compliance with NFPA 13 and 72. Where there are multiple
tenants or uses in a building, the activation of a water flow device in any area of the
building will activate all notification devices in the building or structure. (Amended
10/15/2012 by Ord.No. 5457)(Amended 6/1/2015 by Ord. No. 5587)
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.4)
P. Amend Section 13.5.1 Private Service Mains by adding the following:
Private service mains shall be constructed of metal pipe, and shall not be PVC,
concrete or other non-metallic material. A private service main supplying water to a
building shall be installed the full length from the supply to the final location within
the building or structure at a single time and by a single contractor.
Q. Amend Section 18.2.2.1 Access Boxes to read as follows:
Any building, other than a one or two family dwelling, that has an automatic alarm
system which is capable of dialing a remote station for Fire Department notification
as described in NFPA72 shall have an approved access box installed in an accessible
location approved by the Fire Department.
R. Add Section 18.4.2.1 Hydrant Flow to read as follows:
Section 18.4.2.1 Hydrant Flow. Water flow from hydrants, as recommended by the
Illinois Insurance Services Office (ISO), shall be required before occupancy of any
structure. Where at least fifty percent (50%) of the required water flow is not
present at the closet hydrant to any structure, said structure shall have a sprinkler
system installed conforming with NFPA standards. Water flows shall be tested
and/or certified by the Normal Fire Department.
S. Add Section 18.5.11 Hydrant Location to read as follows:
Hydrants. Other than single-family and two-family zoning, pumper type hydrants
shall be located no more than 250 feet apart and at such additional locations as are
necessary due to configuration, size, use of buildings, or property as required by
the division of fire prevention. (Added 11/3/2008 by Ord. No. 5220) (Amended
8/3/09 by Ord. No. 5283)(Amended 10/21/13 by Ord. No. 5510)
T. Add Section 13.5.1.1 Water Supply to a Private Hydrant to read as follows:
Section 13.5.1.1 Water Supply to a Private Hydrant. All water supply mains to a
private fire hydrant shall be constructed and installed so that such mains do not pass
through a building or structure. (Added 1/7/02 by Ord. No. 4762)(Amended 8/3/09
by Ord. No. 5283) (Amended 10/21/13 by Ord. No. 5510)
U. Add Section 42.3.4 Fuel Storage Tanks Under or Above Ground:
All storage of gasoline or other volatile fuel shall be in compliance with the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Office of the State Fire Marshall as amended
from time to time. The following provisions shall apply to any above ground
storage of gasoline or other volatile fuel:
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.5)
1. No above ground storage tanks shall be located within any residential zoning
district.
2. A maximum of two (2) tanks per occupancy.
3. The aggregate capacity of above ground storage of gasoline or other volatile
fuel shall be a maximum of five hundred (500) gallons per lot or use
whichever is more restrictive, and a maximum of one thousand (1,000)
gallons in a B-1 Business Zoning District and M-1 Manufacturing Zoning
District.
4. All above ground storage tanks shall conform to applicable NFPA Codes and
appendices.
5. All tanks at the time of installation must meet or exceed the Underwriters
Laboratory standard 2085 or the latest revision thereof.
6. The Fire Department may issue regulations requiring diking or other
containment methods where life, health, and safety so require.
7. Tanks shall be screened from view of streets and residential property.
8. Tanks shall not be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to an assembly
occupancy or building containing any residential dwelling units.
9. Tanks exceeding 500 gallons shall be equipped with an automatic alarm
system notifying the Town or the local central dispatching agency of any
problems with the tank affecting public safety.
10. In the B-1 Business District, tanks and related facilities shall be screened
from street view with a concrete or masonry wall or similar permanent
material other than wood, vinyl, metal or mesh.
11. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, may issue a permit for a temporary
waiver of any of the requirements set forth under paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9,
or 10 of this Subsection O for the temporary storage of fuel tanks. Any
request for a waiver must be made in the form and manner required by the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may approve a request for a temporary waiver
only if he or she finds that (i) the waiver will not conflict with any State or
Federal law or any rule or regulation of the State Fire Marshall and (ii) the
granting of the waiver will not jeopardize the health, safety, or welfare of the
public or of any employee or agent of the Town. The decision to grant or
deny a waiver rests in the discretion of the Fire Chief. Any waiver granted
may not exceed a period of 12 months.
(Amended 8/3/09 by Ord. No. 5283)(Amended 3/20/2017 by Ord. No. 5685)
SEC. 6.4-16(Cont.6)
V. Combustion Heaters in Outdoor Public Assembly Areas:
1. A combustion heater is any heating unit that uses propane gas, natural gas,
kerosene, or gasoline which is designed and intended to be used in various
locations either indoors or outdoors.
2. For purposes of this Section, a “place of assembly” is any place used for a
gathering of persons for deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating,
drinking, amusement, awaiting transportation, sports, work breaks, or similar
uses. A “place of assembly” excludes residential premises.
3. Wherever a combustion heater is used outdoors in a place of assembly, the
heater must meet the following conditions:
a. The heater must be permanently attached to the ground, floor, or wall
such that it cannot be tipped or knocked over.
b. The heater must be provided with a permanent fuel supply that is
piped to the unit that has a remote shut-off valve that is no closer
than 20 feet from the unit. The remote shut-off may be closer than
20 feet from the unit if the remote shut-off is on the other side of a
solid wall at least ten feet high with a minimum one-hour fire rating.
Where multiple heaters are used in a single location, a single remote
shut-off valve must be utilized and located no closer than 20 feet
from any unit or on the other side of a solid wall at least 10 feet high
with a minimum one-hour fire rating.
c. The heater must be listed for the use to which it is being put from the
agency recognized for that purpose by either NFPA or International
Code Council.
d. The unit must be located or screened such that persons cannot be
accidentally burned by the unit.
e. The unit must be shut-off when there are no persons on the premises.
f. A minimum distance from combustibles must be maintained at the
greater of those set forth by the listing company or the following:
(1) 16 inches above the reflector,
(2) 30 inches below the reflector, and
(3) 30 inches beside the reflector.
g. Overhead deflectors and burners must be a minimum of 84 inches
above the ground.
(Entire SEC. 6.4-16 Amended 1/18/05 by Ord. No. 4992)(Entire SEC. 6.4-16 Amended 3/5/07 by
Ord. No. 5121)(Entire SEC. 6.4-16 Amended 1/4/2016 by Ord. No. 5615)
SEC. 6.4-17
SEC. 6.4-17 OPEN BURNING & PERMIT SYSTEM.
A. Rules for Open Burning and Other Activities Requiring Permits. The rules for open
burning and other activities requiring permits are contained in this Section.
1. Open Burning Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall
be unlawful for any person to ignite, burn, cause to be ignited or burned or
permit to be ignited or burned any paper, furniture, building, structure,
material constituting refuse (as that term is defined and used in Chapter 21
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended), leaves,
lawn trimmings, or garden wastes on any public right-of-way street, alley
or sidewalk, or in any private yard, lot, courtway, or other open
unenclosed space within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal.
2. Cooking and Recreational Fires. A permit is required for all fires conducted
outside of a building, except cooking and recreational fires which are
allowed without a permit under the following conditions:
a. Cooking fires are allowed under the following conditions:
(1) The fire is built in a fireplace, or grill;
(2) The fire is used for cooking purposes only;
(3) The fire is kept under competent and continuous
supervision;
(4) All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel
for the fire is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so
as not to constitute a hazard;
(5) All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use
thereof has been completed; and
(6) Only clean, dry firewood or charcoal may be used for
cooking fires. Construction materials or yard waste are
strictly prohibited. The use of flammable or combustible
liquids, other than commercially produced charcoal lighter
fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
b. Recreational fires are allowed under the following conditions:
(1) The fire is in a commercially available portable fireplace, a
chiminea, a permanent outdoor fireplace constructed of
stone or firebrick, or in an approved fire pit. For purposes
of this Section, an approved fire pit shall be bare ground
with no vegetation no less than fifteen feet in diameter.
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.1)
(2) Only clean, dry firewood may be used for recreational fires.
Construction materials or yard waste is strictly prohibited.
The use of flammable or combustible liquids, other than
commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the
fire is strictly prohibited.
(3) The fire is kept under competent and continuous
supervision.
(4) All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel
for the fire is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so
as not to constitute a hazard.
(5) All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use
thereof has been completed.
(6) No fire shall exceed three feet in diameter or two feet in
height.
(7) No fire in an approved container (portable fireplace or
chiminea) shall be located within 8 feet of a building. No
fire in a fire pit shall be located within 25 feet of a building.
(8) At least one functioning, portable fire extinguisher with a
4-A rating shall be outside and available for immediate use
at all times when the fire is burning, or a functional garden
hose attached to a functional water source.
(9) No recreational fires are permitted between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(10) No recreational fire shall be permitted when the Fire Chief
or his designee has issued an order banning all recreational
fires. The Fire Chief may issue an order banning all
recreational or special event fires when wind conditions or
drought create a significant risk of fire spreading beyond
the recreational or special event fire.
(11) All recreational fires shall be extinguished when repeated
wind gusts in excess of 20 miles per hour are presented or
when there is sustained wind in excess of 15 miles per
hour.
3. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to have an open fire, except
cooking and recreational fires as set forth in SEC. 6.4-17(A)(2) of this
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.2)
Code or to engage in the following activities in the Town of Normal
unless a permit has been obtained prior to the open fire or engaging in the
listed activity:
a. Special event fires. A person or entity may have an open special
event fire if the following conditions are met:
(1) A special event fire permit has been obtained from the
Town of Normal Fire Department.
(2) The group or person obtaining the permit provides
competent and continuous supervision;
(3) That the fire is built in connection with an activity
comparable to one of the following illustrative examples:
school pep really bonfire, scouting, and related activities;
group wiener roasts; or campfires.
(4) The fire is in a fire pit which shall consist of bare ground
with no vegetation no less than 30 feet in diameter.
(5) Only clean, dry firewood or non-treated lumber may be
used for special event fires. The use of flammable or
combustible liquids, other than commercially produced
charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
No special event fire shall exceed ten feet in diameter or
ten feet in height.
(6) All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel
for the fire is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so
as not to constitute a hazard.
(7) All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use
thereof has been completed.
(8) No special event fire shall be located within 50 feet of a
building.
(9) At least one functioning, portable fire extinguisher with a
4-A rating shall be outside and available for immediate use
at all times when the fire is burning, or a functional garden
hose attached to a functional water source.
(10) No special event fires are permitted between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.3)
(11) No special event fire shall be permitted when the Fire Chief
or his designee has issued an order banning all special
event fires. The Fire Chief may issue an order banning all
special event fires when wind conditions or drought create
a significant risk of fire spreading beyond the special event
fire.
(12) All special event fires shall be extinguished when repeated
wind gusts in excess of 20 miles per hour are presented or
when there is sustained wind in excess of 15 miles per
hour.
b. A permit is required for the operation of any plant or the conduct of
any operation that produces potentially explosive dust as a product,
or by-product, during the operation of such plant or the conduct of
such operation.
c. A permit is required:
(1) For the storage, handling, or use of containers of more than:
(a) 2,000 gallons (7,570L) individual water capacity or
an aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gallons
(15,140L) of flammable compressed gases, or
(b) 10,000 gallons (37,850L) individual water capacity or
an aggregate water capacity of 20,000 gallons
(75,700L) of nonflammable compressed gases.
(2) For each temporary installation of flammable compressed
gases over ten (10) gallon water capacity.
(3) To store, use, or handle containers of flammable liquefied
gases of 2,000 gallons (7,570L) individual water capacity
aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gallons (15,140L).
(4) To store, use, or handle liquefied medical gases exceeding
2,000 gallons (7,570L) water capacity in any one container or
an aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gallons (15,140L).
d. Permits to manufacture, possess, sell, or otherwise use explosive
materials shall be obtained in accordance with the requirements set
forth in NFPA 495, Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Use
of Explosive Materials.
e. A permit is required for:
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.4)
(1) Storage, handling, or use of Class I flammable liquids in
excess of 15 gallons (15.78L) inside of any building or in
excess of 60 gallons (227.1L) outside of any building.
(2) Storage, handling, or use of Class II or III flammable or
combustible liquids in excess of 25 gallons (94.36L) in a
building or 60 gallons (227.1L) outside of a building.
(3) The initial installation of an oil burner and attendant fuel tank
installed in accordance with applicable NFPA Codes and
standards as listed in Annex A of this Code.
(4) The replacement of an existing oil burner or fuel oil tank
connected to the oil burner.
f. Permits for the supervised display of fireworks conducted in
accordance with the provisions of NFPA 1123, and the State of
Illinois Fireworks Use Act, 425 ILCS 35/1 et. seq., shall be required.
Application for such permits shall be made in writing at least 15
days in advance of the date of display and shall include a sketch of
the display area including distances and physical barriers where
required. Additionally, all permit applications shall be accompanied
by a $1,000 cash bond to insure compliance with all laws, ordinances
and regulations and to pay for any damage which the display may
cause.
g. A permit is required for the storage or handling of more than 25
pounds (11.4 kg) of pyroxylin plastics, for the manufacture of articles
of pyroxylin plastics in the manufacturing or assembling of other
articles.
h. A permit is required for all installations, additions, or modifications
to any sprinkler system, fire suppression system, fire alarm or fire
detection system. Plans for all systems shall be submitted before
installation and system test shall be witnessed and/or certified by the
Division of Fire Protection.
i. A permit is required for other regulated materials and operations as
provided in NFPA 1.
B. Permit Application and Appeal Process. Permits for open burning for special
events and for other activities requiring a permit shall be as set forth in this
section.
1. Special Event Permit Applications. The Fire Chief or his designee may issue
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.5)
a permit for a fire at a special event if the following information is provided
to the Town:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person seeking the
permit. (If the permit is sought for a group or association, the name
address and phone number of the association’s member who is in
charge of the event.); and
b. The location, date and time of the fire, including a brief description
of the event and type of fire, e.g. campfire, bonfire, wiener roast, and
c. If the property is not owned by the person seeking the permit, written
authorization from the owner of the property for the fire.
d. Such other information as the Fire Chief believes is necessary for the
determination that the public safety would not be jeopardized by the
issuance of a special event permit.
2. Denials of Special Event Fire Permit Applications. The Fire Chief, or his
designee, may deny a Special Event Permit request for any of the following
reasons:
a. Required information is missing or false; or
b. The application is not timely filed or;
c. A prior event sponsored by the individual or organization sponsoring
this event violated Town ordinances, caused a disturbance; or created
a fire hazard or;
d. A prior event held at this location violated Town ordinances, caused
a disturbance; or created a fire hazard or;
e. The proposed location, time or type of fire presents a substantial risk
to the public health and welfare if the permit were issued or;
f. A permit has been granted in the past year for any location within
1500 feet of the proposed location and the Fire Department finds that
the issuance of a fire permit would unduly disrupt the quiet of the
area of the proposed fire or;
g. One or more fire permits have been issued within 48 hours of the
time being requested for the permit and the Fire Department
reasonably believes that there are insufficient fire or police resources
available to monitor the special event or;
SEC. 6.4-17(Cont.6)
h. Weather or environmental conditions, such as high winds or
droughts, exist or are predicted to exist, which would cause a danger
to property or persons if the special event fire were to occur.
3. Appeals of Denials of Special Event Permits. The denial of a special event
fire permit by the Fire Chief, or his designee, may be appealed to the City
Manager by the applicant. Such appeal shall be in writing, filed with the
City Manager and must specify objections to the decision of the Fire Chief
or his designee. The City Manager or his designee shall within seven (7)
days act upon the appeal. If the City Manager or his designee determines
that a permit should not be issued, then he shall inform the applicant of his
decision in writing specifying his reasons therefore. All decisions of the City
Manager, or his designee shall be final and reviewable only in the courts in
accordance with applicable law.
4. Applications for Permits Other than Special Event Permits. The Fire Chief or
his designee may issue any permit required by this division if the following
information is provided to the Town:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person seeking the
permit. (If the permit is sought for a corporation or association, the
name address and phone number of the corporation or association’s
member who is in charge of the item for which a permit is required.),
and
b. The location of the item, including an exact description of the item or
items for which a permit is required, and
c. If the property on which the item is to be located is not owned by the
person seeking the permit, written authorization from the owner of
the property for the item, and
d. Any operating permits or other permits required to be possessed to
own or operate the item in question, and
e. A description of the use of the property on which the item or items
are to be located, including all structures, parking areas and drives on
the property, and
f. A description of the uses of the properties adjacent to the property on
which the item or items are to be located, including all structures,
parking areas and drives on those properties, and
g. Such other information as the Fire Chief believes is necessary for the
determination that the public safety would not be jeopardized by the
issuance of a permit.
SEC.6.4-17(Cont.7)
5. Denials of Permits for Activities Other than Special Events. The Fire Chief,
or his designee, may deny a permit request for any of the following reasons:
a. Required information is missing or false; or
b. The application is not filed in sufficient time to make a reasonable
assessment of the risk involved by the item or items or;
c. A prior permit issued to this individual, corporation or organization
violated Town ordinances, caused a danger or caused a fire or;
d. A prior permit issued at this location violated Town ordinances,
caused a danger or fire or;
e. The proposed location, time or type of item presents a substantial risk
to the public health and welfare if the permit were issued or;
f. A permit has been granted for any location within 1500 feet of the
proposed location and the Fire Chief determines that the issuance of
a permit would create a danger to the public health and welfare.
6. Appeals of Denials of Permits Other than Special Events. The denial of a
permit other than a special event fire permit by the Fire Chief, or his
designee, shall be final and reviewable only in the courts in accordance with
applicable law.
C. Revocation of a Permit. The Fire Chief, or his designee, may revoke a previously
issued permit if weather conditions create a hazardous condition or if the Fire
Chief learns of additional information which would cause him to have not issued
the permit in the initial instance. The Fire Chief, or his designee, shall
immediately notify the holder of a permit of the revocation of the permit. It shall
be unlawful to engage in any activity for which a permit had been issued after that
permit has been revoked.
(SEC. 6.4-17 Amended 12/4/00 by Ord. No. 4695)(Amended 4/21/03 by Ord. 4865)(Amended
10/4/10 by Ord. No. 5350)
SEC. 6.4-18 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH STATE FIRE MARSHAL
EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS. Any person servicing, installing, repairing, altering, or
modifying any equipment subject to regulation by the State of Illinois Fire Marshal shall comply
with said state regulations or be subject to penalty as set forth in this Chapter.
SEC. 6.4-19 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. The Fire Inspector or
other officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code while acting for the Town of
Normal shall not thereby render himself personally liable and he is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his official duty. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by him in the lawful discharge of his duties and under the provisions of
SEC.6.4-19(Cont.1)
this Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the Town of Normal until a final
termination of the proceedings. The Code Official or any of his subordinates shall not be liable for
costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
Code and any officer of the Division of Fire Prevention acting in good faith and without malice
shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or
omission in the performance of his official duties in connection herewith.
SEC. 6.5-1
DIVISION 5 - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SEC. 6.5-1 CREATION. There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
SEC. 6.5-2 DEFINITIONS.
A. Board - The Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
B. Department - Normal Fire Department.
C. Fund - Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Fund.
D. Members of the Department - Any person currently employed full-time in the
Normal Fire Department in the position of Firefighter, Inspector, Lieutenant,
Captain, Assistant Chief or Chief.
SEC. 6.5-3 ELECTION OF MEMBER.
A. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of seven (7) members consisting of
the Fire Chief and six (6) members elected by sworn members of the Fire
Department as hereafter provided. (Amended 7/2/12 by Ord. No. 5446)
B. Members shall be elected to a two-year term by the members of the Department the
last full week of April in even numbered years. (Amended 6/5/06 by Ord. No. 5075)
SEC. 6.5-4 FUND ESTABLISHED.
A. All funds received by the Town from the Foreign Fire Insurance Gross Receipts Tax
shall be separately accounted for by the Town's Finance Director.
B. The Finance Director shall provide the treasurer of the Board a monthly accounting
of receipts and expenditures of the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Funds.
C. No expenditure shall be made from the Fund without approval of the Board.
D. Any checks drawn on the Fund shall be processed and executed according to then
current Town procedures.
E. The Board shall prepare an annual budget, in accordance with the Town's
established budget process. The budget shall propose how monies will be spent in
the following fiscal year (April 1, to March 31). The budget shall also specify those
funds to be held in reserve to meet unexpected expenditure needs throughout the
year. The proposed budget shall be submitted to the Town Council for approval in
accordance with the Town's established budget process.
SEC. 6.5-5
SEC. 6.5-5 OFFICERS AND SPECIAL MEETINGS. The Board shall, in accordance
with the Open Meetings Act, establish a regular time and place for its meetings. The Board shall
annually elect a Board Chair and Treasurer. The chairman shall preside at the meetings. There
shall be records kept of all resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the Board and these records shall
be open to the public. Special meetings may be called by the chairman. Any person shall be
entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the Board. (Amended 7/2/12 by Ord. No.
5446)
SEC. 6.5-6 POWERS AND DUTIES. Subject to the provisions of this Division:
A. The Board shall have the power to approve the expenditure of monies from the fund
for the maintenance, use and benefit of the department.
B. The Board may adopt rules and regulations for governing the Board and the
execution of the duties of the Board, and provide for election of the Board and
management of the fund.
C. The Board may amend or revoke rules and regulations so adopted.
D. Any expenditure the Board approves shall comply with the then current purchasing
policies of the Town.
SEC. 6.6-1
DIVISION 6 – EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
SEC. 6.6-1 DEFINITIONS.
A. Emergency Medical Services shall mean pre-hospital and inter-hospital emergency
care and non-emergency medical care at a basic life support, intermediate life
support or advanced life support level as defined by the Illinois Emergency Medical
Services Systems Act.
B. Medicare Allowable shall mean the dollar amount or dollar fee amount for various
types of emergency medical services and related transportation services as published
from time to time by the United States Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
SEC. 6.6-2 FEES FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES,
TRANSPORTATION, AND OTHER EMERGENCY SERVICES BY THE TOWN OF
NORMAL. There are hereby established fees for emergency medical services, related
transportation services, and other emergency services provided by the Town of Normal as follows:
A. Basic Life Support Services (BLS) $500.00
B. Advanced Life Support 1 (ALS1) $600.00
C. Advanced Life Support 2 (ALS2) $673.00
D. Mileage $ 12.00/mile
E. Medical Treatment with No Transport $150.00
F. Oxygen $ 15.00
The charges for the foregoing services shall be adjusted on January 1 of each year by
multiplying the then current fee by 1.03, and the product shall be the new fee for such service.
(SEC. 6.6-2 Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5244)(SEC. 6.6-2 Amended 4/5/2010 by Ord. No. 5334)
SEC. 6.6-3 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT. Any person transported or provided
emergency medical services by the Town of Normal shall be liable for and pay the Town of Normal
the fee then currently in effect pursuant to SEC. 6.6-2 above.
SEC. 6.6-4 THIRD PARTY BILLING. The City Manager is authorized to contract with
a third party for the purpose of billing for transport and emergency medical services provided by the
Town of Normal.
SEC. 6.6-5 FAILURE TO PAY. All fees for services rendered pursuant to this Division
shall be due within sixty (60) days of service. Any person failing to timely remit payment for such
service shall be assessed a late fee of $25.00, plus accruing interest, as set forth in Chapter 25 of this
Code.
SEC. 6.6-6
SEC. 6.6-6 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE FOR PERSONS CONFINED BY
A GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY. Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by
the Town or any other governmental entity, including, but not limited to, individuals who are 1)
under arrest, 2) incarcerated, 3) imprisoned, 4) escaped from confinement, 5) under supervised
release, 6) on medical furlough, 7) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house, 8) living
under home detention, or 9) confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or
rule shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical services, including emergency
medical services, rendered to and received by that person from the Town during the course of his or
her confinement, including, without limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment
facility and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not
requested by the person. Such person shall be required to reimburse the town, in full, for any fees or
charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly to a medical facility or practitioner by the
person or his or her insurance carrier. (Added 9/4/2012 by Ord. No. 5452)
(Entire Division 6 Added 3/6/06 by Ord. No. 5060, effective date of July 1, 2006)
SEC. 7.1-1
CHAPTER 7 - WATER AND SEWER
DIVISION 1 - DEFINITIONS
SEC. 7.1-1 TOWN. The word "Town" whenever the same appears herein, means the
Town of Normal, McLean County, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
SEC. 7.1-2 OWNER. The word "Owner" whenever found in this text means the person or
persons whose name/s appears on the property title of premises served or about to be served water
from the Town of Normal.
SEC. 7.1-3 CUSTOMER. The word "Customer" whenever found in this text means the
person or persons contracting for water service from the Town to a premises as owner or renter of
said premises.
SEC. 7.1-4 WATER DEPARTMENT OR WATER UTILITY. The term "Water
Department" or "Water Utility" whenever found in this text shall mean the Water Department of the
Town of Normal, Illinois.
SEC. 7.1-5 MAIN OR WATERMAIN. The word "Main" or "Watermain" whenever
found in this text shall mean the underground water conduit located in the Public Right-Of-Way or
easement (express, implied, or prescriptive) of the Town, used for transporting potable water from
the treatment works to the customer’s service connection.
SEC. 7.1-6 WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. The term "Water Service Connection"
whenever found in this text means a pipe or tubing and appurtenances connected to the watermain
and extending to the customer’s property line for the purpose of supplying water to the owners
service pipe.
SEC. 7.1-7 TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. The term
"Temporary Water Service Connection" whenever found in this text shall mean a connection
providing water service to a premises for any described purpose for which the period of service is
for less than one year.
SEC. 7.1-8 CONSTRUCTION WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. The term
"Construction Water Service Connection" whenever found in this text shall mean a connection
providing water service to a premises for construction purposes and for which the period of service
is the time necessary to complete the construction project.
SEC. 7.1-9 PROPERTY LINE. The term property line whenever found in this text shall
mean the boundary or lot line adjacent to the public right-of-way or easement in which the water
main is contained.
SEC. 7.1-10 OWNER’S SERVICE, OR SERVICE. The term "Owner’s Service" or
"Service" whenever found in this text shall mean the pipe or tubing and appurtenances used to
SEC. 7.1-10(Cont.1)
conduct water from the service connection at the property line and into the owner’s or customers
premises.
SEC. 7.1-11 METER. The word "Meter" whenever found in this text shall mean the
mechanical or electrical device together with any connections to remote readout devices which
measures and registers the quantity of water supplied to a customer.
SEC. 7.1-12 CURB STOP. The word "Curb stop" whenever found in this text means the
underground shut-off valve or stop owned by the Town and generally located at the owner’s
property line for connection to the customers service.
SEC. 7.1-13 FIRE HYDRANT. The term "Fire Hydrant" whenever found in this text
shall mean any of several hydrants located throughout the Town solely for the purpose of supplying
water for fire protection. Hydrants are classified as either:
A. Public Hydrant - Those hydrants are located in the public right-of-way, and are
owned and maintained by the water utility.
B. Private Hydrant - Those hydrants located on private property and which are under
private ownership but are directly connected to the Town's distribution system.
SEC. 7.1-14 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The term "Distribution System" whenever
found in this text shall mean any of several mains, valves, service connections, hydrants or other
appurtenances used for controlling and transporting water from the treatment plant to the owner’s
service.
SEC. 7.1-15 OVER REGISTER. The term "Over Register" whenever found in this text
shall mean the amount of water actually passing through a water meter is less than the amount
indicated by the meter register as having passed through the meter.
SEC. 7.1-16 BACKFLOW. The term "Backflow" whenever found in this text shall mean
water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering a public water supply system
due to a reversal of flow.
SEC. 7.1-17 CROSS-CONNECTION. The term "Cross-connection" whenever found in
this text shall mean a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a
backflow could occur.
SEC. 7.1-18 SAFE AIR GAP. The term "Safe Air Gap" whenever found in this text shall
mean the minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the maximum high water level or
overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to which public water is furnished which shall be at
least two (2) times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one (1) inch
and need not be more than twelve (12) inches.
SEC. 7.1-19 SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY. The term "Secondary Water Supply"
whenever found in this text shall mean a water supply maintained in addition to a public water
SEC. 7.1-19(Cont.1)
supply, including but not limited to water systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the
requirement of State of Illinois Chapter six regulations, or water from a public water supply which
in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other
than an approved storage facility.
SEC. 7.1-20 SUBMERGED INLET. The term "Submerged Inlet" whenever found in this
text shall mean a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank,
vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other
contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow.
SEC. 7.1-21 DEFINITIONS.
A. Federal Act means the Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts Amendments.
B. Administrator means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
C. State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
D. Director means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
E. State Loan shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act
and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
F. Town means the Town of Normal.
G. Approving Authority means the President and Board of Trustees of the Town of
Normal.
H. Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
I. Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
J. ppm means parts per million by weight.
K. Milligrams per Liter shall mean a unit of the concentration of water constituent. It
is 0.001 g of the constituent 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly
used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in
reporting the results of water analysis.
L. pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
SEC. 7.1-21(Cont.1)
M. Curb Cock shall mean a shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water
main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water-supply lines of a building. Also called curb stop.
N. Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
O. Service Box shall mean a valve box used with a curb cock.
P. Water Service Charge shall be the charge levied on all users of the Water Facilities.
The service charge shall consist of the total of the Basic User Charge and the Local
Capital Cost if applicable.
Q. User Charge shall mean a charge levied on users of water works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
R. Basic User Charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public
water system.
S. Debt Service Charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of outstanding debt for the Water Department.
T. Capital Improvement Charge shall mean a charge levied on users to improve, extend
or reconstruct the water works.
U. Local Capital Cost Charge shall mean charges for costs other than the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement costs. Such charge shall consist of debt service and
capital improvement costs.
V. Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works
to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
W. Useful Life shall mean the estimated period during which the water works will be
operated.
X. Water Fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the
operation of the water system.
(Entire SEC. 7.1-21 Added 12/16/02 by Ord. No. 4842)
(Entire Division 1 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.2-1
DIVISION 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 7.2-1.
A. This Code is not intended to abrogate any covenant, lease, or other private
agreement, provided that when the requirements of this Code are more restrictive
than such covenants, leases or private agreements, the requirements of this Code
shall govern.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Code are either more or less
restrictive than conditions imposed by any other provisions of the Municipal Code or
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation applicable to providing
Municipal water service, the regulation which is more restrictive or imposes the
higher standard or requirement shall govern.
SEC. 7.2-2. The office of Water Director heretofore established by ordinance is hereby
retained. The Water Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and is responsible for the
planning, organizing, controlling and supervising of all departmental functions to insure an adequate
supply of potable drinking water that is bacteriologically and chemically safe and aesthetically
pleasing to its users, and to receive payment with the assistance of the Finance Director and his staff
on behalf of the Town for all services it supplies to its customers.
SEC. 7.2-3 ACCESS TO HOMES. The employees of the water system shall have the
right at all times of access to any person's premises for the purpose of ascertaining the number and
type of water connections to the system, to read the water meter, and to inspect service lines. Any
person refusing the right to permit the said employees of the water system the above-described right
of access to his premises or to make necessary reasonable repairs shall be subject to prosecution and
penalty as hereinafter provided.
SEC. 7.2-4 RESTRICTED AREAS. The water reservoirs, the various well houses and
pumping stations serving the water system of the Town of Normal and all of the water treatment
plant located between the Illinois Central right-of-way on the west, Linden Street on the east,
Mulberry Street on the north, and College Avenue on the south are deemed to be "restricted areas";
and that the general public is forbidden to be upon or within said premises, and particularly within
the confines of any fenced off area so posted, unless permission has been first obtained from the
Water Director or other person or persons authorized and designated by the City Manager.
SEC. 7.2-5 POSTING AND PENALTY. The Water Director is herewith directed to
place "restricted area" warning signs around the confines of all buildings or properties heretofore
designated, and any person or persons found within any of said buildings or about said premises and
within the confines of any fenced off area shall be deemed trespassing.
SEC. 7.2-6 FLUORIDATION. The water supply of Normal shall be treated with the
addition of fluoride so as to provide a residual fluoride ion concentration in accordance with the
requirements of Section 7a of the Public Water Supply Regulation Act (415 ILCS 40/7a).
(Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)
SEC.7.2-7
SEC. 7.2-7 ELECTRICAL GROUNDING. The Town of Normal shall not be held liable
for any personal injury or property damage resulting from an inadequate electrical ground where the
Town's water piping is used as grounding electrode. The Town shall not be liable for the adequacy
of any grounding system and reserves the right to make any structural or material changes in the
installation of water mains and water service connections without regard to the effect such changes
may make on the overall adequacy of a grounding system utilizing the owner’s water service pipe
and/or the Town's water meter.
(Entire Division 2 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.3-1
DIVISION 3 - APPLICATION FOR (METERED WATER) SERVICE
SEC. 7.3-1. Metered water service will be provided to an applicant only on the approval of
an application made by phone or in writing to the Water Department. Upon approval thereof the
application shall constitute a contract between the applicant as a customer and the Water
Department obligating the applicant to pay for water service in accordance with applicable rate
schedule as provided for in SEC 7.7.
If the application is accepted verbally the customer shall, when requested by the Water
Department, sign a written application.
SEC. 7.3-2. The Water Department reserves the right to deny service to any customer who
has changed their residence from one location to another served by the water utility until any and all
delinquent or unpaid water bills or any other bill of the Town of Normal where a request has duly
been made for payment, charged against the former residence have been paid in full.
SEC. 7.3-3. No application for water service will be accepted and water will be
discontinued at those properties until delinquent or unpaid bills resulting from a previous tenant are
paid in full. It is the prospective water customer’s responsibility to ascertain if there are any
outstanding water service debts.
SEC. 7.3-4 SERVICE APPLICATION/TRANSFER FEE. All applications for water
service and all requests to transfer water service billing to any customer shall be charged at $25.00
application/transfer fee, which shall be added to the bill and deemed a charge for water services.
(Added 2/4/02 by Ord. No. 4771 – Effective April 1, 2002)
(Entire Division 3 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.4-1
DIVISION 4 - WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
SEC. 7.4-1. No connection shall be made to the Municipal water system without written
permission from the Water Director, or authorized designee. Any connections or openings made
into the water system without such permission or in any manner different from the above-prescribed
hereafter shall be deemed in violation of and subject to the penalties as set forth in SEC. 7.14-1 of
this Code.
SEC. 7.4-2. All service connections into existing watermains shall be made only by the
Water Department and paid for by the customer. Dry taps made into new mains not yet accepted
for maintenance by the Town, shall be made only by the Water Department or a licensed plumber
certified by the State of Illinois. All such taps shall be left uncovered until inspected by the Water
Department.
SEC. 7.4-3. Except as hereafter provided, a water service connection will not be allowed
where any portion of the owner’s service pipe must pass through lands, buildings or parts of
buildings which are not the property of the owner, or across a platted lot to serve another platted lot
each owned by the permit applicant.
A. In the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District, currently existing water service
connections that cross a platted lot owned by another may continue to cross such lot
provided a private easement is obtained from such lot owner, recorded with the
McLean County Recorder, and a copy provided to the Water Director. This
exception shall be applicable only until the earlier of the following:
1. the non-conforming water service connection needs replacement;
2. the Town becomes aware of an unmetered tap of said water service
connection; or
3. redevelopment of the property served by the water service connection.
(Entire SEC. 7.4-3 Amended 6/20/2011 by Ord. No. 5386)
SEC. 7.4-4. Every dwelling unit or structure served Municipal water from the Town of
Normal shall have an individual water service line connected to the city watermain and be provided
with a curb stop (valve) and valve box at the property line. The service shall terminate within two
(2) feet upon entrance to the structure and thereafter an accessible space shall be provided for an
adequately sized water meter. No branch connections may exist between the property line and the
meter and no dwelling unit may be supplied water from another dwelling unit or structure.
SEC. 7.4-5. In the case whereby multiple meter settings on a single service line are desired
by owners of apartments or condominiums, the following additional conditions must be met:
A. Each dwelling unit in an apartment or condominium complex must have an
individual service line adequately sized to provide sufficient pressure and volume to
serve each unit within the structure. Adequacy shall be defined in SEC. 7.4-10 of
this Code.
SEC. 7.4-5(Cont.1)
B. A separate room apart from any living area and accessible from the outside without
passing through any living area must be provided for the water meters. The water
service line must enter this room without passing through any other exposed area of
the structure.
C. Meters must be neatly arranged and be permanently tagged denoting the dwelling
unit that each meter serves. Valves must be provided on both sides of the meter with
the upstream valve of the plug or ball cock design with padlock wings.
SEC. 7.4-6. Existing dwelling units or structures that do not meet the provisions of this
Chapter shall be allowed continued use of water supply service facilities until the earlier of the
following events: (1) alteration or replacement of such water supply service facilities, or (2) two
delinquent water bills within any twelve month period.
Upon the occurrence of either of the foregoing events, the owner of the dwelling unit or
structure with non-conforming water supply service facilities shall modify, alter or replace such
facilities in order to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Such alteration, modification or
replacement shall be completed within thirty (30) days of notice from the Water Director or such
other deadline as established by the Water Director. In lieu of alteration of a water supply system,
an owner of property or condominium association which has received notice from the Water
Director pursuant to this SEC. 7.4-6 to modify or alter a water supply system may enter into an
agreement whereby all water bills for the property or condominium association become the
responsibility of the owner or condominium association. The Water Director is authorized to enter
into such water billing agreements upon the following conditions:
1. The agreement is only for owners of property or condominium associations who
have received a notice to modify their water supply system due to unpaid water bills.
2. The agreement must require the payment of the entire water bill for all units serviced
by the non-conforming water supply system.
In the event the owner of the dwelling unit or structure containing the non-conforming water
supply service facility fails to alter, modify or replace such facilities within the time set by the Water
Director, or fails to abide by an agreement made pursuant to this SEC. 7.4-6 the Water Director is
authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding at law or equity to obtain compliance
with this Chapter. (SEC. 7.4-6 Amended 3/4/02 by Ord. No. 4779)(SEC. 7.4-6 Amended 6/16/03
by Ord. No. 4875)
SEC. 7.4-7. Owners of premises served water by the Town are responsible for all costs
incurred in the installation and maintenance of all water service lines on the property being served.
The water utility will not install, make repairs or cause repairs to be made to any water service lines
located on private property. If a leak is detected on private property, and it is determined to be
unmetered, the owner will receive notice and be directed to repair same within five (5) days or
service will be discontinued. If a leak is deemed to create an imminent hazard to public health,
service will be terminated immediately without prior notice.
SEC. 7.4-8
SEC. 7.4-8. Owners shall be required to pay the water utility for a reasonable estimate of
the quantity of unmetered water that was lost through leakage.
SEC. 7.4-9. All new construction and reconstruction of water service lines and
appurtenances must conform in all respects to AWWA C800 standards of latest revisions. Service
pipe must be "Type K" seamless copper tubing conforming to ASTM specification B-88-62, and
fittings must be of red brass conforming to ASTM B-62 specifications. The thread form for the
inlet side of all corporation stops must be what is commonly known to the trade as the Mueller
thread. Curb boxes must be of the cast iron, or an approved plastic, extension type with arch pattern
base. Plastic, if used, must be impregnated with a material creating a magnetic field for locating
with ferromagnetic locators.
SEC. 7.4-10. Application for a water service connection will be accepted and approved
only if there is a watermain adjacent to the property being served and connection thereto does not
adversely affect the pressure and volume of the watermain. Adequate pressure and volume shall be
determined as:
A. Static pressure shall be maintained at a minimum of 40 psi in the main as measured
at the nearest tap or fire hydrant connection.
B. Fire hydrant capacity must be maintained at a minimum of 600 gallons per minute
flowing with a residual pressure of not less than 25 psi.
SEC. 7.4-11. No connections shall be permitted on substandard watermains except for
single family dwellings where prior approval has been obtained from the Director of Water.
Substandard watermains are those less than six (6) inches in diameter or composed of any material
other than type K copper, cast of ductile iron, or PVC plastic.
SEC. 7.4-12. Water service connections shall be sized by the Water Department and all
decisions relative to size, material, and manner of installation shall be determined by the Water
Department.
SEC. 7.4-13. Water service connections and service piping shall be installed at the owner’s
expense. The Town shall retain ownership of and maintain at its own expense, all piping and
appurtenances from the point of connection to the watermain and up to and including the curb stop
at the customer’s property line. The owner service pipe shall be installed and maintained at the
expense of the owner subject to approval of the Water Department in the specification of size, type
of materials, and manner of installation.
SEC. 7.4-14. All water service connections and piping shall be maintained at a depth of
four (4) feet minimum burial to prevent freezing or be properly insulated as approved by the
Director of Water.
(Entire Division 4 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.5-1
DIVISION 5 - TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
SEC. 7.5-1. Temporary water service shall be allowed for providing water on a temporary
basis for construction, recreational purposes, irrigation, filling of swimming pools or other large
vessels, or any other reasonable purpose providing the duration of the connection is for less than one
year.
SEC. 7.5-2. Water for construction purposes will be provided under the following
conditions:
A. The service connection must be in accordance with the provisions of Division 7.4 of
this Code.
B. Lawn irrigation, tree planting or other landscaping practices will not be allowed on
an unmetered water service either temporary or permanent, and shall constitute an
illegal use of water and be subject to the penalties as set forth in SEC. 7.14-1 of this
Code.
C. The temporary service shall not be connected to finished piping within a structure
except for the purpose of hydrostatic testing whereupon the bypass mechanism must
be removed. Meter bypasses or jumpers left in place after testing shall constitute an
illegal connection and be subject to the penalties as set forth in SEC. 7.14 of this
Code.
D. Any water consumption deemed to be wasteful or excessive may result in
termination or require a meter to be installed at the owner’s expense.
E. Fees for unmetered construction water shall be assessed and paid as set forth in SEC.
11.4-2 (B)(7)(d) of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended. (Amended 2/16/87)
SEC. 7.5-3. Temporary service fees for other than construction water shall be based on
volumetric measurement, or metered, as determined by the Water Department. If metering is
required it is the customer’s responsibility to provide adequate protection for the meters from
accidental damage, vandalism or freezing.
(Entire Division 5 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.6-1
DIVISION 6 - METERS
SEC. 7.6-1 METERS REQUIRED. All services in the Town of Normal shall be metered.
Meters shall be provided by, set and sealed by the Normal Water Department. The cost of the
meter and installation shall be borne by the customer as a cost of providing water service and does
not convey ownership of said meter to the customer but remains the property of the Town of
Normal.
All new or replacement meters shall be provided with a remote read out device located on
the outside of the premises or as approved by the Director. The physical location shall be such that
the height shall not exceed five (5) feet or be less than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet from
permanent grade. This location shall be such that the remote reader is readily available and
accessible to meter reading personnel. It shall not be screened or otherwise obstructed by trees,
shrubs, bushes, or any fences or other structures that impede access to the remote device from Town
employees for the purpose of reading or servicing.
SEC. 7.6-2 LOCATION. Water meters shall be located inside the premises whenever
possible and shall not exceed two (2) feet in distance from where the service enters the building. No
connections are allowed to exist on any piping between the service and the meter unless specifically
approved, in writing, by the Water Department and are used solely for the purpose of fire protection.
There shall be a suitable place provided for the water meter so as to keep it dry, clean, and
accessible at all reasonable times to meter readers or servicemen of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 7.6-3 SIZING OF METERS. For buildings other than single-family dwellings, the
sizing of the meters shall be approved by the Water Department at the time of application for a
water service. The size of meters so specified shall be subject to change as the demand for water or
other conditions may develop. The Water Department reserves the right to require an increase in
the size of a meter whenever piping changes or water uses indicate present sizing to be inadequate.
Meters larger than two (2) inches, nominal pipe size, are required to have a bypass with a
minimum of three (3) valves arranged to permit repair or replacement of the meter without
interruption of service. The bypass valve shall be sealed by the Water Department.
All services regardless of size shall have valves installed immediately upstream and
downstream of the meter.
SEC. 7.6-4 PROTECTION OF METERS. Owners or occupants of premises served by
the Normal Water Department shall provide adequate protection for water meters against freezing,
hot water damage, or any other physical abuse resulting in damage to the meter. Where meters are
damaged or caused to mal-function as a result of negligence, gross negligence, or willful abuse, all
costs of repair or replacement of said meter shall be incurred by the owner of the premises and shall
be payable when bills are rendered. In all cases where meters require repair or replacement
because of negligence or gross negligence, such service shall not be resumed until corrective action
has been taken by the customer to prevent recurrent damage to the meter.
SEC. 7.6-5
SEC. 7.6-5 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. Whenever an owner or occupant of a
premises requests or is required to discontinue service, either temporarily or permanently,
notification shall be given the Water Department for the removal of the meter. The owner of the
premises shall be held responsible for the meter until removed and if the meter is damaged or lost,
he shall be required to pay the replacement cost of the meter.
SEC. 7.6-6 LIABILITY. The Town of Normal shall not be liable for personal injury or
property damage resulting from leaking meters, valves, or other appurtenances required for the
provision of water service.
SEC. 7.6-7 METER TESTS.
A. The Town or any customer may request a test of its meter to determine its accuracy.
Prior to a test requested by a customer, the customer shall deposit $15.00 cash and
shall be given notice as to the time and place of the test by the Water Department,
and the customer and/or his representative may be present at the test which will be
conducted during regular business hours.
B. If the meter tests out to be accurate or over registers by 2% or less, then the $15.00
shall be forfeited by the customer.
C. If the meter over registers by more than 2%, then the $15.00 shall be refunded and
the amount of over-register shall also be refunded to the customer for the period
over-register occurred but not exceeding six (6) months.
D. If the meter is found to be registering less than 75% of actual usage, the $15.00 shall
be forfeited and the customer shall be billed for the undercharge for the period
under-register occurred, but not exceeding six (6) months.
E. If a meter does not register, the customer shall be billed at the minimum monthly
rate or upon an estimate of consumption based on past usage.
F. Subsection (A) notwithstanding, if a customer has not had his meter tested for five
(5) years or more, then that meter may be tested without the requirement of a $15.00
deposit. If the meter is found to be malfunctioning, water bill adjustments shall be
made in accordance with this Section.
SEC. 7.6-8 NOTICE. Prior notice of a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours must be
received at the Water Department before installation of a meter will proceed. Meters two (2) inches
and larger must be preceded by notice of at least ninety (90) days to allow for ordering and shipping
of the meter. All costs of installation must be paid in advance before a meter will be set.
(Entire Division 6 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.7-1
DIVISION 7 - WATER RATES, BILLING, PAYMENTS
SEC. 7.7-1 RATES. Rates and charges for the availability of use of, and service provided
by, the Town's water system are hereby established as follows, with the number of gallons being the
amount of water metered or used, whichever is greater:
A. A monthly system maintenance fee of:
1. $5.87 for bills issued before April 1, 2019; and
2. $5.99 for bills issued on or after April 1, 2019; plus (Added 2/6/06 by Ord.
No. 5051, Eff. 4/1/06)(Amended 7/20/09 by Ord. No. 5280)(Amended 3/21/16
by Ord. No. 5634)(Amended 4/17/17 by Ord. No. 5687) (Amended 03/05/18 by
Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)(Amended 03/04/2019 by Ord No. 5782)
B. A charge of:
1. $6.44 per 1,000 gallons for bills issued before April 1, 2019; and
2. $6.57 per 1,000 gallons for bills issued on or after April 1, 2019. (Amended
2/15/82, Eff. 4/1/83)(Amended 2/20/84, Eff. 4/1/84)(Amended 3/5/90, Eff.
4/1/90)(Amended 3/16/92, Eff. 2/1/93)(Amended 9/18/95, Eff.
2/1/96)(Amended 5/4/98, Eff. 2/1/99)(Amended 1/22/02, Eff. 2/1/02)(Amended
2/3/03, Eff. 4/1/03)(Amended 2/7/05, Eff. 4/1/05)(Amended 2/6/06, Eff.
4/1/06)(Amended 2/4/08, Eff. 4/1/08)(Amended 7/20/09 by Ord. No.
5280)(Amended 3/21/16 by Ord. No. 5634)(Amended 4/17/2017 by Ord. No.
5687) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)( Amended 03/04/2019
by Ord No. 5782)
All billings for water service shall be issued on a monthly basis. The water service rates
shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs, operation, maintenance and
replacement costs. (Amended 12/16/02 by Ord. No. 4842)(Amended 2/6/06 by Ord. No. 5051, Eff.
4/1/06)(Amended 2/4/08 by Ord. No. 5171) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)
New rates shall apply to all billings issued after the effective date of such rate increase.
(Added 7/20/09 by Ord. No. 5280)
SEC. 7.7-2 RATE BASIS. The basis for computing bills for water service will be as
indicated by the customer’s water meter. The quantity registered by the meter will be accepted
conclusively by user and utility as the amount of water passing through the meter except when the
meter is found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. If a customer disputes a bill
or requests a meter test, such test and charges related thereto shall be conducted as specified in SEC.
7.6-7 of this Code.
SEC. 7.7-3 ACCESS. If for any reason the Town's meter reader cannot gain access to the
customers meter, the meter reader will leave a postcard at the customer's premises with instructions
SEC. 7.7-3(Cont.1)
enabling the customer to read and record the reading on the card. Meter readings thus obtained
shall be mailed to the Billing Department or phoned in during regular business hours. If the
customer fails to provide the meter reading, an estimated bill (so designated) will be rendered. The
estimated bill will be based on similar prior billing periods. Because of the possibility of undetected
leakage only one billing in succession will be made on an estimated basis. If a meter reading is not
obtained on the next billing date by the Town's meter reader or by the customer, the Water
Department will discontinue service upon due notice of its intention to do so.
SEC. 7.7-4 DELINQUENCY, NOTIFICATION, PRE-TERMINATION HEARING
AND TERMINATION OF SERVICES.
A. In the event the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after
rendition of a bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent.
B. In the event the charges for such service become delinquent, the Finance Director is
hereby authorized and directed to cause notice to be given in writing to the customer
of the premises where such delinquency exists, that any customer believing such bill
to be erroneous may request and appear at an administrative hearing before the
Finance Director prior to termination and that absent such request or after the
conclusion thereof, if the bill is found not to be erroneous, that such services shall be
discontinued without further notice, by mailing a copy of such notice, addressed to
the customer at the billing address of the property served.
C. That the Finance Director be and he is hereby authorized and directed to adjust bills
he finds to be "erroneous" based on Town records.
D. Upon the discontinuation of any water service the following charges shall be
collected for re-commencing service, provided, that the current account plus any
delinquent charges shall also be paid before service is restored:
1. $40.00 when performed during regular business hours.
2. $100.00 when performed at a time other than regular business hours.
3. Business hours are from 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. daily, Monday through
Friday, exclusive of any legal holidays regularly observed by the Town.
(Subsection D Amended 2/19/91 by Ord. 3957)(Subsection D Amended 11/3/97 by Ord.
No. 4480)(Subsection D Amended 3/19/07 by Ord. No. 5125)
E. (Reserved) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)
F. When a customer's water service is discontinued for non-payment of bills or for
repairs or for any other reason as specified in SEC. 7.8-2 of this Code, and water
service piping and/or metering is not in accordance with current code standards,
compliance with these standards or an agreement to comply within thirty days from
SEC. 7.7-4(Cont.1)
a request to do so, shall be required before service is restored. The owner of the
premises shall be responsible for and incur all expenses in performance of Code
compliance, including new water meters wherever necessary. (Added 5/3/82)
G. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting or denying the Town of its
statutory or other right of lien or other judicial proceeding against the owner or user
of the property for any charges or expenses incurred. (Numbering amended 5/3/82)
SEC. 7.7-5 BILL FOR SERVICE. It is hereby made the duty of the Finance Director, or
his designee, of the Town of Normal to render bills for service and all other charges in connection
therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
SEC. 7.7-6 REVENUES. All revenue and monies derived from the operation of the water
system shall be recorded by the Finance Director, or his designee, separate and apart from all other
funds of the Town, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to
one or more of the institutions listed in SEC. 2.3-45 of this Code, not later than one (1) business day
after receipt of same.
SEC. 7.7-7 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT. The owner of the premises, the occupant
thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the services on such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the Town of Normal only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the service are jointly and severally
liable therefore to the Town of Normal. All bills for service shall be rendered for the preceding 30-
day period for which the service is billed, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on
the 21st day following the date of the bill as rendered. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills
not paid by the due date. When the due date falls on a Sunday or a legal holiday, then such bills for
service are payable on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or legal holiday without any
additional penalty. (SEC. 7.7-7 Amended 3/18/85) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and
5733)
SEC. 7.7-8 WATER FUND. The Finance Director shall receive all such revenue from the
water system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him and he shall deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Water
Fund of the Town of Normal".
SEC. 7.7-9 ACCESS TO RECORDS. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or their authorized representative, shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Town of Normal which are applicable to
the Town of Normal system of user charges for the purpose of making audit examinations, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of any grant or loan received by the
Town of Normal from said agencies. (Added 12/16/02 by Ord. No. 4842)
SEC. 7.7-10 APPEALS. The method of computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges in this division shall be made available to a user within ten (10) days of
receipt of a written request for such computation. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
SEC. 7.7-10(Cont.1)
computations thereof shall be remedied by the City Manager, or his designee, within ten (10) days
after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancy. (Added 12/16/02 by Ord.
No. 4842)
(Entire Division 7 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.8-1
DIVISION 8 - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
SEC. 7.8-1. The Water Department undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence to
provide a constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure, but reserves the right to turn off water in
its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes. When water service
is to be turned off temporarily advance notice will be given, when practicable, to all customers in
the affected area, stating the probable duration of the interruption of service. The Town shall not be
liable for any damage to a customer’s equipment, piping or property resulting from shut down of the
water system whether scheduled or non-scheduled, or for flooding as a result of failure of mains and
appurtenances.
SEC. 7.8-2. The Town of Normal reserves the right to discontinue service to a customer for
any one or more of the following reasons or conditions:
A. Unauthorized use of or tampering with any curb stop, meter, meter seal or other
property of the Water Department. Evidence of a broken meter seal or the insertion
of a bypass or other connection for the purpose of obtaining unmetered water will
require the customer to pay for the Town's estimate of quantity of water which has
been delivered and not registered, plus the cost to restore the meter to proper
working order and any other necessary expense.
B. Non-payment for service rendered to the customer.
C. The existence of any piping cross-connection with any other source of supply or
apparatus which may endanger the quality of the Town's water supply.
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of inspecting, reading,
repairing or removal of a meter.
E. Failure to repair any defect or leak in a service pipe within five (5) days after
discovery.
F. Violation of curtailment regulations during declared emergencies.
SEC. 7.8-3. Restoration of service will be made only after applicable fees are paid or an
agreed upon payment schedule is approved, or the condition necessitating discontinuance is rectified
to the satisfaction of the Water Department.
SEC. 7.8-4. Whenever an owner wishes to discontinue service permanently for demolition
or removal of a premises being served water, notice shall be given the Water Department at least
forty-eight (48) hours in advance for removal of the meter. The owner of said premises shall be
held responsible for the meter until its removal by the Water Department and if lost the owner shall
be required to pay for or replace the meter. The owner shall be responsible for and incur all costs of
plugging or capping the discontinued water service connection in a manner prescribed by the Water
Department.
SEC. 7.8-5
SEC. 7.8-5. An owner or occupant may request temporary discontinuance of service for
repair of piping, vacancy of premises or other reason with reconnection subject to the following
provisions:
A. If discontinuance is for more than three (3) days and there is no change in customer
status, a reconnection fee of $40.00 will be assessed if the reconnection is made
during regular working hours or $100.00 after regular working hours. (Amended by
Ord. 3957, 2/19/91)(Amended 3/19/07 by Ord. No. 5125)
B. If discontinuance is for more than three (3) days and the account is for a new
customer there is no reconnection fee providing the account is current with respect to
previous user fees.
C. If the discontinuance is for less than three (3) days there is no reconnect charge.
D. If the serviceman discovers that piping is substandard or inadequate at the time of
reconnection, the meter will not be re-installed and water will not be turned back on
until corrections have been made in accordance with the Town Plumbing Code and
all other provisions of this Chapter.
(Entire Division 8 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.9-1
DIVISION 9 - EXTENSION OF WATERMAINS
SEC. 7.9-1 EXTENSION OF MAIN. Anyone requesting extension of existing water
mains or a new service shall first submit a set of plans and specifications, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, to the Water Department with their request showing the location of the
proposed water mains, valves, fire hydrants and fittings. All locations shown on said plans and
specifications shall be in reference to property lines. Likewise, a legal description of the property
that is to be served by the extension or installation of new mains shall also be filed along with the
aforesaid plans and specifications. If proposed installation is to serve an area where the Town has
previously or is about to establish a connection or tap-on charge, then the person making the above
request must pay the tap-on charge at the time that the permit is granted. Such documents as herein
listed shall be filed with the Water Director or his designee, who shall be the one to issue the permit.
SEC. 7.9-2. No connection to any water mains within the Town of Normal shall be allowed
where such tap or connection will adversely affect the volume and/or pressure of existing water
supply in that area. The adequacy of water main capacity shall be as defined in SEC. 7.4-10 of this
Code. Permits will be issued only after the capacity of existing water mains has been determined
adequate, or existing mains are improved or replaced, at permittee’s cost, to meet or exceed
minimum required standards.
SEC. 7.9-3 WATERMAIN IMPROVEMENT COST FORMULA. Where
improvements or replacements must be made at permittee’s cost in order to satisfy the requirements
of SEC. 7.9-2 of this Code, the owner, developer, or contractor, shall be required to pay the private
benefit cost for any proposed units according to the following formula:
Number of proposed units x Total improvement cost in service area
Total number of dwelling units in service area
Dwelling units shall be determined on the basis of the following:
1. Single Family Home 1 dwelling unit
2. Duplex 2 dwelling units
3. Commercial, Manufacturing, 1 unit per 1500 sq. ft.
Business & Institutional of building space
4. Rooming Houses 1 unit per each 4 people
5. Vacant Land Maximum use potential
of property as zoned
6. Apartments 1 per each dwelling unit
SEC. 7.9-3(Cont.1)
Service area shall be determined based on the impact any such proposed taps or connections
shall have on the water system adequacy as defined in SEC. 7.4-10 of this Code.
SEC. 7.9-4. All new watermains installed in the Town of Normal or installed in areas
subject to future connection to the Municipal water system shall have a minimum nominal diameter
of at least six (6) inches and shall be of Ductile cast iron. Thickness and load bearing classes of pipe
shall be as specified in the "American National Standard for the Thickness Design of Ductile-Iron
Pipe", ANSI A21.50, AWWA C-150, of latest revision. The installation of watermains and
appurtenances shall be in strict accordance with and comply with all of the provisions of the
following rules and standards:
A. ANSI/AWWA C600 "Installation of Gray and Ductile Cast-Iron Water Mains and
Appurtenances", of latest revision.
B. State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Water, of latest revision.
C. Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and Regulations Chapter 6, and technical
policy statements in conformance with rule 212.
D. Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers
Recommended Standards, commonly referred to as the "Ten States Standards".
Where the conditions imposed by any standards or rule are either more or less restrictive
than conditions imposed by any other standard or rule, the regulation which is more restrictive or
imposes the higher standard shall govern.
SEC. 7.9-5. Watermain taps will be made only by the Normal Water Department. All
material, labor, and equipment necessary to make the tap shall be furnished by the Water
Department exclusive of excavations. All charges relating to the tap shall be borne by the tap-on
permit holder and bills are due when rendered. Prepayment may be required for permittees who are
unknown or who have not established credit with the Town.
SEC. 7.9-6. All watermains shall be installed in public easements or dedicated public rightof-
way. Such easements and rights-of-way to be of sufficient width and the water mains to be
installed at such locations as to permit open cut installation, maintenance and repair within the
confines of the easement or right-of-way without relocation or unreasonable interference with other
public utilities located therein. Reference Subdivision Code SEC. 16.4-6(B).
SEC. 7.9-7. Watermain must be installed with a minimum cover of four (4) feet and shall
not exceed sixteen (16) feet depth, except where railroads or creek bed crossings are necessary.
SEC. 7.9-8. Watermain extensions shall be served from the Municipal system only after all
of the criteria in Exhibit "A", NEW MAIN PROCEDURE, incorporated herein by reference and
made a part hereof, has been completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Water.
(Entire Division 9 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.10-1
DIVISION 10 - CURTAILMENT OF WATER SERVICE IN EMERGENCIES
SEC. 7.10-1 CURTAILMENT. Whenever the Mayor and/or the Town Council shall
declare the necessity for a curtailment period and shall give public notice of same by publication of
such action in either The Normalite or The Daily Pantagraph, or any other newspaper of general
usage of the water supply of the Town of Normal, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate such
published restriction. Each day, or portion thereof, during which such violation takes place shall
constitute a separate offense.
The use of water during an emergency may include some or all of the following restrictions,
but is not limited to the following:
A. The sprinkling water or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers,
plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation.
B. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches, and other
outdoor surfaces.
C. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars, or any
other type of mobile equipment.
D. The washing of the outside of the dwellings; the washing of the inside and outside of
office buildings.
E. The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment or machinery.
F. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of
water.
G. The filling of swimming and wading pools.
H. The escape of water through defective plumbing.
I. Air conditioning systems or devices for the cooling or dehumidification of space for
human occupancy where Municipal water is the principal medium.
J. Any wasteful use of water.
Publication shall be deemed adequate notice.
The City Manager, acting individually, or, in his absence, the Acting City Manager and the
Water Director, acting collectively, may declare an emergency curtailment period at any time, for a
period of not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, and shall then publish notice of said as above
provided, and such publication shall be deemed adequate notice to all users of the water supply of
SEC. 7.10-1(Cont.1)
the Town of Normal, effective immediately. If an emergency condition exists for a period of time
greater than seventy-two (72) hours, the Town Council shall make the determination on whether or
not to continue the water curtailment.
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the terms and
requirements of this article shall be subject to the penalty provisions of SEC. 7.14-1 of this Code.
(Entire Division 10 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.11-1
DIVISION 11 – SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SEC. 7.11-1 REQUIREMENTS. On and after October 1, 2009, any person, firm,
corporation, agency or other entity whatsoever who shall be allowed to tap into the Town of Normal
Water Distribution System shall pay, separate and apart from any other charges, a system
development charge at the rate of $1,440.00 per service line connection per one inch diameter of
pipe connected.
Any fractional part of an inch shall be considered to be one whole inch when computing the
tap-on fee. In explanation, if water service is requested for a service pipe more than one (1) inch in
diameter, fees would be assessed by rounding off to the next highest whole number. System
development charges shall be paid at the earlier of final platting or actual connection to the Water
Distribution System.
Charges for watermain taps or service taps that are made by the Normal Water Department
are due and payable upon completion of the tap and when bills are rendered. The user or customer
will be assessed at prevailing material and labor costs. A schedule of charges is listed at the Water
Department displaying estimated charges for particular size taps. This schedule is intended as a
guide only and does not reflect any additional costs that might arise from unpredicted cost factors
resulting from the performance of the tap.
Taps made by other than the Normal Water Department must have prior written approval by
the Director of Water before any work may proceed. All materials and workmanship related to the
performance of watermain tapping must conform to the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for
Water, current edition.
SEC. 7.11-2 APPLICATION. Any residence or business which presently is served by the
Town of Normal's water system will not be charged the system development charge as stated above,
unless a new service line is installed larger than the service line serving said residence or business as
of August 1, 2009.
SEC. 7.11-3 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. It is a condition precedent to the
allowance of any tap that said tap-on charges herein established be paid to the Town of Normal and
it is a further requirement that anyone making such tap-on shall abide by all other ordinances and
regulations of the Town.
SEC. 7.11-4 EXISTING ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS. Property under a valid
annexation agreement as of August 1, 2009, shall pay the water tap-on fee set forth in said
agreement in lieu of the system development charge. If the annexation agreement is silent, or
references the current municipal code regarding tap-on charges, then the system development
charge shall be assessed and paid as set forth in SEC. 7.11-1 above.
SEC. 7.11-5 FRANKLIN HEIGHTS WATER MAIN EXTENSION. In addition to the
system development charge provided in SEC. 7.11-1 above, anyone connecting to the Franklin
Heights water main extension shall pay a tap-on fee for this water main extension based on the front
SEC. 7.11-5
foot of property immediately contiguous with Fort Jesse Road right-of-way served by connection to
the Franklin Heights water main. The fee shall be $41.47 per lineal foot of property contiguous to
Fort Jesse Road right-of-way plus six percent (6%) interest compounded annually from January 1,
2007. The Town Water Director shall maintain a map of property served by the Franklin Heights
water main extension which map is attached by reference as though specifically set forth herein.
(Entire Division 11 Amended 8/17/09 by Ord. No. 5284 – Effective October 1, 2009)
SEC. 7.12-1
DIVISION 12 - FIRE HYDRANTS & SERVICES
SEC. 7.12-1. No person, firm or corporation may take water from any fire hydrant except
authorized persons or parties for fire purposes and no hydrant may be used for any purpose except
the extinguishment or prevention of fires unless prior approval is obtained from the Water
Department.
SEC. 7.12-2. Fire hydrants shall not be screened or otherwise obstructed by trees, shrubs,
bushes, fences, or any other structure that impedes access to the hydrant from Town water and/or
Fire Department personnel. Painting, changing the grade or any other alteration to the hydrant or its
surroundings that diminishes the visibility of the hydrant shall not be permitted.
SEC. 7.12-3. No utility pole, traffic signal, sign post, lighting standard, or other such
permanent structure may be located within ten (10) feet of any existing hydrant, and no new fire
hydrant may be located within ten (10) feet of any of the existing aforementioned structures.
SEC. 7.12-4. Installation of new hydrants or replacements of existing hydrants within the
jurisdiction of the Municipal water utility shall be in accordance with the following specifications:
A. All hydrants must contain one (1) four (4) inch pumper nozzle and two (2) two and
one-half (2 1/2) hose nozzles.
B. The bury depth for hydrants must be a minimum of four and one-half (4 1/2) feet
and must have a branch valve of at least six (6) inches at the main connection.
C. Hydrants shall be of the dry barrel type with a main valve opening of the
compression type that closes with the pressure. Main valve minimum opening shall
be five and one-quarter (5 1/4) inches.
D. All hydrants located within four (4) feet of a major street must be traffic model or
breakaway type.
SEC. 7.12-5 FIRE SERVICES. Fire service connections are to be used only for the
extinguishment of fires and are to have no connection whatever with any other service connection or
service pipe. The Town reserves the right to require or provide at owner’s expense a meter or
detector check to ensure that water is not being used for other than fire protection.
SEC. 7.12-6. Fire service lines must meet all requirements of watermain specification and
installation as otherwise mentioned in this Code. A complete set of blueprints prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect shall be on file with the Water Department showing the
location of all piping, valves, sprinklers, and other related equipment that is a part of or is connected
to the fire service line. As-built drawings must be furnished to the Water Department within ninety
(90) days after installation is completed. (Subsections 1-6 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.12.7
SEC. 7.12-7 FIRE HYDRANT RENTAL.
A. Fee Imposed. All persons owning property within the Town of Normal, served by a
secondary water supply system shall pay to the Town, a monthly fire hydrant rental
fee for the use and availability for use of public fire hydrants for fire protection only
in the serviceable vicinity of such property.
B. Calculation of Fee. The monthly fire hydrant rental fee shall be determined by the
Town Water Director, based on the total public fire hydrant maintenance cost
incurred by the Town for the preceding calendar year. Maintenance costs shall
include the value of water used for flushing. A monthly unit maintenance cost shall
be calculated from annual maintenance costs for all public hydrants. This monthly
unit cost rounded to the nearest whole dollar, shall be multiplied by the number of
public hydrant units within the serviceable vicinity of the property served by a
secondary water supply system and the result shall be the monthly fire hydrant rental
fee.
C. Serviceable Vicinity. That area is determined by the Fire Chief in which it is
reasonable to anticipate that the fire hydrants located therein would be used for
firefighting purposes on the properties served by the secondary water supply system.
D. Billing Procedure. The monthly fire hydrant rental fee shall be billed and collected
by the Town Treasurer or his designee. All bills for fire hydrant rental shall be
rendered every two months to cover the preceding two month period for which fire
hydrants were used or available for use as specified herein. All bills shall be due not
later than the close of business on the 15th day following the date of the bill as
rendered. A penalty of ten (10%) percent shall be added to all bills not paid within
15 days of the date of billing. When the fifteenth (15th) day of any month shall be
Sunday or a legal holiday, then such bills for service shall be payable on the next
succeeding calendar day without additional penalty. Additionally, bills not paid
when due shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance of principle, interest and
penalty as provided in Division 18, Chapter 25 of this Code.
E. Lien. The Town may cause a lien to be placed against property when the owner
refuses or neglects to pay any fire hydrant rental fee within 60 days of due date. The
Town shall file a Notice of Lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean
County. Such lien shall secure payment of all fire hydrant rental fees due at the time
of the filing of notice together with any penalty or interest added to such fee any
interest accruing after the filing of the Notice of said lien and also a ten dollar
($10.00) fee to cover the cost of recording said Notice of Lien. The Notice of Lien
shall consist of sworn statement setting out:
1. A description of real estate, sufficient for identification.
2. The amount of money due the Town for fire hydrant rental, together with
any accrued penalty, interest and lien recording fee.
SEC. 7.12-7(Cont.1)
3. The amount of accruing interest, if any, from the date the
lien is filed, until paid.
4. The dates for which the fire hydrant rental fee was imposed.
Upon payment of the fire hydrant rental fee, all accrued penalty and interest, and lien
recording fee, the lien shall be released by the Town and a Notice of Lien released
shall be filed of record, with the Recorder of Deeds, McLean County.
F. Lien Enforcement. Any lien filed pursuant to the Section, may be enforced by
proceeding to foreclosure as provided by law.
(SEC. 7.12-7 Added 12/19/83)
SEC. 7.12-8 FIRE PROTECTION CHARGES. Beginning October 1, 2009, any person
or entity connecting to the Town Water Distribution System for private fire protection purposes
shall pay a fee to the Town based on the diameter of pipe connected as provided below:
A. Effective October 1, 2009, the monthly rate for private fire protection in the form of
a fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants, or other fire suppression
equipment connected to the Town’s water system shall be charged the rate of $7.50
per inch diameter of pipe, or fraction thereof rounded to the next highest inch, of fire
service connection. Fire suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and
fire service line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
B. Effective April 1, 2010, the monthly rate for private fire protection in the form of a
fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants, or other fire suppression
equipment connected to the Town’s water system shall be charged the rate of $7.73
per inch diameter of pipe, or fraction thereof rounded to the next highest inch, of fire
service connection. Fire suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and
fire service line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
C. Effective April 1, 2011, the monthly rate for private fire protection in the form of a
fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants, or other fire suppression
equipment connected to the Town’s water system shall be charged the rate of $8.19
per inch diameter of pipe, or fraction thereof rounded to the next highest inch, of fire
service connection. Fire suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and
fire service line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
D. Effective April 1, 2012, the monthly rate for private fire protection in the form of a
fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants, or other fire suppression
equipment connected to the Town’s water system shall be charged the rate of $8.68
per inch diameter of pipe, or fraction thereof rounded to the next highest inch, of fire
service connection. Fire suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and
SEC. 7.12-8(Cont.1)
fire service line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
E. Effective April 1, 2013, the monthly rate for private fire protection in the form of a
fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants, or other fire suppression
equipment connected to the Town’s water system shall be charged the rate of $9.20
per inch diameter of pipe, or fraction thereof rounded to the next highest inch, of fire
service connection. Fire suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and
fire service line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
(Entire Section 7.12-8 Added 7/20/09 by Ord. No 5280)
SEC. 7.13-1
DIVISION 13 - RULES AND REGULATIONS
SEC. 7.13-1. The Water Director is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations
consistent with this Ordinance for the connection to the water system, specifying the types and sizes
of pipes and all the other appurtenances and extensions thereto and amend the same from time to
time as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the water system shall
comply with the said specifications and rules. Any persons, firm, or corporation not complying
with the specifications and rules for connections to the water system shall be subject to the penalty
provisions in SEC. 7.14-1 of this Code.
No rules and regulation promulgated by the Water Director under this Chapter shall be valid
and enforceable until reduced to written form and a copy filed with the Town Clerk to be placed by
said Clerk in a book kept for that purpose and said book shall be open for public inspection.
SEC. 7.13-2 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Director of Finance shall establish a proper
system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made in all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual
intervals the Director of Finance shall cause to be made an audit by a certified public accountant of
the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system.
SEC. 7.13-3. Resale of water in or outside of the Town Corporate Limits shall not be
permitted unless permission is granted by and a contract is entered into with the Town Corporate
Authorities.
(Entire Division 13 Amended 9/21/81)
SEC.7.14-1
DIVISION 14 - ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 7.14-1. Any person, firm, partnership, land trust, association, agent or legal
representative violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to discontinuance of service
and/or a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00 and each day the violation
continues shall subject such person to an additional penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more
than $500.00. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be considered as a separate
and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 7.14-2. In the event charges for water, sanitary or storm services are not paid
within thirty (30) days and are declared delinquent, such delinquent charges shall constitute a
lien upon the real estate, upon or for which such services are supplied or available. The Town, at
its option, may file a lien upon the real property where the services are supplied or available.
When the Town exercises its right to file a lien upon the real property, the Town must file a
Notice of Lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County. Such Notice shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
2. The delinquent charges for services supplied or available to said property; and
3. The date or dates for which said services were supplied or available.
This lien shall be superior to all other liens, except taxes, provided, however, it shall not
be valid as to any purchaser whose right in and to such real estate has arisen subsequent to the
date on which such costs were incurred and prior to the filing of such Notice and a lien of the
Town shall not be valid as to any mortgages, judgment creditor or other lien whose rights in and
to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such Notice. Upon payment of the delinquent
charges and any accruing interest and penalty, together with the costs of filing and releasing said
lien, the lien shall be released by the Town and the Release may be filed of record as in the case
of filing the Notice of Lien. The lien may be enforced by proceeding to foreclosure as provided
by law.
SEC. 7.14-3 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. In the event the owner or occupant
of property supplied water, sanitary or storm sewer services fails to pay the charges for said
services within the time provided by this chapter and such services are declared delinquent, the
Water Director is authorized to terminate water service to the property for which said charges are
delinquent. Such termination of service shall be subject to the procedure set forth in Sec. 7.7-4
of this chapter Delinquency Notification Pre-termination Hearing and Termination of Services.
(Entire Division 14 of Chapter 7 Amended and Renamed 8/7/06 by Ord. No. 5094)
SEC. 7.15-1
DIVISION 15 - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
SEC. 7.15-1. If in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Director of Water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the Director of Water will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The Water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all
applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as
required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations.
SEC. 7.15-2. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the Town enter the supply or distribution
system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Director of Water
and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
SEC. 7.15-3. It shall be the duty of the Director of Water to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of the customer properties served by the public water supply to determine
whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2)
years, or as often as the Director of Water shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years. (Amended 12/16/02 by
Ord. No. 4846)
SEC. 7.15-4. The Director, Plumbing Inspectors, or authorized Cross Connection Control
Device Inspector, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Town for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and that the Water Director, Plumbing
Inspectors, or authorized Cross Connection Control Device Inspector, shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the Town for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding
the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the Director of Water any information which he may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use of such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Director of Water, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this Division. (Amended 12/16/02
by Ord. No. 4846)
SEC. 7.15-5. The Director of Water of the Town of Normal is authorized and may
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property which
fails to provide any survey, inspection report, or fee required by Town ordinance in regard to cross
connections or backflow prevention. The Director of Water of the Town is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
SEC. 7.15-5
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this division is known to exist, and
to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this division, and until a reconnection fee as provided in this Chapter is paid to the
Town Treasurer. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Director of
Water is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system
exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
(Amended 3/7/2011 by Ord. No. 5372)
SEC. 7.15-6. The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal
cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has
been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
SEC. 7.15-7. Any person found guilty of violating any portion of this Division shall be
fined as provided in Division 14 of this Chapter. (Amended 9/21/81)(Amended 3/7/88)
SEC. 7.16-1
DIVISION 16 - MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM ZONE PROVISIONS
SEC. 7.16-1 DEFINITIONS. - Except as stated in this Division and unless a different
meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this Division
shall be the same as those used in the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) and the
Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.):
A. Act means the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 1992 State Bar
Edition) as it exists on April 5, 1993.
B. Agency means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
C. Board means the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
D. Maximum Setback Zone means the area around a community water supply well
established under Section 14.3 of the Act and this Division and described in Exhibits
attached hereto (which may be amended from time to time by the Water Director as
wells are added) being the area of a circle with a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet
around each Town well described in each Exhibit attached hereto.
E. Minimum Setback Zone means the area around a community water supply well
established under Section 14.2 of the Act and this Division and described in Exhibits
attached hereto (which may be amended from time to time by the Water Director as
wells are added) being the area within a circle with a radius of one four hundred
(400) feet around each Town well described in each Exhibit attached hereto.
SEC. 7.16-2 PROHIBITIONS.
A. Except as provided in SEC. 7.16-3 or SEC. 7.16-4 of this Division, no person shall
place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new
potential route within the minimum setback zone.
B. Except as provided in SEC. 7.16-3 of this Division, no person shall place a new
potential primary source within the maximum setback zone.
SEC. 7.16-3 WAIVER, EXCEPTIONS, AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL
HAZARD.
A. If pursuant to SEC. 14.2b of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source,
new potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted a waiver by the
Agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a waiver to the same extent from SEC.
7.16-2(A) of this Division.
B. If pursuant to SEC. 14.2c of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source
(other than landfilling or land treating), new potential secondary source, or new
SEC. 7.16-3(Cont.1)
potential route is granted an exception by the Board, such owner shall be deemed to
have an exception to the same extent from SEC. 7.16-2(A) of this Division.
C. If pursuant to SEC. 14.2c of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source
(other than landfilling or land treating) is granted an exception by the Board, such
owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from SEC. 7.16-2(B)
of this Division.
D. If pursuant to SEC. 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source,
new potential secondary source, or new potential route is issued a certificate of
minimal hazard by the Agency, such owner shall not be subject to SEC. 7.16-2(A) of
this Division to the same extent that such owner is not subject to SEC. 14.2d of the
Act.
SEC. 7.16-4 EXCLUSION. SEC. 7.16-2(A) of this Division shall not apply to new
common sources of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to SEC. 17 of the Act and the
regulations adopted thereunder by the Agency. However, no such common sources may be located
within the applicable minimum distance from a community water supply well specified by such
regulations.
SEC. 7.16-5 FILING OF WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS, AND CERTIFICATIONS OF
MINIMAL HAZARD. If any person obtains a waiver, exception, or certification of minimal
hazard pursuant to the Act from the Agency, then such person shall file a copy of such waiver,
exception, or certification of minimal hazard with the Normal Town Clerk. Such filing shall be
made prior to the commencement of any drilling, digging, or excavating pursuant to such waiver,
exception, or certification of minimal hazard.
(Entire Division 16 Added 4/15/93 by Ord. No. 4128)(Entire Division 16 Amended 6/19/06, by
Ord. No. 5081)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-1)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-2)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-3)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-4)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-5)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-6)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit A-7)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit B-1)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit B-2)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit C-1)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit C-2)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit C-3)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit C-4)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-1)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-2)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-3)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-4)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-5)
SEC. 7.16 (Exhibit D-6)
SEC.7.17-1
DIVISION 17 - WATER OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS
SEC. 7.17-1 FURNISHING WATER OUTSIDE THE TOWN. It shall be the policy of
the Town of Normal to furnish water outside the corporate limits through its distribution system
extended provided the additional water use does not exceed the capacity of the existing water
system and the City Council determines such service is in the best interests of the Citizens of
Normal.
SEC. 7.17-2 REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
Water service outside corporate limits must meet the following requirements:
A. The cost of extensions of water mains and tap on fees must be assumed by the
customers or divided between the customers and the Town on the basis of
engineering recommendations and a mutual agreement to be approved by the City
Council.
B. Water rates shall be 2.5 times the rates established from time to time for the sale of
water by the Town within the corporate limits. (Division 7 of Chapter 7 of this
Code).
C. Annexation to the corporate limits is reasonably imminent as determine in the sole
discretion of the City Council.
D. Every property owner whose property is served and connected to the Town's water
system shall first enter into a pre-annexation agreement in a form approved by the
Town setting forth the terms of cost and other appropriate requirements and shall
among other provisions include the following:
As a covenant running with the land, Customer agrees that in the event any portion
of the above-described property hereafter becomes contiguous with the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Normal in any of the manners prescribed by law, the
Town of Normal may, in its sole discretion, but only after more than thirty (30) days
have elapsed from the date of the City Manager requesting that said above-described
property be annexed, discontinue furnishing of any and all water services to any
property, building improvement or appurtenance upon said above-described
property or any part thereof, and in its discretion may continue to refuse the
furnishing of such water services until said property has become annexed to the
Town of Normal in the manner prescribed by law.
E. The property owner or customer must also agree that he will not permit or allow any
other person, firm or corporation to connect or annex to said water system or use
water therefrom or in any other way benefit from the service provided to the
customer under the terms of the said agreement without written permission from the
City Manager.
SEC. 7.17-2(Cont.1)
F. Water customers outside the Town shall further agree that all extensions of the water
system remain the property of and subject to the control of the Town and that the
water customer and his property shall be subject to and shall be obligated to the
enforcement of liens for nonpayment of water and said customers shall abide by all
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Town with regard to the construction, use
and maintenance of water mains and for the payment of services for water services;
and upon the penalty of violation that a notice of disconnection may be given by the
Town as provided in this Chapter for non-payment for services. In the event of
disconnection for violation or breach of any covenant or condition of the water
agreement, it is strictly provided that no rebate, reimbursement or claim shall be due
and owing to the water customer.
SEC. 7-17.3 RESALE OF CITY WATER FOR PROFIT PROHIBITED.
A. No private person, partnership or corporation shall resell water purchased from the
Town of Normal at a price greater than the amount charged to such person,
partnership or corporation by the Town for the purchase of such water.
B. This Section shall not prohibit landlords from charging a fixed monthly or annual
amount to reimburse such landlords for the cost of supplying water as a term of a
lease when the actual amount of water used by an individual tenant cannot be
ascertained, but such fixed amount, and the method of computing such amount, shall
be disclosed to the individual tenant and to Town inspectors upon request. The fixed
amount must be a reasonable estimate of the per capita cost to such landlord of
supplying water based on previous usage rates and current water rates.
C. Violators of this Section shall be fined a minimum of $100.00 and a maximum of
$500.00 for each violation of this Section. Overcharging shall be a separate offense
for each month the violation continues. In the case of tenants of rented dwelling
units or mobile home lots which are overcharged in violation of this Section a
separate offense shall have been committed for each individual dwelling, unit or
mobile home lot tenant so overcharged for each month of overcharging.
D. This Section shall not apply to any unit of local government or to any entity
regulated as a water utility by the Illinois Commerce Commission.
(Entire Division 17 Added 9/5/2000 by Ord. No. 4667)
SEC. 7.18-1
DIVISION 18 – POTABLE WATER SUPPLY WELLS
SEC. 7.18-1 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this Division shall be as follows:
Person is any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any
other legal entity or such entities’ legal representative, agent, or assign.
Potable Water is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not
limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, preparing foods, or
watering gardens in which product intended for human consumption is grown.
Prohibited Property means all properties listed in Schedule A Identifying Property from
which the use of ground water as a potable water supply is prohibited. Said Schedule A shall be
kept in the Office of the Water Department Director, Town Engineer, and Town Clerk.
SEC. 7.18-2 PROHIBITATION ON THE USE OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
WELLS.
A. Use of Ground Water as a Potable Water Supply is Prohibited. The use or attempt to
use as a potable water supply, ground water from Prohibited Property by the
installation or drilling of wells on or at the Prohibited Property, or by any other
method on or at the Prohibited Property, is hereby prohibited.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of up to
$500.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense subject to a penalty of up to $500.00 for each day the
violation exists.
C. Injunctive Relief. The Director of the Water Department is hereby authorized to
seek injunctive relief in the form of a restraining order or temporary or permanent
injunction prohibiting any violation of this Section. The Director of the Water
Department may institute injunctive relief without first seeking the imposition of a
monetary penalty pursuant to this Section.
D. Restrictions Binding on the Town of Normal. Except for the provisions set forth in
the penalty Section and the Section for injunctive relief, the restrictions contained in
this Ordinance shall be binding on the Town of Normal, Illinois.
SEC. 7.18-3 SCHEDULE “A” PROHIBITED PROPERTY.
The following exhibits the Prohibited Property identified in this division from which the
installation or use of potable water supply wells is prohibited.
(Entire Division 18 Added 5/7/07 by Ord. No. 5131)(Exhibit B Added 11/19/12 by Ord. No.
5461)


SEC. 7.20-1
DIVISION 20 - GENERAL PROVISIONS - SEWER
SEC. 7.20-1 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this Division shall be as follows:
Sewage Works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of
sewage.
Superintendent or Director shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works of
the Town of Normal or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Sewage shall mean the water carried wastes from residences, businesses, institutions and
industrial establishments, plus minor and incidental amounts of ground, surface or storm water.
Public, Sanitary or Storm Sewer shall mean a sanitary sewer or storm sewer or storm drain
located in the public right-of-way or public easement in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by a public authority.
Combined Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit receiving both surface water and sewage.
Sanitary Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit designed and intended to carry sewage and to
exclude storm, surface and ground water.
Storm Sewer or Storm Drain shall mean a pipe or conduit which is designed and intended to
carry storm, surface and ground water and to exclude sewage and industrial wastes.
Sewage Treatment Plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
Industrial Wastes shall mean solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial
or manufacturing operation or process.
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and
from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Properly Shredded Garbage shall mean that wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
Building Drain means the lowest horizontal portion of a building or structure's sewage
collection and disposal system which is designed to carry sewage through or beyond the foundation
wall to the building sewer. A building drain may include a sewage sump pump, ejector, lift pump
or other similar device which pumps sewage.
SEC. 7.20-1(Cont.1)
Building Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit located on private property owned and
controlled by the private property owner, which is designed and intended to carry sewage from the
building drain to the public sanitary sewer or a private sewage disposal system. (Added 4/5/76)
Building Sewer Connection shall mean a pipe or conduit and appurtenances connected to
the public sanitary sewer and extending from said sewer to the customers property line for the
purpose of carrying sewage from the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer. (Added 3/7/88)
Natural Outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
Shall is mandatory. May is permissive.
SEC. 7.20-2 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the Town of Normal, or in an area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectional waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Normal, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this Division.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes, situated within the town and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is now located or may in the future be located on a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the Town is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this division, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected,
any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool or industrial waste, or
any other fixture or device discharging any form of polluting substances, to any storm or water drain
or combination storm water drain in the Town of Normal.
SEC. 7.20-3
SEC. 7.20-3 PROHIBITION OF PRIVATE SEWER SERVICE LINES. No person
shall construct or install or use or permit the use of any private sewer service line for any lot
building or structure provided:
A. This section shall not apply where approval is given for private sewer service lines
where a final planned unit development plan has been authorized, and
B. This section shall apply to persons using or permitting the use of such lines on the
date of this amendatory ordinance as follows:
1. Said person may continue to use and may repair these private sanitary sewer
lines.
2. Replacement of these private sanitary sewer lines shall only be allowed in
the event that no public sanitary sewer is located within one hundred (100)
feet of the property line at the time the private sanitary sewer needs
replacing. If a public sanitary sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line, then use of the private line shall be discontinued and
connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer in accordance with all
applicable ordinances.
C. That for the purpose of this section "private sewer service" is defined as a nonpublicly
accepted direct or indirect connection to a public sewer by means other than
another public sewer, a building drain or building sewer, which traverses property
belonging to another person or entity.
D. That for the purpose of this section "repair" shall mean the reconstruction of less
than fifty percent (50%) or more of the private sewer service.
E. That for the purposes of this section, "replacement" shall mean the reconstruction of
fifty percent (50%) or more of the private sewer service. (Entire SEC. 7.20-3 Added
by Ordinance No. 1972, 8/18/80)
SEC. 7.20-4 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL. Where a public sanitary or combined
sewer is not available under the provisions of SEC. 7.20-2, the building sewer shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall
first obtain a written permit signed by the Director. The application for such permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the Town, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Director. A permit and inspection fee of Ten
($10.00) Dollars shall be paid to the Town Treasurer at the time the application is filed. (Amended
5/5/80)(Amended 9/19/83)
SEC. 7.20-4(Cont.1)
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Director
when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the Director.
(Amended 5/5/80)
The type, capacities, location and lay-out of private sewage disposal systems shall comply
with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. No permit shall be
issued for any private sewage disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided however that
the Town Council may authorize the Director of the Department of Public Works to issue such a
permit on a lot of record containing less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet if each of the
following requirements are met:
A. The lot contains at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. The septic system, when installed, will serve a single-family dwelling.
C. That percolation tests conducted on the lot demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Town Engineer that given the existing soil conditions, the proposed lot is of
adequate size to efficiently handle the anticipated sanitary discharge.
D. The McLean County Health Department approves in writing the use of a septic tank
at the location proposed.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a public sewage
disposal system, as provided in SEC. 7.20-3, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this Division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer. (Amended 5/6/74)
SEC. 7.20-5 SEWER PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. (Amended 5/5/80)
SEC. 7.20-6 CLASSES OF PERMITS. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: one for residential and commercial service and one for service to establishments for
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Town. The required permit fee shall be paid to the Building
SEC. 7.20-6(Cont.1)
Inspector, who in turn shall deliver same to the Town Treasurer, and shall, likewise, immediately
deliver a copy of the permit to the Director who shall act in accordance with this Division. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. A permit and inspection fee of Five ($5.00)
Dollars for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and Fifteen ($15.00) Dollars for an
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town Treasurer at the time the application is
filed. (Amended 9/19/83)
SEC. 7.20-7 COSTS OF INSTALLATION. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer and building sewer connection shall be borne by
the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer or building sewer connection.
(Amended 3/7/88)
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building unless
approved in writing by the Director; except when one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings only when they are
found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all requirements of this Division.
SEC. 7.20-8 COST OF INSPECTION AND TESTING AND MAINTENANCE. Any
person requesting a Town inspection or test of any building drain, building sewer, building sewer
connection, private sewer service line, private storm sewer, private storm drain or part of the private
sewage disposal or storm water disposal system of a lot, building or structure shall be liable to
conducting such inspection and test based on a current sewer system inspection test fee schedule,
prepared by the Director of Public Works for the Town of Normal and available for inspection in
his office and in the office of the Town Clerk. All costs and expenses of repair and maintenance of
the building sewer and building sewer connection shall be borne by the owner of the building sewer.
(Amended 3/7/88)
SEC. 7.20-9 SPECIFICATIONS. The building sewer and building sewer connection
shall be cast-iron or ductile iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A 74-42 (or latest revision) or equal;
or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, ASTM specification D 3034 for sized 4"-15" or F-679 for sizes
18"-27". Minimum specification shall be schedule 40 or SDR 21. Any part of the building sewer or
building sewer connection that is located within ten (10) horizontal feet or eighteen (18) vertical
inches of a water service pipe, shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe. Cast-iron pipe may be
required by the Director of Public Works where the building sewer or building sewer connection is
exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer or
building sewer connection shall be cast-iron soil pipe, except that a non-metallic material may be
accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Director of Public Works.
(Amended 3/7/88)(Amended 2/7/05 by Ord. No. 4994)
SEC. 7.20-9(Cont.1)
All joints for cast-iron pipe shall be tight and waterproof and meet ASTM Specification C-
564 (or latest revision) or equal. All joints for PCV Pipe shall be solvent welded ASTM
specification D 2855 or Flexible Elastomeric Seal type ASTM specification DC 3212. (Amended
3/7/88)(Amended 2/7/05 by Ord. No. 4994)
If more than one type of sewer pipe is used, they shall be connected by tight and waterproof
adapters, especially designed for such jointing, and be approved by the Director of Public Works.
SEC. 7.20-10 SIZE AND SLOPE. The size and slope of the building sewer and building
sewer connection shall be subject to the approval of the Director but in no event shall the diameter
be less than four (4) inches for single family residential property or less than six (6) inches for all
other property. The slope of such pipe shall not be less than one-eight (1/8) inch per foot.
(Amended 3/7/88)(Amended 2/7/05 by Ord. No. 4994)
SEC. 7.20-11 ELEVATION. Whenever possible the building sewer and building sewer
connection shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building
sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer and
building sewer connection shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
(Amended 3/7/88)
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewer carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged to the building sewer. Water pressure ejectors and siphons shall not be installed for the
discharge of any sewage or wastes unless adequately protected against back-siphonage.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all residential construction for which a building permit is issued
after January 1, 2011, and the construction provides plumbing fixtures or drains which are below
grade, said buildings must have approved overhead discharge and no gravity discharge to the sewer
system for those fixtures and drains which are below grade. Exception: Residential construction in
a development subject to an approved preliminary plan which was approved before January 1, 2011,
shall be exempt from the overhead discharge provision until January 1, 2015. Beginning January 1,
2015, all residential construction for which a building permit is issued and the construction provides
for plumbing fixtures or drains below grade level shall have approved overhead discharge and no
gravity discharge for those fixtures and drains which are below grade. (Amended 12/6/2010 by
Ord. No. 5365)(Amended 11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5516)
SEC. 7.20-12 EXCAVATIONS. All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer and building sewer connection shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
Director. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specifications
C12-19 and the applicable sections of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. (Amended
3/7/88)
All excavations for building sewer installation and building sewer connections shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
SEC. 7.20-12(Cont.1)
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the Town. (Amended 3/7/88)
SEC. 7.20-13. (Reserved)
SEC. 7.20-14 CONNECTIONS. The building sewer connection into the public sewer
shall be made at the "Y" or "T" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less and no properly located "Y" or "T" branch is
available, the owner shall at his expense install a "Y" or "T" branch in the public sewer at the
location specified by the Superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches
in diameter and no properly located branch is available, a tapping saddle shall be used. The type of
tapping saddle shall be subject to the discretion of the Director of Public Works. (Amended
5/5/80)(Amended 3/7/88)
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director when the building
sewer connection is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Director or his representative. (Amended 5/5/80)(Amended
3/7/88)
SEC. 7.20-15 EXCAVATION DRAINS AND CONNECTIONS.
A. During the time of excavation and as long as an excavated area remains open so as
to act as a catch basin, then in such instance, any sewer tile or drainage outlet
designed to service the excavated area shall at all times be either kept or furnished
with a sufficient stand pipe, so as to eliminate the possibility of any rain or surface
water collecting or draining into the excavated area and hence into the outlets and
accordingly into the sewer system of the Town of Normal and/or the Bloomington-
Normal Sanitary District. (Amended 5/5/86)
B. When demolishing or removing buildings or building debris, all sewer services and
mains must be properly cut off and capped as approved by the Director of the Public
Works Department. (Amended 5/5/86)
SEC. 7.20-16 MAINTENANCE, CONTINUATION OR RETENTION OF BROKEN,
DEFECTIVE, OR PRESENTLY UNLAWFUL BUILDING DRAINS, BUILDING SEWERS
OR STORM DRAIN CONNECTIONS OR CONDITIONS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning property located within the Town of
Normal to permit any of the following conditions to be or remain on such property
ninety (90) days after notification by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, or actual knowledge, of the existence of such a condition unless a variation
has been granted by the Director of Public Works. (Amended 8/20/79)
1. A storm sewer or storm drain which is so constructed or is in such a
condition as to allow or permit the discharge of storm water, surface water or
ground water into a building drain, building sewer or public sanitary sewer,
SEC. 7.20-16(Cont.1)
either directly through a direct connection or indirectly by discharging or
permitting the discharge of such water in or near areas of gravel, crushed
rock or other porous soil or material located near or around openings, holes,
cracks, loose joints or other gaps in a building drain, building sewer or public
sanitary sewer;
2. A private combined sewer;
3. A storm water, surface water or ground water collection or diversion device,
including without limitation the following: area drains, yard drains, footing
tiles, downspouts, leaders, storm water, surface water or ground water sump
pumps or other pumping device, which is constructed or in such a condition
so as to discharge or permit or allow the discharge of storm water, surface
water or ground water into a building drain, building sewer or public sanitary
sewer either directly through a direct connection or indirectly by discharging
or permitting the discharge of such water in or near areas of gravel, crushed
rock or other porous soil or material located near or around openings, holes,
cracks, loose joints or other gaps in a building drain, building sewer or public
sanitary sewer;
4. A building drain or building sewer with broken, missing or cracked tiles,
loose or separated joints or other holes, cracks, gaps or spaces;
5. Any other fixture, structure or condition which permits or allows or is in
such a condition to permit or allow storm water, surface water or ground
water to enter directly or indirectly a building drain, building sewer or public
sanitary sewer.
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works may give notification of the
existence of such a condition described in Paragraph A of this Section either
personally or by ordinary mail with postage fully prepaid to the owner of record of
the property on which such a condition is located or to the person who last paid local
real estate taxes on such property and upon the giving or mailing of such
notification, the property owner shall be deemed to have notice of the existence of
such a condition.
C. The notification provided in Paragraph B of this Section shall be given if one or
more of the following occurs:
1. An on-site visual or physical inspection of the property indicates the
existence of a condition described in Paragraph A of this Section;
2. A dye or TV monitor test indicates that water or dye placed in storm water,
surface water or ground water collection or diversion devices or in the
ground near the foundation of a building or structure located on such
property enters the public sanitary sewer;
SEC. 7.20-16(Cont.2)
3. A "smoke test" indicates that smoke placed into the public sanitary sewer
under pressure is escaping through the ground or through downspouts,
leaders, gutters, yard drains, area drains or other storm water collection or
diversion devices located on the owner's property;
D. The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
develop material describing the testing procedures hereinabove referred to and
indicating the manner in which such tests shall be conducted.
E. Any person to whom such notification is given may appeal the determination of the
Director of the Department of Public Works to the Plumbing Board of Appeals of
the Town of Normal by delivering to the Town Clerk of the Town within ten (10)
days from the date of such notification is given a "Notice of Appeal" detailing the
circumstances, grounds or reasons the property owner believes the Director's
determination is incorrect or inaccurate, which said notification shall be substantially
in the following form:
NOTICE OF APPEAL
TO: The Plumbing Board of Appeals of the Town of Normal
I, (name) am the owner of certain property located within
the Town of Normal, commonly known as .
On (date of notification), I was notified that a condition described in SEC.
7.20-16 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended,
exists on my property. I do not believe that such a condition exists on my property,
and therefore, appeal the Director's determination for the following reasons:
(Enumerate in detail the reasons the property owner does not believe the
condition exists and/or the determination of the Director is inaccurate or incorrect.)
_______________________________
Signature of Property Owner
Upon the timely filing of such an appeal, the Plumbing Board of Appeals shall
conduct an administrative hearing thereon, affording the property owner an
opportunity to appear and present evidence in support of his or her appeal and to
respond to affirmative defenses offered by the Director and providing the Director
an opportunity to respond to the allegations or representations of the property owner,
and to present affirmative material in support of the original determination. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall sustain or reverse the determination of the
Director and shall notify the property owner and Director of their decision by
SEC. 7.20-16(Cont.3)
verbally announcing it at the hearing or in the absence of the property owner, by
mailing a copy thereof to the owner at the address indicated in the Notice of Appeal.
A timely appeal shall stay the ninety (90) day period provided in the Director's
notification from the date of filing of the appeal to the date of decision by the Board.
(Amended 4/5/76)
F. A variation from the strict requirements of this SEC. 7.20-16 may be granted by the
Director of Public Works once all of the following events have occurred:
1. Excavation of the building sewer line.
2. Installation of band seal couplings.
3. Infiltration inflow dye test completed. If there is still some leakage, the band
seals are to be removed and the line visually lamped and inspected for
cracks.
4. If there are cracks in the building sewer, further excavation shall be
performed so that the cracks can be repaired.
5. Once the cracks have been repaired, or if there are no cracks, reinstall the
band seals and perform another dye test. Steps 3, 4, and 5 may be repeated
at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
G. If the Director of Public Works refuses to grant a variation after completion of all of
the steps mentioned in the preceding subsection, appeal may be had to the Plumbing
Board of Appeals as provided in subsection E.
(Subparagraphs F & G Added 8/20/79)
SEC. 7.20-17 EXTENSION OF PUBLIC SEWERS. When it is desired to extend a
public sewer to private property which lies more than one hundred (100) feet from the public sewer,
the extension of the public sewer shall be made by the property owner.
The size of the sewer to be built shall be approved by the President and Board of Trustees of
the Town of Normal, but in no case shall it be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. The owner
shall submit detailed construction plans and specifications to the President and the Board of
Trustees for approval before the work is started. Construction methods shall be in accordance with
the standard specifications used by the Town of Normal. All construction shall be subject to the
inspection of the Director or other designated representative.
At the time the plans and specifications for extensions to public sewers are presented to the
President and Board of Trustees, persons requesting said extension shall submit a completion bond
or deposit cash in an escrow account in the penal sum sufficient to cover the estimated construction
cost plus engineering, legal fees and inspection, which funds shall be used to pay the aboveSEC.
7.20-17(Cont.1)
referenced costs after the project is accepted by the President and Board of Trustees. The
completion bond shall be approved by the City Attorney.
The person, firm or corporation requesting the extension of said sewer shall dedicate all
easements, temporary and permanent, necessary for the construction of said sewer as determined by
the President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
No connection shall be made to any sewer, or system of sewers of said Town, whether said
extension be within or outside the corporate limits of said Town for the purpose of giving sewer
service to any property line outside the corporate limits of said Town and no sewer service shall be
given to any property lying outside the corporate limits except land in the corporate limits of
Bloomington, Illinois. The President and Board of Trustees may have the right to approve the
extension of their sewers by the City of Bloomington.
SEC. 7.20-18 USE OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS.
A. No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or permit the discharge of any
storm water, ground water, run-off, sub-surface drainage or unpolluted industrial
process water from private property to any public sanitary sewer.
B. No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or permit the discharge of any
material into the public sanitary sewer which does not comply with the Bloomington
and Normal Sanitary District ordinances. (Amended 4/5/76)
SEC. 7.20-19 DAMAGE TO SEWERS. No unauthorized person shall maliciously,
willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
SEC. 7.20-20 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS. The Director and
other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this Division. (Amended 5/5/80)
SEC. 7.20-21 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or
permitting a violation to remain beyond the period of time provided for voluntary correction or
elimination thereof, shall upon conviction, be fined not less than One Hundred ($100.00) dollars or
more than Five Hundred ($500.00) dollars for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Amended 4/5/76)
(Entire Division 20 Renumbered by ORD. 3029 Dated 9/21/81)
SEC. 7.20-22 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. All sewers and appurtenances thereto
shall use materials and be installed in the manner meeting or exceeding the requirements, standards,
and specifications contained in the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction
in Illinois, the current edition as then modified, supplemented, and amended by the Town of
SEC. 7.20-22(Cont.1)
Normal. Such standards and specifications with the modifications, amendments, and amplifications
are available for public inspection and review in the Department of Public Works for the Town of
Normal, Illinois, and are incorporated herein by reference. (Added 5/5/86)
SEC. 7.21-1
DIVISION 21 - SEWER CHARGES
SEC. 7.21-1 SEWER CHARGES WHERE MUNICIPAL WATER SERVICE IS
USED.
A. For users located within the corporate limits of the Town, the following rates and
charges are established for the use and service of the Town's sewer system where the
water supply is from a municipal service:
1. System-Maintenance Fee. A monthly system-maintenance fee is imposed
regardless of the quantity of water consumed. The amount of the systemmaintenance
fee is as follows:
a. For bills issued before October 1, 2017, the monthly fee is $2.50.
b. For bills issued on or after October 1, 2017, the monthly fee is $3.00.
c. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2018, the monthly fee is $3.25.
d. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2019, the monthly fee is $3.50.
e. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2020, the monthly fee is $3.75.
f. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2021, the monthly fee is $4.00.
g. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2022, the monthly fee is $4.25.
2. Use Fee. The use fee is imposed per 1,000 gallons of water consumed during
the billing period. The fee is as follows:
a. For bills issued before October 1, 2017, the fee is $1.27 per 1,000
gallons.
b. For bills issued on or after October 1, 2017, the fee is $2.02 per 1,000
gallons.
c. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2018, the fee is $2.23 per 1,000
gallons.
d. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2019, the fee is $2.44 per 1,000
gallons.
e. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2020, the fee is $2.65 per 1,000
gallons.
f. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2021, the fee is $2.86 per 1,000
gallons.
g. For bills issued on or after April 1, 2022, the fee is $3.07 per 1,000
gallons.
(Amended 2/24/75, Effective 4/1/75)(Amended 3/7/83, Effective 7/1/83)(Amended 2/20/84,
Effective 4/1/84)(Amended 3/16/92, Effective 2/1/93)(Amended 9/18/95, Effective
2/1/96)(Amended 12/18/00, Effective 2/1/01)(Amended 2/3/03, Effective 4/1/03)(Amended 2/2/04,
Effective April 4, 2004)(Amended 2/5/07 by Ord. No. 5114)(Amended 2/1/10 by Ord. No. 5320,
Effective for all bills issued on and after April 1, 2010)(Amended 3/3/2014 by Ord. No. 5532,
Effective for all bills issued on or after April 1, 2014)(Amended 4/17/17 by Ord. No.
5688)(Amended 8/7/17 by Ord. No. 5700, Effective for all bills issued on or after October 1, 2017)
SEC. 7.21-2
SEC. 7.21-2 RATE INCREASE. If at any time the charges and rates herein fixed shall
not be sufficient to pay the cost of operating and maintaining the sewerage system, to provide an
adequate depreciation fund and other required reserve funds and to pay the principal and interest
upon all the sewerage revenue bonds payable out of the revenues of the sewerage system issued by
the Town of Normal, County of McLean, Illinois, which may be then outstanding, the Council shall
forthwith increase the rates fixed by this Division so that same shall be sufficient to provide
adequate revenues for said purposes.
SEC. 7.21-3 BILLING. Charges for sewerage service shall be made for a 30-day period
and bills shall be rendered for such service at the same time as provided by this Chapter for
rendering the water bills. A penalty of 10% shall be imposed, attached and collected in addition to
and as a part of the charge or bill in the event of failure to pay on or before the 21st day following
the date upon which the statements are rendered. In the event the charges for services are not paid
within 30 days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed, and are
hereby declared, to be delinquent. (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5732 and 5733)
SEC. 7.21-4 DELINQUENCY, NOTIFICATION, PRE-TERMINATION HEARING
AND TERMINATION OF SERVICES.
A. In the event the charges for such service become delinquent as defined in SEC. 7.21-
3, the Town Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to cause notice to be given
in writing to the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service that such delinquency exists, that any person believing such bill to be
erroneous may request and appear at an administrative hearing before the Town
Treasurer prior to termination and that absent such request or after the conclusion
thereof, if the bill is found not to be erroneous, that such services shall be
discontinued without further notice, by mailing a copy of such notice, addressed to
"Occupant" at the address of the property served.
B. That the Town Treasurer be and he is hereby authorized and directed to adjust bills
he finds to be "erroneous" based on Town records.
C. Upon the discontinuation of any service, a charge of $2.00 shall be made for
reconnecting or reinstituting the same after settlement of the current account plus
any delinquent charges incurred.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting or denying the Town of its
statutory right of lien against the owner of property for any charges or expenses
incurred. (Amended 12/18/78)
SEC. 7.21-5 COLLECTION. The charges and rates hereby established by this division
shall be collectible as against the owner or occupant of any and all real estate within the corporate
boundary of the Town of Normal, for which said real estate use and service is supplied or made
available, whether or not such owner or occupant has a direct or indirect connection with the Town
sewerage service; provided, however that no charge shall be made to such owner or occupant if a
SEC. 7.21-5(Cont.1)
sewer connection is not available from any street or alley running beside, in front of or in the rear of
the property of said owner or occupant.
The charges and rates hereby established by this Division shall be collectible against the
owner or occupant of any and all real estate outside said Town which make use of the services and
facilities of the sewerage system or any part thereof.
In the event charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days and are declared
delinquent, such delinquent charges shall constitute liens upon the real estate upon or for which
sewerage services are supplied or available. The Town Clerk, or officer charged with the keeping
of the records of sewerage charges, is hereby directed to file sworn statements showing such
delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of McLean, Illinois, which shall
be deemed notice of the lien for payment for such sewerage services; provided, however, that the
said officer may refrain from filing such a statement of delinquencies if the Town proposes to sue or
shall have sued the occupant or user of said real estate in a civil action to recover such money due
for sewerage services, plus a reasonable attorney's fees to be fixed by the Court.
It is hereby made the duty of the Town Treasurer, or such other officer as may be charged
with the keeping of the records of sewerage charges for the Town of Normal, to render bills for
sewerage services and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all moneys due
thereon. (Amended 9/19/83)
SEC. 7.21-6 REVENUE. All of the revenues and moneys derived from the operation of
the sewerage system shall be held separate and apart from private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the Town, and all of the same, without any deductions, shall be delivered to the
Town Treasurer not more than ten days after the receipt of same, or after such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Town Council.
SEC. 7.21-7 SEWER FUND. The Town Treasurer shall receive all of such revenues from
the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of said system as the
same may be delivered to him, and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Sewer
Revenue Account" or the "Sewerage Fund of the Town of Normal" and shall divide and administer
the said sewerage fund in every respect in the manner provided in the sewerage revenue bond
ordinances of the Town. He shall establish a property system of accounts and shall keep proper
books and records and accounts (separate from all other records and accounts) in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relating to the sewerage system. Such Town
Treasurer shall, as of the close of each fiscal year, cause to be made an audit by a certified public
account of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system, as well as a
balance sheet and other customary showings to accurately relate the performance and operation of
said system.
SEC. 7.21-8 BOND. Prior to the receipt of any revenues derived from said sewerage
system, the Town Treasurer, or the officer charged with the keeping of records and collection of
sewerage charges, shall execute a good and sufficient bond in the amount established by Resolution
of the Town Council, conditioned upon faithful accounting for such funds and subject to the
approval of the Town Council. (Amended 9/21/81)(Amended 9/19/83)
SEC. 7.21-9
SEC. 7.21-9 SEWER CHARGES WHERE NON-MUNICIPAL WATER SERVICE
IS USED.
A. Private Meters Required. The owner of any property attached to the Town's sanitary
sewer system which obtains its water from a source other than the Town of Normal
shall install and maintain, at the owner's expense, water meters of a type approved
by the Town for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from such
other sources. The owner shall provide Town employees access to the water meter
at all times. The private meter readings shall be used as the basis for billing for
sewer service using the same rate as set forth in SEC. 7.21-1 of this Code.
B. Delinquent Bills. In the event a bill for sanitary sewer service imposed under this
Section becomes delinquent, the Town shall impose the same penalties and follow
the same procedures as are set forth in SEC. 7.21-3 et. seq. of this Code. In addition
to said penalties, the Town may disconnect properties for which sanitary sewer fees
under this Section are delinquent from the Town's sanitary sewer. (Added 7/3/89)
SEC. 7.21-10 FAILURE TO INSTALL PRIVATE WATER METERS. Any property
owner who is required to install a private water meter pursuant to SEC. 7.21-9 and who fails to do
so on or after August 1, 1989, shall be subject to a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each
day shall constitute a separate violation of this Section. (Added 7/3/89)
SEC. 7.22-1
DIVISION 22 - TAP-ON CHARGES FOR VARIOUS TRUNK LINE SANITARY
SEWERS AND STORM SEWERS
SEC. 7.22-1 REQUIREMENTS. Any person, firm, corporation, or agency whatsoever
who shall be allowed to tap into any of the following listed trunk line sanitary sewers shall pay,
separate and apart from any other charge, the tap-on or hook-up charge at the rate established in this
Code for the particular trunk line sewer on a per acre or fraction thereof basis for each acre or
fraction thereof which will drain its sanitary sewerage and/or storm drainage into said sewer. Said
tap-on rate for sanitary sewers herein established shall apply only to users for residence purposes,
school or church uses, and commercial purposes where the use of the individual commercial
purpose shall not exceed 2,000 gallons per day of sewerage discharge per acre. It being understood
that nothing shall preclude both residence and school, church or commercial purposes to occupy one
acre of ground so long as the combined use of sewerage discharge will not exceed the 2,000 gallons
per day. Under no circumstances shall sanitary sewerage be discharged into any storm sewer.
SEC. 7.22-2 DESIGNATED AREAS. General trunk line sanitary sewer or storm sewer
areas are designated and described as follows:
A. West Sanitary Sewer
B. North Grove Storm Sewer
C. North Sanitary Sewer
D. North Linden Sanitary Sewer
E. Firestone Sanitary Sewer
F. Vernon-Grandview Storm Sewer
G. Southeast Sanitary Sewer
H. Ash Park Sanitary Sewer
I. Far West Sanitary Sewer (Added 2/6/84)
J. North Linden Street Extension Sanitary Sewer (Added 2/6/84)
K. Veterans Parkway Sanitary Sewer (Added 2/6/84)
L. Landings Sanitary Sewer (Added 11/18/86)
M. Uni-Par Sanitary Sewer (Added 12/21/87)
N. Northtown Pump Station (Added 5/21/90)
O. Warehouse Road Sanitary Sewer (Added 5/21/90)
P. Henry Street Sanitary Sewer (Added 2/19/01)
Q. North Henry Street Sanitary Sewer (Added 2/19/01)
R. Firestone Sanitary Sewer Extension (Added 2/19/01)
S. Northeast Sanitary Sewer - Area A (Added 8/7/01)
That the tap-on fee would apply to the following sewers and any extensions thereto, which
are again listed under the categories above set forth and are described as follows:
A. West Sanitary Sewer - contract with Jack Finley Co., completed April 30, 1970;
SEC. 7.22-2(Cont.1)
B. North Grove Storm Sewer - contract with West Construction Company, dated
August, 1966;
C. North Sanitary Sewer - contract with Elton A. Wagner Co., completed May 11,
1971;
D. North Linden Street Sanitary Sewer - contract with Ralph W. Cassidy, dated April
18, 1967;
E. Firestone Sanitary Sewer - contract with Bluffview Contracting and Equipment
Rental Leasing Company, dated July 2, 1965, and extension thereto under contract
with Rowe Construction Company, dated April 10, 1968;
F. Vernon-Grandview Storm Sewer - contract with Rowe Construction Company,
dated July 30, 1965;
G. Southeast Sanitary Sewer - contract with Wiegand and Storrer, dated March 23,
1971 and with Bloomington/Normal Sanitary District, dated May 24, 1971;
H. Ash Park Sanitary Sewer - contract with Rowe Construction Company, dated March
19, 1973;
I. Far West Sanitary Sewer - the sewer constructed by Wiegand and Storrer, Inc.,
under contract dated January 4, 1982. (Added 2/6/84)
J. North Linden Street Extension Sanitary Sewers - the sewers constructed by West
Construction Company under contract dated May 20, 1982, and by Walker
Excavating, Inc. under contract dated May 18, 1983. (Added 2/6/84)
K. Veterans Parkway Sanitary Sewer - the sewer constructed by Walker Excavating,
Inc., under contract dated May 18, 1983. (Added 2/6/84)
L. Landings Sanitary Sewer - the sewer constructed by Snyder Development Company
under contract dated 1986. (Added 11/18/86)
M. Uni-Par Sanitary Sewer - Contract with Colclasure, Inc. dated September 8, 1986.
(Added 12/21/87)
N. Northtown Pump Station - constructed by West Construction on September 23,
1987. (Added 5/21/90)
O. Warehouse Road Sanitary Sewer - constructed by Willoughby & Dupree, Inc., under
contract dated November 5, 1987. (Added 5/21/90)
P. Henry Street Sanitary Sewer - Contract with Stark Excavating, Inc. dated October 4,
1993.
SEC. 7.22-2(Cont.2)
Q. North Henry Street Sanitary Sewer – Contract with Stark Excavating, Inc. dated
October 19, 1998.
R. Firestone Sanitary Sewer Extension - Contract with Stark Excavating, Inc. dated
September 7, 1999.
S. Northeast Sanitary Sewer Area A - Contract with Stark Excavating, Inc. and G.A.
Rich & Sons, Inc. dated January 11, 2001. (Added 8/7/01)
T. Firestone Sanitary Sewer Extension Phase III – Contract with Hoerr Construction,
Inc., of Peoria, Illinois, dated April 23, 2007. (Added 9/8/09)
SEC. 7.22-3 MAP. The areas that the tap-on charges would apply to as above-designated
by name are shown on a certain map entitled Town of Normal Sewer Tap-On Map, revised on
February 1, 2001, and approved by the City Engineer, which map is designated as Exhibit A and is
attached by reference as though specifically set forth herein. This map may in the future be revised
as the Town of Normal extends additional trunk line sewers to other areas. (Amended 3/15/82)
SEC. 7.22-4 FEES. The tap-on fee per acre for the above listed areas shall be as follows:
A. West Sanitary Sewer $450 per acre or fraction thereof
B. North Grove Storm Sewer $400 per acre or fraction thereof
C. North Sanitary Sewer $600 per acre or fraction thereof
D. North Linden Sanitary Sewer $450 per acre or fraction thereof
E. Firestone Sanitary Sewer and Extensions $408 per acre or fraction thereof
F. Vernon-Grandview Storm Sewer $450 per acre or fraction thereof
G. Southeast Sanitary Sewer *$160 per acre or fraction thereof
H. Ash Park Sanitary Sewer $5,000 per acre or portion thereof
I. Far West Sanitary Sewer $744 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 2/6/84)
J. North Linden Street Extension
Sanitary Sewers $774 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 2/6/84)(Amended 1/7/85)
K. Veterans Parkway Sanitary Sewer $1,265 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 2/6/84)
SEC. 7.22-4(Cont.1)
L. Landings Sanitary Sewer $1,658 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 11/18/86)
M. Uni-Par Sanitary Sewer $310 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 12/21/87)
N. Northtown Road Sanitary Sewer
Pump Station $2,195.00 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 5/21/90)
O. Warehouse Road Sanitary Sewer $6,795.00 per acre or fraction thereof
(Added 5/21/90)
P. Henry Street Sanitary Sewer $1,335 per acre or fraction thereof
Q. North Henry Street Sanitary Sewer $1,378 per acre or fraction thereof
plus 6% compounded annually from
October 19, 1998
R. Firestone Sanitary Sewer Extension $477 per acre or fraction thereof plus
6% compounded annually from
September 7, 1999
S. Northeast Sanitary Sewer Area A $1,685 per acre or fraction thereof
plus 6% compounded annually from
January 11, 2001 (Added 8/7/01)
T. Firestone Sanitary Sewer
Extension Phase III $2,095.00 per acre or a fraction
thereof, plus 6% interest compounded
annually from September 8, 2009.
(Added 9/8/09)
*rate for single family residential use of property which shall be presumed to use 5,000
gallons per acre per day. Multi-family, commercial and manufacturing property or uses will
be charged proportionately greater tap-on fee, according to the amount of sewage discharged
into said sewer. (Amended 6/3/74)(Amended 8/7/78)
SEC. 7.22-5 APPLICATION. Any residence or business which presently is served by the
Town of Normal's sewer system will not be charged the tap-on fee as stated above.
SEC. 7.22-6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. It is a condition precedent to the
allowance of any tap that said tap-on charge as herein established be paid to the Town of Normal,
and it is further a requirement that anyone making such tap-on abide by all other ordinances and
regulations of the Town, and that the above payment does not in any way eliminate the obedience to
the requirement of other ordinances of said Town, most particularly the Land Subdivision
Ordinance. (Entire Division 22 Renumbered 9/21/81 by Ord. 3029)
SEC. 7.23-1
DIVISION 23 - SEWER TAP-ON FEES FOR RECOUPMENT OF EXPENSES INCURRED
IN CONSTRUCTING PUBLIC SEWERS TO REPLACE NON-PUBLIC SANITARY
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
SEC. 7.23-1 REQUIREMENTS. Any owner of property described in SEC. 7.23-2 who
shall be allowed or required to tap into any of the sanitary sewers designated therein shall pay,
separate and apart from any other charge, tap-on or hook-up charge or fee, the amount of money
specified in said Section.
SEC. 7.23-2 DESIGNATED SANITARY SEWERS, PROPERTY SERVED AND
TAP-ON FEES. Designated sanitary sewers, the property served thereby and the applicable tap-on
fees are as follows:
A. 1977 Samantha Street - Morgan Street 8-inch sanitary sewer.
PROPERTIES NOT PREVIOUSLY SERVED TAP-ON FEE
Block 2, Lot 3, Good's Addition $1,051.46
Block 2, Lot 4, Good's Addition $1,051.46
Block 2, Lot 5, Good's Addition $1,051.46
Block 2, Lot 6, Good's Addition $1,051.46
Block 2, Lot 7, Good's Addition $1,051.60
Block 2, Lot 8, Good's Addition $1,051.60
Block 2, Lot 9, Good's Addition $1,051.60
165 x 130 foot parcel located at the southeast corner
of Adelaide and Morgan, Property Tax Identification
No. 14-28-358-001 $3,158.76
South half of Lots 11 and 12 in the 20th Addition to
the Town of Normal $1,108,88
Lot 13 in the 20th Addition to the Town of Normal $1,181.77
Lot 14 in the 20th Addition to the Town of Normal $1,181.77
Lot 15 in the 20th Addition to the Town of Normal $1,181.77
Lot 16 in the 20th Addition to the Town of Normal $1,181.77
SEC. 7.23-2(Cont.1)
Lot 17 and 18 in the 20th Addition to the Town of Normal $2,363.54
B. 1977-78 Pine Ridge Subdivision Sewer Extension
PROPERTIES NOT SERVED TAP-ON FEE
The north 140 feet of the west 140 feet of the east 5.07
acres of Lot 15 in Tuttle and Watson's Subdivision of a
part of Sections 33 and 34, Township 24 North, Range 2
east of the Third Principal Meridian in McLean County,
Illinois $1,050.00
The north 149.90 feet of the east 109.5 feet of Lot 15
in Tuttle and Watson's Subdivision of a part of Sections
33 and 34, Township 24 north, Range 2 east of the Third
Principal Meridian in McLean County, Illinois $1,050.00
(Part B of SEC. 7.23-2 Added 12/5/77)
SEC. 7.23-3 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. It is a condition precedent to the
allowance of any tap that said tap-on charges herein established be paid to the Town of Normal and
it is a further requirement that anyone making such tap-on shall abide by all other ordinances and
regulations of the Town.
(Entire Division 23 Added 4/4/77)(Entire Division 23 Renumbered 9/21/81 by ORD. 3029)
SEC. 7.24-1
DIVISION 24 - LOCATION OF SUMP PUMP DISCHARGES
SEC. 7.24-1 STANDARDS. Any sump pump discharge installed after July 1, 1995 shall
be located, to meet the following requirements:
A. Street Right-of-Way Line. The terminus of any sump pump discharge line shall be
at least fifteen (15) feet behind the street right-of-way line;
B. Rear Property Line. The terminus of any sump pump discharge line shall be at least
ten (10) feet from the rear property line of a lot;
C. Side Property Line. The terminus of any sump pump discharge line shall be at least
two and one half (2 1/2) feet from any side property line of a lot; or
D. Direct Sewer Connection. Where a sump pump discharge service is available to a
lot, the sump pump discharge terminus from that lot shall be connected directly to a
storm sewer.
SEC. 7.24-2 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division, "street right-of-way" is
defined as property dedicated to the Town for road purposes, whether or not actually occupied by a
street. For purposes of this Division, "sump pump discharge terminus" shall mean that point where
water pumped by a sump pump is discharged from a pipe onto the ground surface, or into a sewer.
For the purpose of this Division, "sump pump discharge service" means the tap connecting directly
into a storm sewer.
SEC. 7.24-3 WAIVER. The Director of Public Works shall have authority upon
application and good cause to waive the requirements of this Division. Good cause is limited to the
following conditions:
A. Compliance with this Division creates an adverse impact on adjoining property; or
B. Compliance with the Division does not meet reasonable engineering design
practices.
SEC. 7.24-4 PENALTY. Any person owning, operating, or having control over a sump
pump who fails to meet the setback discharge standards provided herein, or obtain a waiver, shall
upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after
notification or knowledge of the existence thereof.
(Entire Division 24 Added 6/19/95 by Ord. No. 4323)
SEC. 7.30-1
DIVISION 30 - STORM WATER UTILITY AND STORM WATER FUND
SEC. 7.30-1 STORM WATER UTILITY AND STORM WATER FUND.
A. The Town hereby establishes a Storm Water Utility within the Public Works
Department to provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use,
construction, and enhancement of the storm water systems and facilities owned or
operated by the Town.
B. The management and supervision of the Storm Water Utility shall be under the
direction of the Director of Public Works.
C. The Town hereby establishes a Storm Water Fund. All revenues of the Storm Water
Utility shall be deposited into the Storm Water Fund and used for purposes of the
Storm Water Utility as deemed appropriate by the Town Council.
SEC. 7.30-2 DEFINITIONS.
Combined Sewer means a sewer designed to receive or receiving both wastewater and storm
or surface water.
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a storm water service charge to an
individual property based upon the provisions of the Town of Normal Storm Water Credit
Manual.
Developed Land means property that has been altered from its natural state by the addition
of impervious area equal to at least two (2) percent of the gross area.
Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) shall be used as the basis for determining the storm
water service charge to a parcel. Three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of
impervious area shall be one ERU. The number of ERU’s attributed to a parcel will be
determined by dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the parcel by three
thousand two hundred (3,200) and rounding the result up to the next integer.
Impervious Area or Imperious Surface means those areas that prevent or impede the
infiltration of storm water into the soil. Common impervious areas include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage
areas, compacted aggregate and awnings.
NPDES or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System shall mean the national
permitting program implemented under the Clean Water Act.
Single Family Residential (SFR) means developed land containing one dwelling structure
which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a
bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. SFR units may
SEC. 7.30-2(Cont.1)
include houses (including duplexes), manufactured homes and mobile homes located on
one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as SFR
despite the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does
not result in the addition impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, structures or
additions to the building which are used for non-residential uses.
Storm Water System shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances and include
sewers, storm drains, curbs, gutters, ditches, retention ponds or basins, dams, stream
impoundments, manmade channels or storm drains and flood control facilities and
appurtenances thereof which is designed or used for the collection, control, transportation,
treatment or discharge of storm water. Combined sewers are not included in the storm water
system.
Town means the Town of Normal, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the
State of Illinois.
SEC. 7.30-3 SCOPE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORM WATER UTILITY.
The Storm Water Utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, management, and
improvement of the storm water system owned by the Town including all activities required by the
NPDES Storm Water Permit.
SEC. 7.30-4 DETERMINATION OF STORM WATER SERVICES CHARGES.
Storm water services charges shall be determined by the Town Council. The revenue generated by
storm water service charges together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available
to the Storm Water Utility will be sufficient to meet the obligations of the Storm Water Utility.
SEC. 7.30-5 STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
SEC. 7.30-5.1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY CHARGES. Owners
of developed single family residential properties will be charged one ERU each. The charge per
ERU is $4.60 per month.
SEC. 7.30-5.2 PARCELS OTHER THAN SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
Owners of developed properties other than single family residential will be charged based on the
number of ERUs on the property. The charge per ERU will be $4.60 per month.
SEC. 7.30-6 EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS APPLICABLE TO STORM WATER
SERVICE CHARGES PER MONTH.
A. Owners of property in the Town containing developed land shall be charged storm
water service charges except pedestrian/bicycle trails, streets and highway rights-ofway
owned by a Township, McLean County, the Town of Normal, the State of
Illinois, or the U.S. Government.
B. Parcels shall be eligible to receive a storm water service charge credit based upon
the requirements of the Town of Normal Storm Water Credit Manual.
SEC. 7.30-6(Cont.1)
C. Any credit allowed against the storm water service charge is conditioned upon
continuing compliance with the Town of Normal Storm Water Credit Manual.
SEC. 7.30-7 BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
A. Billings for storm water service charges shall be rendered by the Water Department
on a bi-monthly, quarterly, or annual basis at the discretion of the Town of Normal
and may be billed in advance for services to be rendered.
B. When storm water services charges are not paid on or before the due date stated on
the bill, a penalty of ten (10) percent shall be added. Failure to receive a bill does
not entitle the owner or customer to a remission of penalty.
C. Notice must be given by the parcel owner or authorized agent if it is desired that
bills be forwarded to any other address than the parcel address.
D. The owner of any lot, building, or premises and the occupant thereof and the
customer of the water service of said system shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for such storm water service charges for said premises.
E. In the event that the Town deems it necessary to refer past due storm water services
charges for collection, the Town may additionally recover its actual expenses so
incurred, including but not limited to, court costs, collection agency fees, and
reasonable attorney’s fees.
SEC. 7.30-8 STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES BILLED IN COMMON. The
storm water service charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with Town
water, sewer, and waste collection charges.
SEC. 7.30-9 APPEALS. Any customer who believes the provisions of this Division have
been applied in error may appeal in the following manner:
A. An appeal must be filed in writing with the Director of Public Works. In the case of
service charge appeals based on a dispute concerning an ERU calculation or
impervious area, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a Licensed Land
Surveyor or Licensed Professional Engineer containing information on the total
property area, the impervious surface area, and any storm water management
features, such as detention facilities or conditions which influence the hydrologic
response of the property to rainfall events. All pertinent calculations shall be
included.
B. Using the information provided by the appellant, the Director of Public Works shall
conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the
appeal in writing within sixty (60) days.
SEC. 7.30-9(Cont.1)
C. In response to an appeal, the Director of Public Works may adjust the storm water
service charge and any late payment penalties applicable to a property in
conformance with the general purpose and intent of this Section.
D. A decision of the Director of Public Works that is adverse to an appellant may be
appealed to the City Manager for review.
E. Any appeal of the decision of the City Manager must be made pursuant to Illinois
Law.
SEC. 7.30-10 PARTIAL INVALIDITY. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable,
and if any of the provisions shall be held unlawful by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions.
(Entire Section 7.30 Added 4/17/06 by Ord. No. 5072)
SEC. 7.31-1
DIVISION 31 - STORM WATER STORAGE FACILITIES
SEC. 7.31-1 REQUIREMENTS. Any person, firm, corporation or agency that develops
property within the Town of Normal shall provide storm water storage facilities on the developed
property according to the standards set forth in this Division, or, upon Town direction, pay a fee in
lieu of constructing such storm water storage facilities. (Amended 1/20/86)
SEC. 7.31-2 DEFINITION. The term "develop or development" as used in this Division
shall mean one of the following acts on any lot or tract of ground for which a subdivision plat has
been previously approved or where no subdivision plat is required: the erection or construction of
any building, structure, or parking lot of more than four (4) spaces upon any lot or tract of ground
which results in an increase in the amount of storm water runoff compared to the storm water runoff
from said lot or tract of ground based on use at the time this Division is adopted. Development shall
not include alteration or remodeling of buildings or structures in existence at the time this Division
is adopted.
Development shall not include the erection or construction of any building or structure on
any lot in an R-1AA, R-1A, or R-1B Single-Family Residential Zoning District, provided said lot is
within a subdivision, the final plat for which was filed of record prior to April 1, 1985. (Added
12/2/85)
SEC. 7.31-3 STANDARDS.
A. No development shall take place within the Town of Normal unless there is an
adequate storm water outlet or the Town has approved retention or detention
facilities for the property. The developer shall show by detailed calculations that the
storm water outlet is adequate for a 25-year rain. The calculations are subject to
Town review and approval. If the storm water outlet is not adequate, the developer
shall submit storm water storage facility plans for Town review and approval. The
storm water storage facility shall be designed for a 50-year rain with an assumed
coefficient for the particular zoning district where the development occurs as set
forth in SEC. 7.31-4 of this Division and a release rate based on a runoff coefficient
of .25 for a 3-year rain.
B. In connection with any required storage facilities, the Developer shall submit plans,
specifications, and drainage calculations to the Town for review and approval. Plans
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Plans and calculations shall
include existing and proposed elevation of site, including buildings with streets
adjacent to the site(s).
C. Formulas for determining the size of detention and retention basins shall be based on
the latest Illinois Division of Highways Standards for Storm Water Runoff and the
latest Greater Chicago Sanitary District Standards for Storage. A copy of the latest
Standards for Storm Water Runoff and Storage issued by the Illinois Division of
Highways and the Greater Chicago Sanitary District are on file with the Town Clerk
and incorporated herein by reference.
SEC. 7.31-4
SEC. 7.31-4 FEE IN LIEU. Upon Town direction, the Developer shall pay a fee in lieu of
constructing storm water facilities as required by this Division, or by the Town Subdivision Code
(Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code, (Amended 1/20/86) of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended). The fee is based on the following criteria:
A. The use permitted by the Town Zoning Code and the size of the parcel of land to be
developed bears directly on the amount of storm water runoff generated by such
parcel. The higher the zoning classification, the more intense the land use, thereby
increasing storm water runoff.
B. The estimated storm water runoff generated from development in various zoning
districts is expressed by a coefficient representing the imperviousness of the land as
determined in accordance with the rational formula. The runoff coefficients for the
various zoning districts within the Town of Normal are as follows:
A - Agriculture District: 0.25
R-1AA - Single Family Residence District: 0.30
R-1A - Single Family Residence District: 0.35
R-1B - Single Family Residence District: 0.45
R-2 - Mixed Residence District: 0.55
R-3A - Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District: 0.70
R-3B - High Density Multiple-Family Residence District: 0.80
R-4 - Mobile Home Residence District: 0.45
S-1 - University District: 0.75
S-2 - Public Lands and Institutions District: 0.30 - 0.80
S-4 - Historic and Cultural District: 0.30 - 0.80
C-1 - Office District: 0.60
C-2 - Neighborhood Shopping District: 0.90
C-3 - Community Shopping District: 0.90
C-4 - Regional Shopping District: 0.90
B-1 - General Business District: 0.80
B-2 - Central Business District: 0.90
M-1 - Restricted Manufacturing District: 0.75
M-2 - General Manufacturing District: 0.85
SEC. 7.31-5 FEE RATE.
A. For Parcels of Undeveloped Property. In the event the Town directs a developer to
pay a fee in lieu of constructing storm water storage facilities, such fee shall be in
amounts not less than the following:
A - Agriculture District: $225 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be developed.
R-1AA - Single-Family Residence District: $275 for each 1/3 acre or fraction
thereof to be developed.
SEC. 7.31-5(Cont.1)
R-1A - Single-Family Residence District: $320 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof
to be developed.
R-1B - Single-Family Residence District: $410 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof
to be developed.
R-2 - Mixed Family Residence District: $500 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to
be developed.
R-3A - Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District: $642 for each 1/3 acre
or fraction thereof to be developed.
R-3B - High Density Multiple-Family Residence District: $734 for each 1/3 acre or
fraction thereof to be developed.
R-4 - Mobile Home Residence District: $408 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to
be developed.
S-1 - University District: $683 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be developed.
S-2 - Public Lands and Institution District: Fee to be based upon actual development
plans accurately showing the increase in storm water run-off generated by the
proposed development.
S-4 - Historic and Cultural District: Fee to be based upon actual development plans
accurately showing the increase in storm water run-off generated by the proposed
development.
C-1 - Office District: $500 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be developed.
C-2 - Neighborhood Shopping District: $825 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to
be developed.
C-3 - Community Shopping District: $825 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be
developed.
C-4 - Regional Shopping District: $825 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be
developed.
B-1 - General Business District: $734 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be
developed.
B-2 - Central Business District: $825 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to be
developed.
SEC. 7.31-5(Cont.2)
M-1 - Restricted Manufacturing District: $683 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof
to be developed.
M-2 - General Manufacturing District: $775 for each 1/3 acre or fraction thereof to
be developed.
(Amended 3/17/86)(Amended 11/3/86)
B. For additions to Developed Parcels: Where the proposed development consists
solely of an addition to an existing structure, building or parking lot and the Town
directs payment of a fee in lieu of constructing storm water storage facilities, such
fee shall be calculated based on the actual amount of additional runoff caused by
said addition. The developer shall submit to the Town calculations showing the size
of the addition to the existing structure, building or parking lot. The developer shall
pay a fee based on the size of the proposed addition. Such fee shall be Twenty-eight
dollars ($28.00) per 1/100th of an acre or fraction thereof occupied by the proposed
addition. Such fee is based on a runoff coefficient of .90 representing the
imperviousness of the land as determined in accordance with the rational formula.
(Added 11/3/86)
SEC. 7.31-6 USE OF FEE. The cash contribution paid in lieu of construction of storm
water storage facilities shall be held by the Town or other public body designated by the Town
solely for the improvement, acquisition, construction, or development of storm water storage
facilities or other storm water management projects designed to serve the immediate or future needs
of the Town of Normal and to reduce storm water flooding.
SEC. 7.31-7 REFUND OF FEE. Upon Town approval, all or a portion of the cash
contribution paid pursuant to this Division for a particular parcel of property may be refunded to the
then current owner of the property in the event such owner constructs storm water storage facilities
on site in conformance with the standards imposed by this Division. The fee refunded shall be
determined by multiplying the original fee amount by a fraction, the numerator of which is the area
of the original development served by the storm water storage facility, and the denominator of
which is the total area of development for which a fee was originally paid.
SEC. 7.31-8 PAYMENT OF FEES. Payment of the storm water storage fee shall be
made upon the earlier of the following events:
A. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for development;
B. Prior to recording of a final subdivision plat.
SEC. 7.31-9 BUILDING PERMIT. No building permit shall be issued for development
within the Town of Normal as provided herein, until all requirements of this Division are met.
SEC. 7.31-10
SEC. 7.31-10 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
A. Notwithstanding payment of any fee as provided in this Division, all off-street
parking areas of more than four (4) spaces shall provide on-site catch basins and
inlets so designed as to collect all storm water from the parking lot through a
minimum twelve (12) inch inside diameter enclosed storm water conduit to an
adequate storm sewer outlet. (Amended 1/20/86)
B. Owners of parking areas of more than four (4) spaces may apply for a waiver of the
above requirement from the Director of Public Works, provided storm water falling
on the parking lot can be accommodated in accordance with the accepted
engineering standards including, but not limited to, detention, retention, or swales,
and either of the following exists:
1. The closest storm sewer is more than 100 feet from the property line that the
parking lot is upon; or
2. The closest storm sewer does not have adequate capacity to accommodate
additional storm flow.
(Entire Division 31 of Chapter 7 Amended 4/1/85 by Ord. 3388)
EXHIBIT "A"
NEW MAIN PROCEDURE
JULY 25, 1980
New watermains, firelines, and services six (6) inches in diameter and larger must be
hydrostatically pressure and leak tested, flushed, disinfected, and bacteriologically examined before
being served by the Town of Normal Municipal water system.
Procedures for installation and inspections are as follows:
1. Construction of new mains shall not commence until the party contracting and
requesting the new main has filed an acceptable performance bond or escrow
account similar to what is required in the Town's Subdivision Code for bonding new
construction. Included in the bond shall be the cost of replacing all public property,
in public right-of-way or easements. Where mains are to be constructed on the
owner's property and maintained by the owner, only the cost of inspection shall be
included in the bond or escrow account.
2. Taps to City mains will be made by the Normal Water Department. No taps will be
made until a set of acceptable plans showing all proposed new watermains, valves,
fire hydrants, meters, and services are on file in the Water Department office.
3. Foreign material shall be prevented from entering the pipe while it is being placed in
the trench. During laying operations, no debris, tools, clothing, or other material
shall be placed in the pipe. At times when pipe laying is not in progress the open
ends of pipe shall be closed by a water-tight plug. All trenches must be pumped dry
preceding any pipe laying operations.
4. Upon completion of the pipe laying operation hydrostatic pressure and leak testing
must be accomplished. All water used for the test must be potable, containing a
chlorine residual of not less than .2 parts per million.
Criteria for basis of acceptance of the pressure and leak tests are according to
ANSI/AWWA C600-77 standards as follows:
(a) Hydrostatic pressure shall be 90 PSI for at least two (2) hours duration and
shall not vary by more than + 5 PSI. Before applying the specified test
pressure, air shall be expelled completely from the pipe.
(b) Allowable leakage is determined by the following formula:
L = ND vP
7400
in which L is the allowable leakage in gallons per hour, N is the number of
joints subjected to the test; D is the nominal diameter of the pipe, and P is the
average test pressure during the test in psi.
Exhibit A
All visible leaks are to be repaired regardless of the amount of leakage.
All tests must be scheduled, and witnessed by the Normal Water Department.
5. After hydrostatic testing has been successfully completed the main must be flushed,
attaining a minimum velocity of at least two (2) feet per second. Flushing must
continue until all particulate matter and discoloration has been removed.
6. Disinfection following flushing must be accompanied by either the continuous feed
or slug method. The tablet method is not acceptable and is not to be used except
with the expressed written permission of the Director of Water. A chlorine residual
of at least fifty (50) parts per million must be attained initially and twenty-five (25)
parts per million residual present after twenty-four (24) hours when the preferred
continuous feed method is used. If the slug method is used, three hundred (300)
parts per million must be retained for a minimum of three (3) hours, or five hundred
(500) parts per million retained for thirty (30) minutes. Attainment of initial and
final chlorine residuals must be verified by the Water Department.
7. After disinfection, bacteriological testing must be done to insure the public health of
the main. All samples must be collected by a designated sample collector of the
Normal Water Department and tested at an EPA approved laboratory.
No new watermains or extensions thereto will be approved for public use until
permits, if required, have been obtained from the Illinois EPA, and all of the above
criteria has been successfully completed.
(Adopted 9/21/81)
SEC. 8.1-1
CHAPTER 8 - PUBLIC WAYS
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 8.1-1 SUPERVISION. All public ways shall be under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works. The Director shall have supervision over all work thereon and the
cleaning thereof.
SEC. 8.1-2 PUBLIC WAYS. As used in this Chapter, public ways shall mean all right-ofways
dedicated to or owned by the Town and includes but is not limited to public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parkways, or easements.
SEC. 8.1-3 CONSTRUCTION. It shall be unlawful, for any person except a contractor or
subcontractor employed by the Town, to conduct any construction of any type, including sidewalks,
on any public way or repair the same without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications
for such permits shall be made to the Department of Public Works and shall state the locations of
the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction. (Amended 6/4/74)
SEC. 8.1-4 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Each application shall be accompanied
by a complete set of plans and specifications for the proposed construction, or reconstruction, and
anything incidental thereto.
SEC. 8.1-5 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. The Director of Public Works shall have
responsibility for issuance of permits for construction in any public way. Such permits shall be
issued upon compliance with the provisions contained in this Division and Division 2 of this
Chapter. Such permits shall be subject to the same terms and conditions provided in Division 2 of
this Chapter.
SEC. 8.1-6 BOND. Each applicant, other than a contractor or subcontractor employed by
the Town directly, shall file a bond with surety to be approved by the Corporation Counsel
conditioned to indemnify the Town for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or
the manner of doing same. The amount thereof shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works, based upon the estimated cost of completion of the job, including labor, materials, and ten
percent additional for unforeseen contingencies.
SEC. 8.1-7 REPAIRS AND RESURFACING: LIABILITY OF ABUTTING
OWNER. All improved public ways shall be kept in good repair. Repair work, whether done by
the Town or by the abutting owner, shall be done under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works. The owners of property abutting sidewalks shall be responsible for the repair and
maintenance of such sidewalks. No person owning property abutting a sidewalk shall permit such
sidewalk to be in a state of repair endangering the safety of persons passing over the same. In the
event a person is injured as a result of lack of maintenance and repair of a sidewalk, the owner of
property abutting such sidewalk shall be liable for such injuries.
SEC. 8.1-8
SEC. 8.1-8 PROHIBITED ACCESS; INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS. It shall be
unlawful for any person to walk, ride, drive, or in any manner propel any kind of vehicle or piece of
machinery over, along, or upon that portion of any street, sidewalk, or other public way place while
the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly-laid
pavement.
SEC. 8.1-9 OBSTRUCTION OF OR MERCHANDISE ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OFWAY.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to
cause, create, or maintain any obstruction of any sidewalk, street, alley, or other
public way; or to place upon, over, or across, or to suspend upon, over, or across any
sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, any vegetables, food products, fruits,
berries, produce, or any other articles of merchandise whatsoever for the purpose of
storage, exhibition, sale, or offering for sale. For purposes of this Section, the
definition of "street" includes and incorporates all that area within the public rightof-
way line, including sidewalk, pavement of street right-of-way, parkway (which is
defined as all that area within a street right-of-way between a curb and the right-ofway
line, or where no curb exists, between the improved street edgeline and the
right-of-way line), and any additional land, whether used for the foregoing or other
purposes.
B. The provision of sub-section A above shall not apply to any devices commonly
known as newspaper boxes or similar devices whereby a person is allowed to
remove one (1) or more newspapers or magazines from said device upon depositing
therein the purchase price thereof, located on sidewalks provided such devices meet
the following standards:
1. Such device shall not stand higher than four (4) feet from the ground nor
possess any horizontal dimension in excess of two (2) feet;
2. Such device shall not be located:
a. In any location in which any part of the device, including any door
thereto when opened, extends onto street pavement or leaves less
than five (5) continuous feet of sidewalk width or obstructs
pedestrian traffic;
b. Adjacent to any bus stops or any no parking zone anywhere in the
Town;
c. Within fifty (50) feet of any intersection where the presence of such a
device obstructs a motorist's view of cross traffic or pedestrians;
d. Within one (1) foot of any building.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.1)
3. Such device shall not be chained to any bench, tree, waste receptacle, traffic
signal, traffic control device, traffic sign, traffic light, public utility pole, or
fire hydrant.
4. Such device shall contain a name, address, and telephone number of a person
to be notified in case of theft, vandalism, non-functional condition of the
device, or the device's noncompliance with this Section. (Amended 4/19/76)
C. 1. For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Basketball goal - a structure consisting of a post or upright, a
superstructure, a backboard, a rim, and a (optional) net.
b. Post or Upright - a rigid, upright member extending vertically from
grade level.
c. Superstructure - a rigid member which firmly attaches the backboard
permanently to the post or upright, extending the backboard from the
post or upright.
d. Backboard - a member consisting of a square, rectangular, or semioval
flat surface permanently attached to the superstructure.
e. Rim - a piece of iron or other hardened material formed into a circle
and permanently attached to the backboard.
f. Net - a piece of cloth, leather, or chain networking of linear material
attached permanently to the rim which allows both the observer and
player to determine if the basketball has passed successfully through
the rim.
g. Gutter pan - the portion of the street immediately adjacent to the
curb, designed to carry storm water.
2. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not apply to basketball goals
maintained on cul-de-sac parkways provided the following standards are
met:
a. Application is made to the Director of Public Works containing the
following:
(1) Signed consent of all persons residing on the cul-de-sac to the
placement of a basketball goal on the cul-de-sac parkway.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.2)
(2) Agreement by one or more persons to indemnify the Town
for any and all claims made directly or indirectly against the
Town, its officers, and employees arising in whole or in part
from the presence and use of the basketball goal on Town
property.
(3) Maintaining on file with the Town a certificate of liability
insurance written on an occurrence basis in the amount of at
least one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) naming the Town, its
officers, and employees as additional insureds.
(4) Agreement by the applicant to remove the basketball goal
from Town property within twenty-four (24) hours of Town
request.
(5) An agreement that all utilities shall be located by JULIE prior
to installing the post(s) or upright(s).
(6) An agreement by one or more persons to indemnify the
Town for any property damage or personal injury to the
Town or its officers or employees arising in whole or in part
from the presence and use of the basketball goal on town
property.
(7) A waiver by the owner of the basketball goal of all claims
against the Town for damage to such basketball goal by the
Town or its officers or employees.
b. Such basketball goal shall not be located:
(1) Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant.
(2) So as to interfere with any existing utilities.
c. Such post or upright shall be no farther than four (4) to six (6) inches
from the back of the curb.
d. Such rim shall be no less than ten (10) feet above the gutter pan.
e. All basketball goals must include a superstructure.
f. No concrete shall be used above the surface to secure the basketball
goal.
g. No more than one basketball goal shall be permitted on any cul-desac.
(Entire Subsection C Added 6/15/92 by Ord. 4065)
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.3)
D. Outdoor Cafes.
1. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them when used in this Section:
a. Food service establishment shall mean any public place which is
kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a
place where meals are sold and served and where meals are
actually and regularly served to the public. A food service
establishment shall have seating available for patrons as well as
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment. A food
service establishment must have employed therein a sufficient
number and kinds of employees to prepare, cook, and serve full
meals for its guests. Food service establishments must keep a
record of all food items sold such that a determination that the
restaurant is serving meals regularly can be made. The term “ Food
service establishment” also includes any entity that holds a Class O
liquor license under Section 4.10 of the Liquor Code. Food service
establishments serving alcohol shall also meet requirements of the
Town Liquor Code applicable to such Licensee.
b. Outdoor café shall mean use of a public sidewalk or plaza area by
a food service establishment, for the serving of food and beverages
to seated customers.
c. Plaza area shall mean those public spaces, not including streets or
alleys, within the B-2, Central Business Zoning District as
designated by the Public Works Director.
d. Permit area shall mean the sidewalk area designated on the permit
specifying the area of operation of the outdoor café.
e. Permittee shall mean the person or entity operating a food service
establishment who has received a permit allowing for the operation
of an outdoor café.
2. Permits Required.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor café
without an outdoor café permit.
b. The outdoor café permit shall allow a food service establishment
located in the B-2 Central Business Zoning District of the Town to
operate an outdoor cafe subject to the requirements of this Section.
c. Any permit issued pursuant to this Section may contain such
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.4)
written conditions as the Public Works Director, or his designee,
deems warranted to protect the use of adjacent right-of-way for its
intended purpose or to prevent congestion of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic flow and to otherwise carry out the purpose and
intent of this Section and this Code.
d. The permit holder shall, as part of the right granted pursuant to the
permit, be entitled to remove or exclude persons from the permit
area during hours of business operation. Such permittee is
authorized to give notice to any such person to prevent such entry.
e. The outdoor café permit shall expire annually on December 31 of
each year. There is an annual permit-filing fee of $100.00.
f. Any outdoor café permit shall be subject to suspension or
revocation as hereafter provided.
3. Application. Application for an outdoor café permit shall be made on
forms supplied by the Town, and submitted to the Public Works Director,
together with the annual fee and shall at minimum include the following:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
property and the food service establishment related to the permit.
b. A copy of a valid license issued by the McLean County Health
Department.
c. A drawing or sketch depicting the dimensions of the proposed
permit area and which shows the location and type of tables,
chairs, trash receptacles and other equipment proposed to be used,
location of ingress and egress, the Town owned equipment
facilities in or adjacent to the area proposed which are visible to
the eye, including but not limited to parking meters, trees, manhole
covers and utility poles or openings.
d. An operations plan specifying the proposed dates, days and hours
of operation of the outdoor café, the hours of operation of the
adjacent restaurant, scheduled maintenance of the permit area,
maximum seating capacity, and method of providing security and
maintenance.
e. An original certificate of insurance listing the required coverage
amounts and policy periods of the permittee’s general liability
policies.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.5)
f. An executed waiver of liability in a form approved by the Town
Corporation Counsel.
g. Any other information related to the requirements of this chapter
that the Public Works Director may require.
h. All Persons, prior to receiving a permit, shall procure and maintain
for the duration of the permit, public liability and property damage
insurance pertaining to the permit area in a minimum amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000,00.) per person and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate per occurrence and
property damage in a minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), naming the Town, its officers and employees as
additional insured, and the same shall provide that policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without thirty
(30) days advance written notice to the Town. Proof of such
insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the State of Illinois in the form of a certificate of insurance shall
be attached to the application.
4. Application Review.
a. No permit shall be granted, pursuant to this Section, unless the
Finance Director or his designee shall certify that there are no
outstanding fines, fees, taxes, or other charges dues and owed to
the Town by the owners of the real property on which the
restaurant is located or the applicant.
b. All applications for outdoor café permits shall be reviewed by the
Town to determine compliance with each of the requirements of
this Section.
c. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant supplies all
information required on or by the application form and is in
compliance with the regulations contained in this Section.
5. Regulations.
a. Except as permitted in Paragraph (10), an outdoor café is permitted
only on sidewalks or approved plaza areas. The permit area shall
be immediately adjacent to the food service establishment
requesting the permit, or a sidewalk contiguous to the sidewalk
adjacent to the food service establishment.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.6)
b. No permit will be granted if seats or equipment in the outdoor café
result in the need for additional restrooms unless such additional
restrooms are provided.
c. The hours when service is permitted at the outdoor café shall be
between 6:00 a.m. and 12 a.m.
d. Any person making use of an outdoor café shall do so in a
reasonable manner with due regards for the health and safety of
persons and property. Except as permitted in Paragraph (10), no
permittee shall make any physical alteration to public property. A
permittee shall owe a duty to the Town of Normal and third
persons to maintain the permit area in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition.
e. The permittee shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles,
and spills at all times. The permitttee shall promptly collect and
dispose of all litter, trash and other waste materials associated with
the outdoor café, including materials in the adjacent public rightof-
way or property originating from the outdoor café. The
permittee shall dispose of any such waste in their own trash
receptacles only. The permittee shall not dispose of any such waste
in public trash receptacles.
f. Upon the expiration or other termination of an outdoor café use
permit, the permittee shall immediately remove all tables, chairs,
furnishings, equipment and other items of personal property from
the permit areas. Any such items remaining upon the public rightof-
way after a reasonable opportunity to remove the same may be
removed and disposed of by the Town of Normal at the sole cost
and expense of the permittee.
g. An outdoor café permit allows for the temporary placement of
tables, chairs, furnishings, equipment, and other items of personal
property related to the café. Except for plaza areas, and except as
set forth in Paragraph (10), all tables and chairs must be portable,
meaning that no such furniture shall be chained together or bolted
together as a unit or affixed to the outdoor wall or ground surface.
In plaza areas, outdoor furniture, tables and chairs, may be secured
to one another, however, may not be affixed or bolted to any public
property
h. Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of eight (8) feet, a
weighted base and be fabric covered. All umbrellas must be made
of cloth fabric; vinyl umbrellas are prohibited. Umbrella materials
may not have a shiny, synthetic appearance. Signage on umbrellas
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.7)
is prohibited. No lettering, advertising, graphics, and/or logos are
allowed on the umbrella face.
i. No signs, banners or other like advertising shall be located in the
permit area, except one menu sign not exceeding fifteen (15)
square feet in area.
j. Tables, chairs and umbrellas shall be located so that there remains
open, at all times, a longitudinal walking space, the location of
which shall be determined by the Town, of a minimum of four (4)
feet in width, with a cross-slope not to exceed Americans with
Disability Act (ADA) requirements.
k. The Public Works Director may promulgate administrative rules,
substantially related to the requirements contained in this Section.
Such rules shall be attached to the permit and be followed by the
permittee.
6. Suspension or Revocation. The use of a public sidewalk as an outdoor
café shall be subject to temporary suspension or termination at any time by
the Town in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. To the
extent that a permit area is needed by the Town for the purposes for which
it was dedicated, or any other public purpose, the Town may immediately
terminate the revocable use permit by sending written notices to the
permittee and assume full possession and control of the permit area. The
permittee shall remove all furniture from the right-of-way within the time
specified by the notice. If the furniture is not removed by the permittee,
the Town shall be authorized to remove all furniture and other objects of
the permittee from the permit area. If such furniture is not reclaimed by
the permittee within seven (7) days after removal by the City, the property
shall be presumed abandoned and subject to disposal according to law.
7. Public Property. Except as provided in Paragraph (10), the provisions of
this Section shall apply only to the locating of outdoor cafes on public
property or public right-of-way and shall not apply to any private property.
8. Indemnification; Payments for Cleaning or Damages.
a. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, each
permittee shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Town against all claims, liability, loss, injury, death, or damage
whatsoever in connection with or arising out of the use of the
outdoor café by anyone.
b. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, the permittee
shall agree to, within seven (7) days after the billing date, pay to
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.8)
the Town all costs associated with damage to the pavement or
other Town-owned facilities located in or adjacent to the permit
area caused by operation of the food service establishment, or costs
to clean or remove trash from the permit area or adjacent premises
occasioned by the failure of the permittee to clean or remove such
trash.
c. The Public Works Director is authorized to execute the agreements
required in subsections (a) and (b) above after the form thereof has
been approved by the Town’s Corporation Counsel.
9. Enforcement.
a. The Town may inspect the permit area at any time. The Town
shall mail or deliver the result of the inspections to the permittee.
b. Any violation of the provisions of this Section shall be remedied
within the time given in the notice or, if not stated in the notice,
within seven (7) calendar days from the date of delivery or postmark
on the notice.
c. Any permittee violating or failing to comply with the terms or
requirements of this Section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions and procedures set forth in this Chapter.
10. On-Street Café Seating Pilot Program.
a. A one-year pilot program is established to allow a food service
establishment in the B-2 Central Business Zoning District to
operate outdoor seating in the on-street parking spaces in front of
the business. The pilot program consists of the business located at
111 W. North Street.
b. The area of the on-street café may not include the portion of any
parking space beyond the building line extended. The on-street
café may not be located in any loading zone.
c. The on-street café must be located on a platform. The design of the
platform must be submitted with the application for the outdoor
café.
d. The area for the on-street café must be delineated by fencing
anchored to the platform. The fencing must be constructed of a
durable material, such as steel, aluminum, or wrought iron; fencing
constructed of primarily wood is not allowed, but wood may be
incorporated into the fencing design.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.9)
e. Planters with flowers or other vegetation are allowed as an
alternative to the anchored fencing required under item (d). The
design of the planters must be approved by the Uptown Manager,
subject to the following limitations:
(1) The planters must be fastened to the platform;
(2) The planters may not be less than 27 inches nor more than
36 inches in height, excluding plantings; and
(3) The planters must be either metal or have a metal frame.
f. The plans for the platform and other components of the on-street
café must be submitted with the permit application for the outdoor
café under Paragraph 3. The Public Works Director has sole
discretion in approving or denying the plans based on his or her
determination that:
(1) The on-street café has appropriate space buffers and other
measures to protect public safety;
(2) The on-street café will not impair drainage or otherwise
interfere with the operation of the Town’s right-of-way;
and
(3) The application meets all the other requirements of this
Subsection D.
g. If stored outdoors, tables, chairs, and other items must be secured
within the anchored fencing at the end of each day’s operation so
that they are unusable.
h. The on-street café may not begin before April 1 of each year and
must be removed from the public right-of-way on or before
October 15 of each year. The Town may require the temporary
removal of the on-street café, at the permittee’s expense to
accommodate an event on the street permitted by the Town.
i. The Town may terminate the pilot program at any time. There is
no guarantee that the Town will continue to authorize on-street
cafés. As a condition of the permit, the permittee must sign an
acknowledgement complying substantially with the following:
Permittee acknowledges and agrees that: (i) no property
right is conferred by this permit for the use of any portion
of the public right-of-way; (ii) the Town is not empowered
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.10)
to grant permanent or perpetual use of its right-of-way for
private purposes; (iii) the Town may order locations or uses
within the right-of-way to cease and desist if, for any
reason, the Town determines that the right-of-way is
needed for a public use and should be cleared of any and all
obstructions and that Permittee is not entitled to any
compensation if the Town so determines.
j. All other requirements of this Subsection D apply to on-street
cafés.
(Entire Subsection D Added by 8/1/05 Ord. No. 5024)(Amended 05/21/18 by Ord. No. 5739)
E. Removal of Snow and Ice in the Central Business District.
1. The following terms, when used in the Section E shall have the meaning
provided in this Section:
a. Business Day. The term “business day” means any day not a
Sunday or national or state holiday.
b. Business Hours. The term “business hours” means the hours
between 10:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on any business day.
c. Central Business District. The term “central business district”
refers to that area in the Town of Normal zoned B-2 Central
Business District.
d. Occupant. The term “occupant” means any individual,
partnership,
corporation, association, governmental entity, or other entity of
any description other than the owner having the right to possession
of the premises.
e. Owner. The term “owner” means any individual, partnership,
corporation, association, governmental entity, or other entity of
any description holding legal title to the Premises.
2. Except as provided in subsection (3), every owner and occupant of any
building or lot of land within the central business district fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk shall remove and clear away, or cause to be
removed and cleared away, snow and ice from so much of said sidewalk
as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of land within four (4)
business hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain
or by the beginning of business hours of the next business day following
such fall, whichever period is shorter.
SEC. 8.1-9(Cont.11)
3. In the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot
be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk the person or
entity charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
subsection (2) hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on the
sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to be thoroughly
cleaned.
4. Owners and occupants of properties in the Central Business District failing
to comply with the requirements of Section E shall upon conviction
thereof be fined in an amount not less than Twenty-Five ($25.00) nor
more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
(Entire Subsection E Added 2/20/06 by Ord. No. 5055)
F. Bicycles in the Public Right-of-Way. No bicycle or other device propelled by
human power for the purpose of conveyance shall be left unattended or chained to
any structure, fixture or tree within the public right-of-way, except as follows: at
a bike rack or other area or structure designated by the Director of Public Works
for the parking of such device, provided, however, such bicycle or device may not
remain at said location for a period of time exceeding 24 hours unless such
parking area is designated for extended parking. In such case, the bicycle or
device may not remain at said location more than 24 hours beyond the extended
parking period.
The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to remove any bicycle or other
device parked in Town right-of-way in violation of this Section. The Public
Works Director shall provide reasonable notice, prior to removal, to the owner of
the bicycle or device if ownership information is readily available on the bicycle
or device. The Public Works Director shall keep the bicycle or device for at least
seven (7) days following removal to allow the true owner to claim the property.
After seven (7) days, if no one has claimed the impounded bicycle or device, the
Town of Normal may dispose of the property as it deems appropriate.
The owner of the bicycle or device removed by the Public Works Director shall
be responsible for all costs incurred by the Public Works Director in removing
and storing the property. Such costs shall be ten dollars for removal, and one
dollar per day for storage. The Town of Normal is not responsible for any
damage caused to the bicycle or device incurred during the removal and storage
of the bicycle or device.
The owner of the bicycle or device placed in Town right-of-way in violation of
this Section shall be liable for any personal injury or property damage caused, in
whole or in part, by the presence of the property in Town right-of-way.
(Entire Subsection F Added 9/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5453)
SEC. 8.1-10
SEC. 8.1-10 BARRICADES. Any person, firm, or corporation doing any construction
work in a public way, or making an excavation in the same, shall provide traffic control in
accordance with the application specifications of the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction adopted by the State of Illinois and the applicable guidelines
contained in the latest edition of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways; a copy of each is on file with the Town Clerk's office and available for public
inspection.
SEC. 8.1-11 DISTURBING BARRICADES. It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any barricades, lights, or other traffic control devices lawfully placed to protect or mark any
new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley, sidewalk, easement, or other
public way.
SEC. 8.1-12 WHEELCHAIR RAMPS. All newly constructed curbs and all existing
curbs which are rebuilt or reconstructed in any area of the Town shall be constructed so as to enable
persons using wheelchairs to travel freely and without assistance by providing at each crosswalk a
ramp with non-slip surface so that the sidewalk and street blend to a common level. Such ramp
shall not be less than thirty-two (32) inches wide and shall not have a slope greater than one (1) inch
rise per twelve (12) inches length. Where because of surrounding buildings or other restrictions it is
impossible to conform the slope with this requirement, the ramp shall contain a slope with as
shallow a rise as possible under the circumstances. In all ramps there shall be a gradual rounding at
the bottom of the slope. (Addition by Amendment 1/7/74)
SEC. 8.1-13 PLACEMENT OF MAILBOXES.
A. The placement of mailboxes which are attached to a residence shall be as provided
by United States Postal Service regulations.
B. Mailboxes permitted or required to be placed adjacent to a street by United States
Postal Service regulations shall comply with said regulations and the following:
1. Mailboxes shall be placed no closer than three inches (3") from the back of
the curb and at least forty-two inches (42") above the curb but no more than
forty-eight inches (48") above the traveled portion of the street.
2. Mailbox support structures can be no larger than four inches by four inches
(4" x 4") or four and one-half inch (4 1/2") diameter wood posts or two-inch
(2") diameter standards steel or aluminum pipe buried no more than twentyfour
inches (24") in the ground.
3. No brick posts, or supporting structures are allowed.
4. Any ornamental designs must have prior approval from the Public Works
Director.
SEC. 8.1-13(Cont.1)
C. Damage to or Destruction of Mailboxes. The Town shall not be liable for the repair
or replacement of mailboxes damaged by Town vehicles or employees when the
mailbox is in violation of this Section. Town liability for repair or replacement of
any mailbox is limited to $70. This limitation shall not apply to willful and wanton
conduct by Town employees directly causing mailbox damage. (Amended 1/4/2016
by Ord. No. 5613) (Entire SEC. 8.1-13 was Amended by Ord. 3981 on 6/17/91)
SEC. 8.1-14 NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES.
A. Findings and Purpose.
1. The Town Council hereby finds, as follows:
a. The public right-of-ways historically have been used to circulate
newspapers and other publications;
b. The substantial growth in the number of newspapers and other
publications has produced a significant increase in the number of
individual newsracks located on public right-of-ways;
c. The unregulated placement and maintenance of individual newsracks
in the public right-of-ways interferes with the free and unimpeded
use of such public right-of-ways and threatens the health, safety and
welfare of persons who use the public right-of-ways, including
pedestrians, children, the aged, persons entering and leaving vehicles
and buildings, drivers, persons performing essential utility, traffic
control and emergency services, and persons with disabilities; and
d. The unregulated placement of multi-colored, broken, rusted, and
abandoned individual newsracks of various shapes and sizes in the
public right-of-ways significantly detracts from the aesthetic
character of surrounding areas.
2. Based on the conditions described above, the Town Council further finds
that there is a need for reasonable time, place and manner restrictions
regarding the installation, placement, size, appearance, and maintenance of
newsracks in the public right-of-ways, including the creation of a Modular
Newsrack District. Consistent with these findings, it is the purpose of this
Section to promote the health and safety of users of the public right-of-ways
and to enhance the aesthetics of the Town in a manner which may utilize
newsracks as a method of distribution of newspapers and other publications,
so as to do the following:
a. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
b. Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.1)
c. vehicular traffic, including ingress and egress from any residence or
place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons
existing or entering parked or standing vehicles;
d. Provide for the safety of the public and property during windstorms
and other inclement weather;
e. Replace, remove, or relocate individual newsracks that have created
visual blight on the public right-of-ways or unreasonably detracted
from the aesthetics of adjacent businesses, landscaping, and other
improvements;
f. Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties; and
g. Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury and
property damage.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
Abandoned. Any newspaper dispensing device or any compartment of a modular
newsrack, that does not contain the newspaper or other publication specified
therefore for more than eight consecutive days for a daily publication, twelve
consecutive days for a weekly publication, twenty consecutive days for a bi-weekly
publication, 36 days for a monthly publication, or 70 days for a bi-monthly
publication.
Compartment. The individual space within a modular newsrack that dispenses one
newspaper or other publication, including the door, coin return mechanism, and
associated hardware.
Modular Newsrack. A newspaper dispensing device that is designed with multiple
separate enclosed compartments to accommodate at any one time the display, sale or
distribution of multiple distinct and separate newspapers or other publications.
Modular Newsrack District. That portion of the Town designed as the Central
Business District in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
Newspapers and Other Publications. Includes newspapers, periodicals, advertising
circulars, and all other printed materials that may be distributed through the use of
newsracks.
Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner. The Director of Public Works or his
designee.
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.2)
Newspaper Dispensing Device. Any unmanned, self-service or coin-operated box,
container, storage unit, or other dispenser located in or upon, or projecting onto, into,
or over, any part of the public right-of-ways and which is installed, used or
maintained for the display, sale, or distribution of newspapers and other
publications.
Public Right-of-Way. All right-of-ways dedicated to or owned by the Town and
includes, but is not limited to, public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, or
easements.
Publisher. The person or other legal entity selling, displaying or distributing
newspapers or other publications in a newspaper dispensing device.
C. Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner. The Newspaper Dispensing Device
Commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To administer and rule upon the application for, and the issuance, renewal,
suspension, denial, and revocation of Newspaper Dispensing Device Permits
as set forth in this Section.
2. To conduct or provide for such inspections of newspaper dispensing devices
as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions
of this Section and other applicable provisions of law.
3. To take such further actions as the Newspaper Dispensing Device
Commissioner shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of
this SEC. 8.1-14 and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance
thereof as are implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly set
forth in this Section.
D. Newspaper Dispensing Devices; Generally.
1. Newspaper Dispensing Device Permit Required. A Newspaper Dispensing
Device Permit shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain a
newspaper dispensing device within the Town.
2. Operation Without Permit Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person not
having a current and valid Newspaper Dispensing Device Permit to
establish, operate, or maintain a newspaper dispensing device on public
property within the Town at any time after the effective date of this Section.
3. Operation in Violation of Permit Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
Licensee to establish, operate, or maintain a newspaper dispensing device on
the public property within the Town except in the manner authorized by, and
in compliance with, the provisions of this Section and by the Licensee’s
Newspaper Dispensing Device Permit.
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.3)
E. Newspaper Dispensing Devices; Application and Permit.
1. Applications for a permit under this Section shall be made on forms provided
by the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner for permits allowing
for the installation and placement of newspaper dispensing devices within
the public right-of-way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways,
and sidewalks within the Town. The Applications shall be provided by the
Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner immediately upon request.
The Application must include a site plan and must expressly state the exact
location where the applicant wishes to install a newspaper dispensing device.
The application must also include a description of and the specification for
the intended newspaper dispensing device.
2. Within five (5) business days of receipt of an application for a permit under
this Section, the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner shall grant
the application and issue the permit provided that the conditions contained in
SEC. 8.1-14(F) are, where applicable, complied with. If the terms and
conditions contained in SEC. 8.1-14(F) are not complied with, the
Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner shall, within five (5) business
days of receipt of the application for a permit, deny the application, and state
the reasons in writing for such denial.
3. A permit granted hereunder shall apply only to the location provided for in
the permit, and no newspaper dispensing device permitted hereunder shall be
relocated without application for and issuance of a new permit.
F. Newspaper Dispensing Device Permit Conditions. No newspaper dispensing
device, other than modular newsracks, shall be placed on public right-of-way within
the Modular Newsrack District. A Town permit allowing the placement of privately
owned newspaper dispensing devices on public right-of-way outside the Modular
Newsrack District shall be subject to and granted upon the following conditions,
restrictions and requirements:
1. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed adjacent and parallel to
building walls not more than six inches distant therefrom, or near and
parallel to the curb not less than 24 inches distant from the curb.
2. No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed, installed, located, used, or
maintained:
a. Within three feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility.
b. Within ten feet of any intersecting driveway, alley, or street.
c. Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.4)
d. At any location where the width of paved clear space in any direction
for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet.
e. So as to be chained or otherwise secured to any tree, utility pole, light
pole, parking meter, traffic control post, street signpost, or other
public property.
f. On or within any median within any public right-of-way.
g. So as to project into any part of the public right-of-way or along the
street, thoroughfares, parkways, and sidewalks within the Town,
unless authorized by a properly issued Town permit.
h. Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the
sidewalk or parkway, or in such manner as to impede or interfere
with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.
i. On any handicapped access ramp.
3. The permittee shall maintain the device in good working order, in a safe and
clean condition, in such a manner that:
a. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
b. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
c. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon;
d. The clean plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes, and discoloration;
e. The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading;
f. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly disfigured;
h. The device shall display a telephone number for refund in case of
malfunctioning of the device; or
i. No newsrack shall exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in
width, or two (2) feet in thickness.
4. The permittee shall not use a newspaper dispensing device for advertising
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.5)
signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or
purchase of the materials sold therein.
5. A permit shall allow the installation of a newspaper dispensing device only
at the exact location described in the application for the permit. The permit
shall contain a description of the authorized location. Permits shall not be
transferable from one location to another.
6. The permittee, upon removal of the dispensing device, shall restore the
property of the Town to the same condition as when the device was initially
installed, ordinary wear and tear expected.
7. As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the
permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officials, both
elected and appointed, and its employees and agents against any loss or
liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal
injury and for property damage sustained by any person as the result of the
negligent installation, use or maintenance of a newspaper dispensing device
within the Town.
G. Provisions of Modular Newsracks. The Town shall provide for the placement of
modular newsracks on public right-of-ways in the Modular Newsrack District. The
Publisher shall have access to the modular newsrack compartment for the vending of
the Publisher’s publications.
1. The modular newsracks shall be purchased by the Town and maintained by
the Town.
2. After the initial installation of modular newsracks, the total number of
compartments in the modular newsracks in the Modular Newsrack District
may be increased or decreased only consistent with the purposes stated in
this Section. Modular newsracks shall be placed in locations determined by
the Town throughout the district which afford easy, convenient service to
pedestrians but which do not obstruct or interfere with access to abutting
properties and which do not impede or endanger pedestrian, bicycle or
vehicle traffic. Any publication may petition the Town for placement of a
modular newsrack at a specific location within the Modular Newsrack
District. The Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner shall review
each petition and determine whether such location is warranted.
3. There shall be no newspaper dispensing devices of any type located within
the Modular Newsrack District except as part of a Town-provided modular
newsrack. All existing newspaper dispensing devices shall be removed from
the Modular Newsrack District within fourteen days after placement of the
modular newsrack. Any newspaper dispensing device not so removed or
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.6)
otherwise placed in violation of this Section shall be subject to confiscation
by the Town.
H. Allocation of Modular Newsrack Compartments. The Town shall ensure that
modular newsrack compartments are allocated in accordance with the following
procedures:
1. Each compartment in a modular newsrack shall contain copies of only one
newspaper or other publication and have a door that is sized to fit and
display such newspaper or other publication.
2. The Town shall ensure that there are enough compartments in each modular
newsrack to accommodate all publishers who initially wish to distribute their
newspapers and other publications at that location, up to a maximum of 16
compartments per newsrack in the Modular Newsrack District. If more than
16 publishers wish to distribute newspapers or other publications at that
location, then the compartments shall be allocated as follows:
a. Priority shall be given to publishers who continuously have
distributed newspapers or other publications in newsracks at that
location for more than 12 months before the effective date of this
ordinance, as indicated by the publisher’s affidavit provided to the
Town;
b. Among publishers who have priority under this Subsection,
compartments will be allocated first to newspapers and other
publications issued at least five days per week, second to newspapers
and other publications issued between two and four days per week,
third to newspapers and other publications issued once a week, and
fourth to newspapers and other publications issued less frequently;
c. If there are more compartments than publishers with priority under
this Section, then the Town shall allocate the remaining
compartments among publishes who do not have priority, first to
newspapers and other publications issued at least five days per week,
second to newspapers and other publications issued between two and
four days per week, third to newspapers and other publications issued
once a week, and fourth to newspapers and other publications issued
less frequently.
d. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Subsection, no newspaper
or other publication may receive a second space in a modular
newsrack until all other interested publishers have had the
opportunity to have their newspaper or other publication allocated to
a compartment.
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.7)
e. Whenever additional compartments become available, they shall be
allocated in the manner described in this Subsection; and,
f. In the event two or more publishers have equal priority under this
Subsection, then allocation shall be by lottery or other random
method.
3. For initial assignment of newsrack space, the Town shall notify all
publishers who currently distribute their newspapers and publications at each
location where the Town is installing a modular newsrack. Such
notification shall, at a minimum, consist of a copy of the Town’s Application
for Modular Newsrack Space. On the application, each publisher shall
include the number of compartments and the locations it is seeking. All
applications shall be returned to the Newspaper Dispensing Device
Commissioner, who shall ensure that compartments are allocated in
accordance with the procedure set forth above.
4. After the initial assignment of newsrack space, any publisher seeking to
place its publication within the Modular Newsrack District must fill out an
Application for Modular Newsrack Space and submit it to the Newspaper
Dispensing Device Commissioner who shall ensure that compartments are
allocated in accordance with the procedure set forth above.
5. The opportunity of publishers to have their newspapers or other publications
distributed from a modular newsrack shall not be affected whatsoever by
their content, consistent with the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution.
I. Appeal of Denial Permits. The decision of the Newspaper Dispensing Device
Commissioner in refusing to grant a permit under this Section shall be appealable.
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the City Manager,
provided that the applicant files a written notice of appeal, including a statement of
the grounds of appeal, with the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner within
fifteen (15) calendar days after notice of the decision of the Newspaper Dispensing
Device Commissioner. The City Manager shall set a hearing on the appeal, and
notice of such time and place shall be given in the same manner as specified in this
Section. The City Manager shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the
decision of the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner. In making his
determination, the City Manager shall only consider the standards set forth in this
Section. His decision shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of
the City Manager shall be final.
J. Emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, however, the
Town may remove any newspaper dispensing device from public property which,
because of its location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety
and welfare of the public or a member thereof. The Newspaper Dispensing Device
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.8)
Commissioner shall send by certified mail with return receipt requested a written
notice to the address of the owner or user of the newspaper dispensing device. The
notice shall state the address and telephone number of the Newspaper Dispensing
Device Commissioner and a description of why the newspaper dispensing device
was removed. The owner may request a hearing before the City Manager by filing a
written appeal with the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner. In this event,
a hearing shall be held, according to SEC. 8.1-14(L), for the purpose of determining
whether there is a continued need for the removal.
K. Revocation of Permits. The Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner shall
revoke any permit issued under the terms of this Section after a finding of any of the
following causes which shall constitute violations of this Section:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the application
for a permit;
2. Violation of any term of the permit granted to the permittee;
3. Violation of any term of this Section.
L. Removal of Newspaper Dispensing Devices.
1. If any newspaper dispensing device is placed or remains within any public
right-of-way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, or sidewalk without a permit
therefor being issued, or after the expiration or revocation of a previously
issued permit, or is deemed abandoned or unclaimed, or in violation of any
other provision of this Section, the Newspaper Dispensing Device
Commissioner shall send by certified mail with return receipt requested a
written notice to the address of the owner or user of the newspaper
dispensing device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number
of the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner; a description of why
the newspaper dispensing device is in violation of the requirement of this
Section; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the
newspaper dispensing device from the public property; and that the
newspaper dispensing device shall be removed by the Town after a date
designated by the notice. The date shall be no less than ten (10) calendar
days after the date the notice is mailed or first posted, as the case may be,
unless the owner or user requests a hearing before the City Manager by filing
a written appeal with the Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner on or
before the designed removal date.
2. When any appeal is filed pursuant to this Section, the City Manager shall set
a hearing on the appeal, and a notice of such time and place shall be given in
the manner as specified in this Section. In making his determination, the
City Manager shall only consider the standards set forth in this Section. His
SEC. 8.1-14(Cont.9)
decision shall be rendered on the same day as the hearing. The decision of
the City Manager shall be final.
3. If any newspaper dispensing device is still on public property after the ten
(10) day period described in Subsection (1) of this Subsection, or if any
appeal is made and denied after a hearing before the City Manager, the
Newspaper Dispensing Device Commissioner shall cause removal of the
newspaper dispensing device.
4. The owner of any newspaper dispensing device removed in accordance with
the terms of this Section shall be responsible for all the expenses of the
removal, storage and disposal of such newspaper dispensing device. Should
the newspaper dispensing device or materials fail to be claimed, or should
the owner fail to pay any money due the Town within a period no less than
sixty (60) days after the removal of the newspaper dispensing device, such
newspaper dispensing device or materials shall be unclaimed property and
should become property of the Town.
M. Penalties. Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation continues.
N. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Section is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this Section.
(Entire Section 14 Added 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5259)
SEC. 8.2-1
DIVISION 2 - EXCAVATIONS
SEC. 8.2-1 PERMIT REQUIRED. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to make
any excavation in, on, or under any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, whether owned by
the Town in fee, by easement or otherwise, shall first complete an application on forms available
from the office of the Director of Public Works and shall file such completed application in the
Director of Public Works office.
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk, or crosswalk, public way or any
part thereof, dig any hole, ditch, or drain, or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand, or gravel
from, or dig, place, or construct any tunnel or drive, or bore for any pipe conduit, wire main or shaft
in or under, any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way in the Town, without having first
obtained written permission from the Department of Public Works, given in accordance with the
provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the Town.
SEC. 8.2-2 PERMIT FEE. For each and every permit issued for an excavation in any
public right-of-way or public way there shall be collected a fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
SEC. 8.2-3 SECURITY REQUESTED. Before a permit shall be granted to any person to
open any pavement, improved roadway, sidewalk, or alley, or excavate for any purpose any public
right-of-way or public way other than a Subdivider who currently has a valid Subdivision Bond
posted with the Town, said person shall place a cash deposit or performance bond, with the Town of
Normal in the office of its Treasurer to cover the estimated cost of restoring said pavement,
improved roadway, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way, to as good a condition as before it shall have
been so opened, with an additional sum as a margin for unforeseen costs and damages, all as
determined by the Director of Public Works. The estimated cost determined by the Director shall
include the excavated materials after the person obtaining the permit has removed the pavement,
sidewalk, or other improvement and made the excavation; backfilling all excavated areas; and
restoring the pavement, improved roadway, sidewalk, or alley to its original condition. When the
excavation has been made and any utility involved has been connected and inspected, the person
making the excavation shall notify the Director of Public Works to inspect the work done.
The cash deposit or Performance Bond shall be held by the Town as security until the
Director of Public Works or Town Engineer certifies in writing that the work and restoration
required under the permit have been completed and inspected. Upon receipt of said certification,
and waivers of lien from all contractors and subcontractors who furnished labor or materials, the
Treasurer shall refund the deposit less any amount thereof expended by the Town due to failure to
promptly perform and complete restoration as required, and less inspection cost. (Amended
9/19/83)
SEC. 8.2-4 BOND OR INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED. No permit shall be issued
to any person permitting or allowing the obstruction, tearing up, removing, or repairing of any
sidewalk, street, alley, other public place, or any part thereof, until the person making application
for such permit shall first have executed to the Town a good and sufficient bond in the amount of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the Corporation
Counsel, or filed evidence of general liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand
SEC. 8.2-4(Cont.1)
dollars ($100,000.00) aggregate naming the Town as an additional insured. Provided however, the
Public Works Director may require a bond or insurance in additional amounts where in his opinion
the size, extent, location, or nature of the project involves greater risk or liability to the Town.
The condition of the bond shall be such as to indemnify, save, and keep harmless the Town
from any and all loss, cost, damage, expense, or liability of any kind whatsoever, which the Town
may suffer or which may be recovered against the Town from or on account of the issuance of the
permit to obstruct, tear up, remove, or repair any sidewalk, street, alley, other public way or part
thereof, and from or on account of any act or thing done by the permittee or permitted by the
permittee, and from or on account of any negligence or omission of the permittee in the obstruction,
tearing up, removal, or repairing of any sidewalk, street, alley, other public way or part thereof.
SEC. 8.2-5 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO BE ADVISED OF TIME,
PLACE, AND TYPE OF OPENING. The Director of Public Works shall not issue any permit
for the opening of any street, alley, or public way by any person until the Director shall have been
fully advised of the time, place, and the type of such opening and the purpose thereof.
SEC. 8.2-6 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY PLAT OR
SKETCH. All applications for permits under this Division shall be accompanied by a plat or pencil
tracing or sketch showing the location, character, and dimensions of the proposed opening for the
installation of new work or the location and character of the alternatives involving changes in the
location of pipes, conduits, wires, or conductors, and submission of specifications for the
installation.
SEC. 8.2-7 SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION OF WORK. All work done under the
authority of a permit under the provisions of this Division shall be supervised and inspected by a
Town Inspector to be designated by the Director of Public Works. Such supervision and inspection
shall be done at the sole expense of the person securing such permit.
SEC. 8.3-1
DIVISION 3 - CURB CUTS AND ACCESS WAYS
SEC. 8.3-1 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
A. Breaking Curb or Gutter. No person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter break or cut
away any portion of any curb or gutter now or hereafter laid or established on any
street, alley, or public way without first securing a "Curb Cut Permit" authorizing
such construction, and all such construction shall be done in a manner so as to meet
the standards specified in this Division.
B. Establishing New Access Ways. No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or
create a new access way from the surface portion of a street, alley, or public way to
adjoining property without first securing a "Curb Cut Permit" authorizing the
establishment of such an access way, and all such ways shall be constructed in a
manner so as to meet the standards specified in this Division.
C. Duplicate Permits Not Required. A single curb cut permit may authorize the
building of the curb and the creation of a new access way.
D. Curb cuts for sump pump discharge are prohibited.
SEC. 8.3-2 PERMIT.
A. Procedure. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to break any curb or gutter or
establish a new access way shall first complete a Curb Cut Application on forms
available from the Director of Public Works and shall file such completed Curb Cut
Application in the Director of Public Works' office.
Before a permit will be issued for any curb cut or access way onto a State right-ofway,
a copy of an approved permit from the State of Illinois Department of
Transportation shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works. (Added
12/18/78)
B. Fee.
1. Applications for curb cut permits serving property zoned agricultural, single
family residential, two-family residential, or multiple family shall be
accompanied by a filing fee and inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
(Amended 12/17/78)
2. Applications for curb cut permits serving property otherwise zoned shall be
accompanied by a filing an inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
(Amended 12/18/78)
SEC. 8.3-3
SEC. 8.3-3 STANDARDS.
A. General Location. Based on the street classification included in the transportation
element of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Normal, curb cuts or access
ways shall be permitted in the following locations:
1. On major or collector streets, no curb cut, access way, or portion thereof
shall be permitted within sixty-four (64) feet of the right-of-way line of any
intersecting major or collector street;
2. On major, collector, or minor streets, no curb cut, access way, or portion
thereof shall be permitted within twenty-four (24) feet of the right-of-way
line of any intersecting minor street;
3. On minor streets, no curb cut, access way, or portion thereof shall be
permitted within twenty-four (24) feet of the right-of-way of any intersecting
major or collector street. (Amended 12/17/78)
4. Waivers. The Director of the Department of Public Works may grant a
waiver to the requirements imposed in subsections A(1), A(2), and A(3) of
this Section where adequate protection to the public safety can be provided
and where the resulting curb cut is at least seventy-four (74) feet from the
back of the curb on major and collector streets, and thirty (30) feet from the
back of the curb on minor streets, and where one (1) or more of the
following conditions exist:
a. Where road right-of-way has been dedicated to the Town exceeding
that required by the Town Subdivision Code;
b. Where a lot platted prior to December 20, 1978, has no access to a
public road, except a curb cut be granted within the setback
ordinance established by this Section. (Sub-paragraph 4 added by
Ord. No. 3373, 2/18/85)
B. Width, Number, and Separation.
1. Residential – Major and Collector Streets. Curb cuts or access ways for
driveways serving agricultural, single-family, duplex, or multiple family uses
or where no use is proposed in areas zoned agricultural, single-family, twofamily,
or multiple family shall conform with the following widths and shall
conform to the details in Figures 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8:
a. Minimum - twenty (20) feet.
b. Maximum - thirty (30) feet.
SEC. 8.3-3(Cont.1)
2. Residential - Minor Streets. Curb cuts or access ways for driveways serving
agricultural, single-family, duplex, or multiple family uses or where no use is
proposed in areas zoned agricultural, single-family, two-family, or multiple
family shall conform to the following widths and shall conform to the details
in Figures 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8:
a. Minimum - sixteen (16) feet.
b. Maximum - thirty (30) feet.
3. Other. Curb cuts and access ways to commercial, office, institutional,
business, manufacturing, and any other uses or where the use is unknown in
areas zoned commercial, business, institutional, office, or manufacturing,
shall conform to the requirements for the above uses, as specified in Figures
6 and 7 of the IDOT policy on Permits for Access Driveways to State
Highways, the latest edition of which is incorporated herein by reference and
on file in the office of the Town Clerk. (Amended 6/1/81)
4. Waivers. Where conformance with the width requirements of the Section
would, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, work an
unreasonable hardship on the property owner involved and which adequate
protection to the public safety can otherwise be provided, the Director may
increase the maximum width or decrease the minimum width requirements
by an amount not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the width specified.
5. Common Drives Prohibited. Common curb cuts and access ways are
prohibited. In order to promote public safety, the Public Works Director
may grant a waiver to this section for all zoning districts except the
residential districts.
6. Minimum Distance from Side Property Line. No part of a curb cut or access
way shall be located within three (3) feet of a side property line, except:
a. Where there existed prior to May 1, 1980, an accessway which is not
hard surfaced, said accessway may be hard surfaced over the same
area as presently exists provided all of the other requirements of this
Division are met; or
b. Where there existed prior to May 1, 1980, a lot with a structure on it
without a driveway, then the three (3) foot minimum distance from a
side property line may be reduced to one (1) foot if in the opinion of
the Director of Public Works or his designee, there is no place for the
curb cut to be installed. (Amended 4/21/80)
c. Driveways located within three (3) feet of property line may have a
curb cut or accessway within one (1) foot of the property line.
SEC. 8.3-3(Cont.2)
7. Residential Exception. Curb cuts for residential uses shall be limited to one
per use except:
a. For circle driveways (See Figure 3);
b. Where one way traffic is to be utilized. (Added by Ord. 1944 -
4/21/80
C. Supplemental Standards.
1. The Director of Public Works shall not issue any permit under this Division
for any private access way or for the breaking or removing of any curb
where the proposed opening would create an unnecessary hazard to
pedestrians or create a traffic hazard.
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town of Normal hereby adopts the
standards of the Bureau of Traffic, Department of Transportation of the State
of Illinois, as now or hereafter amended, which said standards are available
for public inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk.
3. Where a Town project involves constructing a new curb and a request is
made for a curb cut permit and no hard surfaced driveway is in existence
adjacent to the location of the curb cut, before the curb cut permit is issued,
the applicant shall post an escrow in cash or certified check to insure that
sixty (60) days from the date the curb cut is made that the new hard-surfaced
driveway shall be installed.
Said escrow, equal to the amount of the cost to recurb the area requested in
the permit, shall be forfeited to the Town if the hard surfaced driveway is not
installed within the sixty (60) day time period. (Added by Ord. 1944 -
4/21/80)
4. Where an owner of property has the option of selecting one of several streets
on which to request a curb cut, the owner of such property must take the
permitted curb cut off a street that is classified minor. If none of the streets
are classified minor, the curb cut must be taken off a street that is classified
Collector. If none of the streets are classified minor or Collector, the curb
cut may be taken off of a street that is classified Major. In order to promote
the public safety and general welfare, the Public Works Director may grant
waivers to this subsection. (Added by Ord. 3213 - 6/6/83)
SEC. 8.3-4 ACCESS WAY PAVEMENT, TURNING RADIUSES, AND CURB
REPLACEMENT.
A. Construction Standards.
SEC. 8.3-4(Cont.1)
1. Materials. All access ways and curb cuts shall be constructed of Portland
Cement Concrete (PCC) in accordance with Section 408-Portland Cement
Concrete Pavement and Section 623-Portland Cement Concrete Driveway
Pavement of the Standard-Specifica-tions for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest edition, except the Public Works Director may waive this requirement
where construction in the public way is reasonably foreseeable, or if the
access way is from a non-concrete street. All concrete shall have six (6)
bags of Portland Cement per cubic yard of concrete with a minimum of
3,500 pounds per square inch when tested at 14 days. In addition, all access
ways and curb cuts shall meet the following standards:
a. Single and Two-Family Uses. The Portland Cement Concrete access
way to single or two-family uses or where no use is known or
proposed in single and two-family zoning districts shall have a
minimum thickness of six (6) inches. The existing sidewalk crossing
the access way need not be removed; however, if it is removed, it
must be removed to the nearest contraction joint outside the access
way and replaced with concrete of the same thickness as the access
way.
b. To All Other Uses. Portland Cement Concrete access ways to all
other uses and in all other zoning districts shall have a minimum
thickness of six (6) inches. The existing sidewalk crossing the access
way shall be removed to the nearest contraction joint outside the
access way and replaced with concrete of the same thickness as the
access way.
2. Procedures. For agricultural and residential uses, the existing curb may be
saw cut as shown in Figure 6 and removed. The new depressed curb must be
placed in a workman-like manner as shown in Figure 6. If only the riser
portion of the curb is removed, an expansion joint shall only be constructed
between the sidewalk and the access way. For all uses except agricultural
and residential, the entire curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced.
The depressed curb and gutter replacement shall be a separate placement of
concrete from the access way placement of concrete and there shall be an
expansion joint separating the two placements. A second expansion joint
shall be constructed between the sidewalk and the access way. The saw cut
method as shown in Figure 6 can be used in lieu of complete removal and
replacement at the discretion of the Public Works Director. (Amended
7/20/92 by Ord. 4072)
B. Gutters and Culverts. Where no curb break is necessary and access ways are
proposed, either a concrete gutter or culvert pipe shall be constructed in the manner
shown in Figures 7 and 8. The maximum length of said culvert or gutter pipe shall
be the same as the authorized curb cut, and the minimum size shall be fifteen (15)
inches. (Amended 12/18/78)
SEC. 8.3-5
SEC. 8.3-5 INSPECTIONS. Any person, firm, or corporation installing an access way
through a curb break shall notify the Director of Public Works not less than twenty-four (24) hours
prior to the placing of concrete on improved streets, so that the form inspection can be performed
prior to the pouring of the concrete. An additional inspection shall be made after pouring of the
concrete to insure conformance with the provisions of this Division.
SEC. 8.3-6 ILLUSTRATIVE FIGURES. See following figures.
(Entire Division 3 of Chapter 8 Amended 3/2/76)(Figure 6 Amended 7/20/92 by Ord. 4072)







SEC. 8.4-1
DIVISION 4 - CLOSURE PERMIT
SEC. 8.4-1 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct,
manage, institute, carry-on, promote, advertise, encourage, or participate in any activity which
causes an obstruction or interference with the customary uses of a public way without first securing
a Specific Events Permit from the Chief of Police or a Closure Permit from the Public Works
Director. This Division shall not apply to temporary blockage of streets for which Town approval is
required pursuant to Division 5 of this Chapter.
SEC. 8.4-2 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division, the following terms have the
following definitions:
A. Specific Events Permit shall mean the procedures, terms, and conditions for
issuance, use, suspension, or revocation of a Special Event Permit as provided in
Division 10 of Chapter 23 of this Code.
B. Closure Permit shall mean the procedures, terms, and conditions for issuance, use,
suspension, or revocation of a Closure Permit as provided by this Division.
C. Obstruction or Interference shall mean any activity which blocks, hinders, or
disrupts the customary flow of motorized vehicular traffic on public streets, or the
customary flow of pedestrian traffic on sidewalks.
SEC. 8.4-3 CLOSURE PERMIT. An application for a Closure Permit shall be filed with
the Public Works Director not less than three (3) working days before the date proposed for closing
or obstructing a public way. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or by an authorized
representative of the group seeking the permit on forms provided by the Town and shall contain the
following:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to close or obstruct
the public way.
B. If the closure or obstruction is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization.
C. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the chairperson
or local contact person for the proposed activity.
D. The date when the activity is to be conducted.
E. Whether or not the proposed activity is for profit.
F. The approximate number of persons and vehicles, if any, attending the activity.
SEC. 8.4-3(Cont.1)
G. The date and hours when the activity will start and terminate.
H. A statement as to whether the activity will occupy all or only a portion of a public
way.
I. The location of public ways for the activity.
J. The time which participants of the activity will begin to assemble.
K. Whether or not any barricades are requested.
L. Whether or not any police assistance is requested.
M. Whether or not amplified sound will be used.
N. A brief description of the activity.
O. If a street is closed, whether or not all persons abutting said street have been notified
of the activity.
P. Whether or not a fee will be charged for the activity.
Q. Whether or not alcoholic liquor will be available at the activity. If so, a general
statement detailing control and use of alcoholic liquor.
SEC. 8.4-4 CONDITIONS PRECEDING. The Public Works Director shall require from
the applicant an agreement to compensate the Town for loss or damage to public property and the
deposit of a surety or cash bond in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to guarantee the
clean up of the site and the removal of any debris left as a result of the holding of the activity. The
applicant shall also indemnify and hold the Town harmless on account of any and all claims, suits,
losses, damages, costs, attorney fees and expenses which the Town may in any manner suffer, incur,
be put to, pay, or lay out by reason of issuance of a permit pursuant to this Division or by reason of
activities conducted by the applicant or persons attending the activities conducted by the applicant
or by other third parties injured as a result of activities conducted by the applicant or persons
attending the activity.
SEC. 8.4-5 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF A PERMIT.
A. The Public Works Director shall issue or deny the permit within two (2) working
days after receiving an application.
B. The Public Works Director shall issue a permit, provided:
1. The application is on the form provided and contains the required
information.
SEC. 8.4-5(Cont.1)
2. The application for a permit does not contain any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact.
3. The applicant has met the requirements of SEC. 8.4-4.
4. The proposed activity is not contrary to law.
5. The proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with the preservation
of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare.
6. The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions and
regulations attendant upon issuance of the permit.
7. All necessary state highway closure requirements have been met.
C. The Public Works Director may impose reasonable terms and regulations
concerning the time and place of the activity, the maximum number of persons or
units participating therein, the regulation of traffic, the number and type of signs and
barricades to be provided by the applicant, and such other requirements as the Public
Works Director may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and
property.
SEC. 8.4-6 HIGHWAY CLOSURE REQUESTS. Permits to local authorities to
temporarily close portions of state highways for such public purposes or needs as provided herein
are governed by Section 4-408 of the Illinois Highway Code. Requests to the Illinois Department of
Transportation, 700 East Norris Drive, Ottawa, Illinois 6l350, must be filed not less than fifteen (15)
days in advance of the date for which the closure is requested. The request shall be in resolution
form, signed by the Mayor and certified by the Town Clerk as an official act of the city government.
SEC. 8.4-7 PREFERENCE IN APPLICATIONS. If the Public Works Director shall
receive more than one (1) application for activities necessitating a Closure Permit, which activities
are proposed for the same time and place, the application filed first in time shall take precedence.
An application shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the proposed activity is scheduled to
commence within two (2) hours before or after the holding of another activity requiring a Closure
Permit. An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the proposed activity is
within six (6) blocks or any equivalent distance from another activity requiring a Closure Permit.
SEC. 8.4-8 ISSUANCE OF MULTIPLE PERMITS. The Public Works Director may
issue permits for more than a single activity requiring a Closure Permit on any one (1) date in
accordance with the requirements of SEC. 8.4-5 and 8.4-7 of this Division, provided however, that
the Public Works Director may not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of
such additional permits would require the continuing diversion of so great a number of police
officers or other municipal personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or delivery of other
services to the municipality.
SEC. 8.4-9
SEC. 8.4-9 RECONSIDERATION. If a permit has been denied by the Public Works
Director, the applicant may request reconsideration of such application and submit to the Public
Works Director for his review any additional evidence relevant to said application. The Public
Works Director shall make a final determination within twelve (12) hours following receipt of any
request for reconsideration.
SEC. 8.4-10 CONTENTS OF PERMIT. A Closure Permit shall contain the following:
A. The name of the person or organization to whom issued.
B. The address and telephone number of the person or organization named on the
permit.
C. The type of activity for which the permit has been issued.
D. The date, hour, and location for the proposed activity.
E. The expiration date of the event.
F. Any conditions imposed on the holding of the proposed activity.
SEC. 8.4-11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. A Closure Permit may be summarily
suspended or revoked by the Public Works Director on the following grounds:
A. If the Public Works Director has reasonable cause to believe that any of the grounds
exist for which the original application for a permit would have been denied.
B. If the Public Works Director has reasonable cause to believe that the health, safety,
and welfare of persons or property would be endangered because of real or
threatened disaster, public calamity, riot, or other emergency.
C. If the Public Works Director has reason to believe that the conditions imposed upon
issuance of the permit have not or are not being met.
SEC. 8.4-12 APPEAL. Decisions of the Public Works Director on applications for
reconsideration may be appealed to the City Manager.
SEC. 8.4-13 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this Division is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Division, provided said remaining portions can be given effect without the invalid
provision or provisions.
(Entire Division 4 Amended 7/20/98 by Ord. No. 4540)
SEC. 8.5-1
DIVISION 5 - CONSTRUCTION PROJECT RULES
SEC. 8.5-1 APPLICATION OF RULES. The following rules and regulations shall apply
to all persons, firms, or corporations doing work on any construction project within the Town of
Normal.
SEC. 8.5-2 CLEANING OF STREETS. Streets adjacent to or in the area of a
construction project must be kept clean at all times. Trucks going in or out of a construction project
shall not be overloaded so as to cause dumping on the Town streets, nor shall they exit from the
construction project with dirt or debris on their tires which might fall off on the Town streets.
SEC. 8.5-3 BLOCKAGE OF STREETS. Town streets may not be blocked without
obtaining approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance from the Director of Public Works.
The twenty-four (24) hour notice may be waived in cases of extreme emergency.
SEC. 8.5-4 STORAGE ON STREETS. No contractor's equipment or material shall be
stored on Town streets or other public right-of-way without the permission of the Director of Public
Works.
SEC. 8.5-5 CUTS ON TOWN PROPERTY. No cuts may be made in any Town
property or public way without prior approval of the Director of the Public Works Department. A
performance bond must be provided before approval is given to make any cut in any public way.
The bond must be in the amount designated by the Director of Public Works and must be approved
as to form by the Corporation Counsel. Cuts in pavement shall not be left open over twenty-four
(24) hours on any street, unless permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works. The
street pavement cuts shall be made so as to not block more than one-half (1/2) of the street at any
one time on major and collector streets. Repairs of all street pavement shall be made so as to not
block more than one-half (1/2) of the street at any time. Pavement cuts must be properly filled in
and must be replaced within five (5) days after the completion of the work. The cut or excavation in
any public way must be barricaded in accordance with Town Code.
SEC. 8.5-6 FENCES. No fences are to be erected on public property, including right-ofway
or easement, without permission of the Director of Public Works except when required by State
law. Fences erected must be provided with gates only at points approved by the Director of Public
Works. Gates must not swing into the public right-of-way. An excavation of more than 5,000
square feet in surface area must have a fence of metal construction with metal posts, said fence must
be at least six (6) feet in height, and completely surround the excavation. Any fence installed across
a public sidewalk or within (6) feet of a surfaced roadway must have red warning lights no more
than twenty-five (25) feet apart and at least four (4) feet above grade level. No construction fence
may be erected so as to obstruct the view of motor vehicle operators or pedestrians at intersecting
roadways. Barbed wire fencing is not permitted. Signs other than warning signs are not permitted
to be hung on any fence or post. Warning signs may be hung only after approved by the Director of
Public Works.
SEC. 8.5-7 EQUIPMENT: LUG AND CLEATS. Tractors and traction equipment with
lugs or cleats of any sort, other than rubber mounts, are not permitted to be operated on Town streets
or other areas under Town jurisdiction.
SEC. 8.6-1
DIVISION 6 - POLES, WIRES, CONDUIT AND
EQUIPMENT IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SEC. 8.6-1 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install, erect or maintain or cause the
installation, erection or maintenance of any gas, telegraph, telephone, electric, fiber optic, or cable
TV post, poles, wires, conduit, or equipment or any telegraph, telephone, electric, or cable TV
wires, fiber optic lines, or electric light conductors in, upon, across, or along any street, sidewalk,
alley, or public way within the Town, without having first obtained a permit from the Director of
Public Works as provided in Division 2 of this Chapter, and an agreement from the Town of
Normal for use and occupancy of the public way.
An agreement shall not be required from an adjacent property owner for incidental use of a
public way when providing a service line from the public way to a lot adjoining the public way.
(Amended 12/2/96 by Ord. No. 4426)
SEC. 8.6-2 NOT TO BE ERECTED OR MAINTAINED SO AS TO IMPEDE
TRAVEL OR INJURE PROPERTY; LIABILITY. No person obtaining a permit as required by
SEC. 8.6-1 shall set, erect, or maintain any post or poles or place or hang any wires thereon, as to
impede or interfere with the public travel upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way, or as to
injure or damage any public or private property within the Town. (Amended 7/16/84)
SEC. 8.6-3 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS BY THE TOWN; COMPENSATION IN
CASE OF USE BY OTHER COMPANIES. In granting permits to erect poles for the purpose of
carrying wires, the Town reserves the right to use all such poles free of charge if the interest of the
public so demands. The Town also reserves the right to authorize other persons to use such poles, if
the interest of the public so demands, upon payment to the owners of such poles reasonable
compensation as determined by agreement between the parties. If the parties cannot agree upon a
reasonable compensation, the Board of Trustees shall determine the compensation.
All use or authorization for use granted under this Section shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this Division. (Amended 7/16/84)
SEC. 8.6-4 SETTING OR PLACING TO BE UNDER SUPERVISION OF
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The setting or placing of all gas, telephone, telegraph, cable
TV, electric, or fiber optic posts, poles, wire, conduit or equipment within the Town shall be done so
as not to inconvenience or interfere with the public use of any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way.
Plans for construction shall be approved by the Director of Public Works before work is
commenced. (Amended 7/16/84)(Amended 12/2/96 by Ord. No. 4426)
SEC. 8.6-5 PERSON. As used in this Division, person means any individual, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, company, unincorporated association, public or private corporation, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, or other legal entity. (Added 12/2/96 by Ord. No. 4426)
SEC. 8.6-6
SEC. 8.6-6 VIOLATION OF THIS DIVISION. In the event any person shall erect or
maintain or cause the erection or maintenance of any post, pole, equipment, wire or conduit in
violation of this Division, then the placement of such in, upon, across or along any street, sidewalk,
alley or public way within the Town of Normal shall be considered implied consent on behalf of
such person to pay annually to the Town of Normal the greater of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts derived from such equipment for services originating in the Town of Normal or one dollar
and seventy-eight cents ($1.78) per lineal foot of right-of-way occupied annually adjusted from
January 1, 1997, as provided below: (Amended 10/15/12 by Ord. No. 5458)
The compensation rate per lineal foot provided herein shall be adjusted annually from
January 1, 1997 based on the change in the Consumer Price Index - all urban wage earners
published by the United States Department of Labor or such successor index published by the
United States government. (Added 12/2/96 by Ord. No. 4426)
(Division 6 Re-codified 7/16/84 by Ord. No. 3326)
SEC. 8.7-1
DIVISION 7- TREES AND SHRUBS
SEC. 8.7-1 TREES AND SHRUBS ON TOWN PROPERTY. This Section shall be
applicable to trees and shrubs planted in or located on Town property, and to trees and shrubs
located on private property which grow onto or above Town property.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
1. Drip-line shall mean a point directly below the outer most point of a branch
away from the trunk or center of a tree or shrub.
2. Person means any natural born person, corporation, partnership or voluntary
association, or other entity recognized under Illinois law.
3. Parkway means that area between the road pavement and the property line
demarcating the extent of road right-of-way including any public sidewalk.
4. Shrub means a woody plant which grows less than 20 feet tall without
support.
5. Town property means any real property owned by the Town of Normal,
including, but not limited to, all road rights-of-way, parks and facilities and
other Town property.
6. Tree means any plant which grows more than 20 feet tall without support.
7. Tree or shrub located in a municipal parkway means a tree or shrub which is
actually rooted in whole or in part in the parkway or a tree or shrub that
occupies any portion of the air space above the parkway, whether or not such
tree is actually rooted in the parkway.
8. Trim shall mean the removal of any branch with a diameter of greater than
one inch, or the removal of more than one-third of the foliage of a tree or
shrub within a single growing season.
B. Impeding Traffic. Any tree or shrub located in a municipal parkway shall have its
trunk, boughs or branches thereof cut and trimmed so as not to impede the passage
of persons or vehicles along any street or sidewalk. Any branch or portion of a tree
or shrub shall be considered an impediment if it is less than 8 feet above a sidewalk
or less than 14 feet above a street. It shall be unlawful for any person or property
owner to permit a tree or shrub to impede the passage of persons or vehicles along a
street or sidewalk. A property owner is liable for any tree or shrub violating this
section which is rooted on private property. A property owner is not liable for any
tree or shrub which is rooted in a municipal parkway. A violation of this section is
an absolute liability offense with regard to property owners, and the Town need not
SEC. 8.7-1(Cont.1)
prove knowledge of the violation on the part of property owner. Every day upon
which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation.
C. Obstructing Views. All trees or shrubs located in a municipal parkway shall have the
trunks, boughs or branches thereof cut and trimmed so as not to obstruct the view of
any person or driver of a vehicle traveling along a street or sidewalk of any traffic
sign, traffic signal, street identification sign, or other vehicles or pedestrians which
may be on or entering the roadway. It shall be unlawful for any person or property
owner to permit a tree or shrub to obstruct the view as provided by this section. A
property owner is liable for any tree or shrub violating this section which is rooted
on private property. A property owner is not liable for any tree or shrub which is
rooted in a municipal parkway. A violation of this section is an absolute liability
offense with regard to property owners, and the Town need not prove knowledge of
the violation on the part of property owner. Every day upon which a violation occurs
shall be considered a separate violation.
D. Responsibility of Adjacent Property Owners.
1. Non-emergency trimming. Where the owner of premises adjacent to streets,
alleys, or sidewalks permits the limbs, boughs, or foliage of trees, or shrubs
planted on the premises to grow in such a manner as to impede the travel of
vehicles or persons on streets or sidewalks or to obstruct in whole or in part
the view of any traffic sign, traffic control device, street identification sign,
or other vehicles or persons who may be on or enter the roadway, it shall be
the duty of the Director of Parks and Recreation to notify such owner in
writing to trim such trees or shrubs within ten (10) days. If the person so
notified shall neglect or refuse to comply with such notice, the Director of
Parks and Recreation may cause such foliage to be trimmed at the expense of
the owner. The Town may charge the owner with the costs so incurred, and
such costs shall be a lien on the premises. The lien may be enforced as
provided by law.
2. Emergency trimming. Where the owner of premises adjacent to streets,
alleys, or sidewalks permits the limbs, boughs, or foliage of trees or shrubs
planted on the premises to grow in such a manner as to impede the travel of
vehicles or persons on streets or sidewalks or to obstruct in whole or in part
the view of any traffic sign, traffic control device, street identification sign,
or other vehicles or persons who may be on or enter the roadway, and the
Director of Parks and Recreation determines that the tree or shrub creates an
immediate danger to the health and safety of persons on the street or
sidewalk, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall cause the tree or shrub
to be trimmed or removed so as to remove the danger. The Town may
charge the owner with the costs so incurred, and such costs shall be a lien on
the premises. The lien may be enforced as provided by law.
SEC. 8.7-1(Cont.2)
E. Destruction or Trimming of Trees or Shrubs on Town Property.
Destruction of trees or shrubs or trimming of trees or shrubs on any Town property,
including parkways, is not permitted except upon approval of the Director of Parks
and Recreation. It shall be unlawful for any person to trim, remove or destroy any
tree or shrub on Town property without first having obtained the permission of the
Director of Parks and Recreation. In addition to any fine which may be assessed for
a violation of this section, a person found to have violated this section shall also pay
to the Town the value of the tree or shrub which was trimmed, destroyed or
removed as provided by the most recent version of A Guide to the Professional
Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens as published by
the International Society Arboriculture, but in no event less than the actual cost of
replacement of a tree or shrub of similar type.
F. Accidental Damage to Trees or Shrubs on Town Property. Any person who
accidentally causes damage to or destruction of any tree or shrub on Town property
shall pay the Town the value of the tree or shrub which was damaged, destroyed or
removed as provided by the most recent version of A Guide to the Professional
Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens as published by
the International Society Arboriculture, but in no event less than the actual cost of
replacement of a tree or shrub of similar type. This Section F shall not apply to
utility companies performing line clearance trimming or to trees and shrubs whose
trunks are located entirely on private property.
G. Planting of Trees or Shrubs on Town Property. Any tree or shrub planted on Town
property, including any parkway, becomes the property of the Town of Normal upon
planting, and any other claims of ownership cease upon being planted on Town
property.
H. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant a tree or shrub on
Town property without first obtaining the permission of the Parks and Recreation
Director. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the power to order the
removal of any tree planted in violation of this Code upon the giving of written
notice to the person who planted or caused to be planted such tree. Upon the failure
of such person to remove such tree within a reasonable time after such notice, the
Director of Parks and Recreation may have such tree removed, and such person may
be charged with the expense of the removal of the tree. Such expense may be
collected by bringing suit in the name of the Town against such person. In
determining whether a permit shall be issued, the Parks and Recreation Director
shall consider the following factors:
1. The likelihood of interference with utility lines.
2. Whether the tree or shrub is likely to grow such that it touches a structure
or interferes with persons or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks.
SEC. 8.7-1(Cont.3)
3. Whether there is sufficient room for the type and size of tree or shrub at
that location.
4. Whether the tree or shrub is likely to drop fruit in a location where such
fruit is likely to cause a mess.
5. Whether the tree or shrub is likely to drop branches which might injure
persons or impede persons or vehicles.
6. Whether the tree or shrub is likely to interfere with the ability of persons
to see traffic signals or other traffic along streets.
7. The likely health of the tree or shrub in the area to be planted.
8. The amount of care which a particular tree or shrub may require during its
life.
9. The overall aesthetic of the location of the tree or shrub.
10. Whether the tree or shrub is of a variety already located in the area.
Planting of a single species or type in an area should be avoided.
11. Whether the tree has thorns which are likely to hurt persons.
12. The likely longevity of the tree.
I. Root Protection. In order to protect the roots and health of trees, the following
activities are prohibited:
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in any franchise agreement, it shall
be unlawful for any person to dig a trench or other hole deeper than one inch
deep on Town property within an area closer than one foot of the outer dripline
of any tree or shrub which is over 20 feet tall without the permission of
the Director of Parks and Recreation. The application for a permit shall
depict the exact location and description of the excavation or digging and the
location and description of any trees whose drip-lines extend into the
excavation or digging area. In determining whether permission to dig or
trench shall be granted, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall determine
if alternatives to digging or trenching, such as boring or relocating, are
available, the hardship to the person seeking to dig or trench, and the likely
damage to any tree or shrub.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to pave or place a drive or expand a drive
on Town property in the area between the trunk and the drip-line of any tree
or shrub without the permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation. In
determining whether permission to pave shall be granted, the Director of
SEC. 8.7-1(Cont.4)
Parks and Recreation shall determine if alternative locations are available,
the need for the paving, the hardship to the person seeking to pave, and the
likely damage to any tree or shrub.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to place rocks or debris between the trunk
and the drip-line of any tree planted on Town property.
J. Equitable Action. Regardless of other remedies which may be available, the Town
may bring an action against any person in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain
compliance with the provisions of this Sections.
K. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of
the terms or requirements of this Section shall be fined a sum of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
Each day that such a violation or failure occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. In addition to any fine
which may be assessed for a violation of this section, a person found to have
violated this section shall also pay to the Town the value of the tree or shrub which
was trimmed, destroyed or removed as provided by the most recent version of A
Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and
Evergreens as published by the International Society Arboriculture, but in no event
less than the actual cost of replacement of a tree or shrub of similar type.
L. Severability. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Board of
Trustees of the Town of Normal, Illinois, that the several provisions of this Section
are severable in that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this Section to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this Section not specifically included in such judgment order.
SEC. 8.7-2 PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY VEGETATION MANAGEMENT.
A. Public utility Companies and their contractors performing non-emergency
vegetation management shall comply with all State laws and regulations, including
non-emergency vegetation management activities set forth at 220 ILCS 5/8-505.1.
B. No prior approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation shall be required of any
public utility company or public utility company contractor performing vegetation
management on Town property when such trimming is done in accordance with this
Section and State Law.
C. Definitions. As used in this Section the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
1. Person means any natural born person, corporation, partnership or voluntary
association, or other entity recognized under Illinois law.
SEC. 8.7-2(Cont.1)
2. Parkway means that area between the road pavement and the property line
demarcating the extent of road right-of-way.
3. Tree located in a municipal parkway means a tree which is actually rooted in
whole or in part in the parkway or a tree that occupies any portion of the air
space above the parkway, whether or not such tree is actually rooted in the
parkway.
4. Sag and sway shall mean that distance determined by the Director of Public
Works that overhead public utility transmission lines will move vertically or
horizontally at midspan due to normal and customary weather conditions.
5. Overhead transmission lines means the wires suspended above ground on
poles placed in the parkway or placed immediately adjacent to the parkway
on private or public easements.
6. Public utility means any company authorized by a franchise agreement with
the Town to occupy public ways.
D. Standards. All tree trimming shall be done based on the guidelines set forth in ANSI
A300 standards, American National Standard for Tree Care Operations Tree Shrub
and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – Standard Practices published by American
National Standards Institute, Inc.
E. Electric Line Clearance Standards.
1. The following species of trees located in the parkway may be trimmed according
to the Table of Maximum Line Clearances and the accompanying notes set forth
in this Section:
American Hophornbeam American Sweetgum
Ash, Blue Ash, White
Bald Cypress Black Walnut
Blue Beech Buckeye
Catalpa Elm, American
Ginko, Male Hickory
Ironwood Kentucky Coffeetree
Linden, Littleleaf Linden, Silver
Maple, Black Maple, Norway
Maple, Red Maple, Sugar
Oak species (except Pin Oak) Tulip Tree
SEC. 8.7-2(Cont.2)
STANDARD CLEARANCE
The following table gives clearances adequate to protect the wires under normal operating
conditions and meets ANSI A300 Standards. Special clearances may be needed sometimes because
of field conditions. The Public Works Director is authorized to grant waivers from the following
table in light of such field conditions as set forth in subsection (F) of this Section.
Electric wires will sag due to hot weather or swing sideways in strong winds. The greatest
wire sag and sway occurs at midspan. The following line clearance will be measured from the
maximum distances power line will sag and sway due to normal and customary weather conditions.
TABLE OF MAXIMUM LINE CLEARANCES (IN FEET)
“PROVIDED, HOWEVER, NO LIVING BRANCH WITH A DIAMETER OF MORE THAN 4
INCHES SHALL BE CUT WITHOUT FIRST OBTAINING A PERMIT FROM THE
DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION OR HIS DESIGNEE”
Clearance
from Trees
120
to
600 V
750
to
5,000 V
7,200
to
12,500 V
Aerial Cable
2,400 to
12,500 V
34,500 V
69,000 V
and
Above
Side 2 4 6 4 10 (d)
Through 1 2 3 2(a) (b) (d)
Over
Conductors
2 4 8 6 © (d)
Under
Conductors
4 6 7 7 8 (d)
NOTES:
(a) Remove limbs over 2 inches in diameter which may sway into or
otherwise contact line for a minimum clearance of 2 ft.
(b) Not permitted through trees.
(c) All overhead should be kept to a minimum.
(d) Remove all trees that could grow or fall into line before they
become a hazard.
(e) The letter “V” refers to volts.
2. Non-Listed Trees. Trees not listed in Subsection E(1) above may be
trimmed in accordance with Subsection E(1) except the maximum line
clearances may be up to two times the distance provided in Subsection E(1),
but not to exceed ten feet in distance unless prior approval is obtained from
the Director of Public Works.
SEC. 8.7-2(Cont.3)
F. Waiver of Standards. Trees located in the parkway may need to be trimmed to
clearances in excess of the standards set forth in Subsections E(1) and E(2) for
aesthetic or safety reasons. In such cases, the Director of Parks and Recreation is
authorized to issue a permit permitting deviation from such clearance standards in a
manner set forth in such permit. No fee shall be charged for such permit. No tree
trimming shall be done by any person as set forth in this Subsection (F) except
pursuant to the authorization of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
G. Emergency Trimming. Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as preventing any
person from trimming to remove trees or portions of trees for the purpose of
restoring electric power which has been interrupted by reason of such trees or
portions thereof having come in contact with electric power lines.
H. Except as otherwise provided in any franchise agreement, it shall be unlawful for
any person to dig a hole or trench within an area closer than one foot of the drip-line
of any tree which is over 20 feet tall for the placement or replacement of utility lines
without the permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation. Utility lines include
electrical, gas, water, cable TV, sewer, telephone, and any other underground service
line. In determining whether a permit should be granted, the Director of Parks and
Recreation should determine whether alternative technologies such as boring are
available or whether there are alternative locations available for the placement or
repair of lines which do not require trenching or digging within the drip line of a
tree. Nothing in this paragraph H shall be interpreted as prohibiting any person
from digging in an emergency situation to repair a broken water, sewer, gas or
electrical line.
I. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of
the terms or requirements of this Section shall be fined a sum of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
Each day that such a violation or failure occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. In addition to any fine
which may be assessed for a violation of this section, a person found to have
violated this section shall also pay to the Town the value of the tree or shrub which
was trimmed, destroyed or removed as provided by the most recent version of A
Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and
Evergreens as published by the International Society Arboriculture, but in no event
less than the actual cost of replacement of a tree or shrub of similar type.
J. Equitable Action. Regardless of other remedies which may be available, the Town
may bring an action against any person in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
K. Severability. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Board of
Trustees of the Town of Normal, Illinois, that the several provisions of this Section
are severable in that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this Section to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this Section not specifically included in such judgment order.
(Entire Division 7 Amended 8/7/06 by Ord. No. 5093)
SEC. 8.8-1
DIVISION 8 - PENALTIES
SEC. 8.8-1 PENALTY. Any person, firm, or corporation violating or failing to comply
with any of the terms or requirements of this Chapter shall be fined a sum of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that such
a violation or failure occurs or continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall
be punishable as such.
SEC. 8.8-2 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the
Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal, Illinois, that the several provisions of this Chapter are
severable in that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Chapter not specifically
included in such judgment order.
(Entire Chapter 8 Amended 5/5/86 by Ord. No. 3616)
SEC. 8.9-1
DIVISION 9 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SEC. 8.9-1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
A. The purpose of this Division is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for
the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities in a manner that is consistent
with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
B. This Division supersedes all prior ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in
conflict with this Division, to the extent of such conflict.
C. If any applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements
of this Division, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
Division to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or
regulations.
SEC. 8.9-5 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division:
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes mean uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes,
including the National Electric Safety Code.
Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
Application means a request submitted by an applicant to the Town for a permit to collocate
small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for
such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace
wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
Communications service means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
Communications service provider means a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a
wireless provider.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
SEC. 8.9-5(Cont.1)
Fee means a one-time charge.
Historic district or historic landmark means a building, property, or site, or group of
buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i
through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR
Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Town pursuant to a preservation program
that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
Law means a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, local
ordinance or resolution.
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24
inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior
antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Municipal utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by the Town in public rightsof-
way.
Permit means a written authorization required by the Town to perform an action or initiate,
continue, or complete a project.
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
trust, or other entity or organization.
Public safety agency means the functional division of the federal government, the State, a
unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this
State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or
other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
Rate means a recurring charge.
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not
include Town-owned aerial lines.
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in
volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its
exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and
SEC. 8.9-5(Cont.2)
(ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility
is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a
similar function.
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment
associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless
of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline
backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or
utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication
transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and
that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless
services provider for the application submitted to the Town.
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless services means any services provided to the general public, including a particular
class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless
facilities.
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not
include a utility pole.
SEC. 8.9-10 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILTIES.
A. Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities are classified as permitted uses and subject
to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (C)(9) regarding height
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.1)
exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are
collocated: (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district; or (ii) outside rights-of-way in
property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Town to
collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed,
and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following
information to the Town, together with the Town’s Small Cell Facilities
Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate
small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
(a) Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989;
(b) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or
location where utility poles or structures would be installed,
including a depiction of the completed facility;
(c) Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice
Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application as it is proposed to be installed;
(d) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
(e) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
(f) Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the
applicant’s knowledge; and
(g) If the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing
pole owned by an entity other than the Town, then the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process. The Town shall process applications as follows:
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.2)
(a) The first completed application shall have priority over applications
received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility
pole or wireless support structure.
(b) An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed
on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
Town fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Town in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit will be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Town. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice will not preclude the Town's denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
Division.
(c) An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the
installation of a new utility pole will be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Town fails to
approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Town in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Town. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Town's denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
Ordinance.
All permits for new utility poles applied for under this Division shall
be issued only if the applicant complies with the requirements of this
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.3)
Chapter, as may be amended from time to time, as well as with all
applicable law.
(d) The Town shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance.
If the Town determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation
requirements and conditions contained in this Division require that
the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the
requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the
cost of the provider.
The Town shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or
before the day the Town denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Town and
resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Town shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the
application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement
of the Town’s review period.
The applicant must notify the Town in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application
cure does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location,
new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
(e) Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility
pole, the Town and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole
Attachment Agreement, provided by the Town for the initial
collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility
on a municipal utility pole, the Town and the applicant shall enter
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.4)
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
3. Completeness of Application. Within 30 days after receiving an application,
the Town shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Town must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if
the Town fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all
documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the Town's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Town.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Town sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
4. Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
(a) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Town; or
(b) A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the Town shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single
permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Town may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated
treatment or that are denied. The Town may issue separate permits for each
collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less
than 5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the Town makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Town codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this Ordinance.
7. Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information and notices to the Town by personal delivery at the
Engineering Department, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by
any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.5)
A. Collocation Requirements and Conditions.
1. Public Safety Space Reservation. The Town may reserve space on municipal
utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Town’s electric utility uses,
or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a
small wireless facility unless the Town reasonably determines that the
municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
2. Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain,
repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good
repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
Ordinance. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
3. No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless
provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public
safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the
FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
The Town may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
4. The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Town
utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.6)
within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Town utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
5. The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code
provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
6. The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Town
ordinance, written policy adopted by the Town, a comprehensive plan or
other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
7. Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this subsection (C), a wireless
provider will not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to
an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with
a new utility pole, the Town may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure
within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept
if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Town, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
8. Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be
no more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.7)
(a) 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a
utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the
date the application is submitted to the Town, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional
boundary of the Town, provided the Town may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole
or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for
such facility; or
(b) 45 feet above ground level.
9. Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new
or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in Chapter 15 of the Town Code.
10. Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Town and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
11. Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the rightof-
way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that
addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not
prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
12. Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local
code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that
prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in
a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver,
zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility
poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
13. Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted
shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the
Town and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.8)
to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the
permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Town grants an
extension in writing to the applicant.
D. Application Fees.
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate
a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed in a
consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility
on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless
facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new
utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications under this Section must be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees are non-refundable.
4. The Town will not require an application, approval or permit, or require any
fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to
occupy the rights-of-way, for:
(a) routine maintenance;
(b) the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Town at least 10 days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the
replacement of equipment consistent with subsection d. under the
Section titled Application Requirements; or
(c) the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of
micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Town to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
E. Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this Division authorizes a person to
collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the
Town or another unit of local government that is not located within rightsSEC.
8.9-10(Cont.9)
of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
2. property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve
district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the
placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as
provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to
an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
Division will be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (i) to
obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or (ii) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this Division.
F. Pre-Existing Agreements. Existing agreements between the Town and wireless
providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Town utility poles, that are
in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the Town’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Town before
June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein.
Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this Ordinance.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Town on the effective
date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Town makes available
under this Ordinance for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the
installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are
the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of
the Act by notifying the Town that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions,
for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Town’s
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Town before the wireless
provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
SEC. 8.9-10(Cont.10)
G. Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the Town an annual
recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Town utility pole located in
a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable
costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the Town utility pole.
If the Town has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee is
$200 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the
permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date
thereafter.
H. Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove
the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the
Town notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by
the Town to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the
small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the Town may
remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole
attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are
provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Town if it sells or transfers s
mall wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Town. Such notice shall include
the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
SEC. 8.9-15 DESIGN STANDARDS. In addition to any other applicable designs standards
as set forth in this Division or in an applicable code or law, a wireless provider shall comply with
the following design standards:
A. Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances, i.e., cabinet, controller, etc.,
are to be installed, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility of such
equipment or appurtenance and shall not be permitted to obstruct sight lines or to
create other traffic or safety problems.
B. Color and Stealth. All small wireless facilities, including all related equipment and
appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole,
wireless support structure, or other structure on which such facility or equipment is
mounted, placed, or collocated. The color must be comprised of nonreflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. The applicant shall use good faith efforts to employ reasonable stealth
techniques to conceal the appearance of a small wireless facility or its related
equipment and appurtenances.
C. Utility Poles. Wireless Support Structures; Extensions. Any utility pole extension
or wireless support structure extension must blend with the color of the utility
SEC. 8.9-15(Cont.1)
pole or wireless support structure upon which such extension is mounted. Any
new utility pole or replacement utility pole shall not be wood and must blend with
the color, style, and structure of any surrounding utility poles or wireless support
structures.
D. Size. The applicant shall make good faith efforts to ensure the silhouette of a
small wireless facility and its related equipment and appurtenances are reduced to
minimize visual impact.
SEC. 8.9-20 SAFETY STANDARDS. In addition to any other applicable safety standards
as set forth in this Division or in an applicable code or law, a wireless provider shall comply with
the following safety standards:
A. A small wireless facility and any related equipment or appurtenance shall not be
collocated in a manner so as to obstruct or interfere with a motorist’s view of
roadways, nor shall any small wireless facility and any related equipment or
appurtenance be collocated in a manner that obstructs the view of a motorist at an
intersection.
B. All small wireless facilities shall comply with tornado design standards as
contained in the EIA-TIA 222 (latest version).
C. Any and all transmission cables and cable trays deployed horizontally above the
ground between any number of small wireless facilities and its equipment, or
between any number of small wireless facilities, or between any number of small
wireless facilities’ equipment, shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all
points.
D. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the small wireless
facility must be installed in accordance with the national electrical code, national
electrical safety code, and any other applicable code adopted by the Town Code and
in force at the time of the installation of the small wireless facility. Any wiring must
be covered with an appropriate cover. No wiring or cabling serving the facility will
be allowed to interfere with any existing uses.
E. No signage is permitted on any small wireless facility or its related equipment or
appurtenances other than signs that are required for public safety purposes, by law,
or by the FCC, FAA, or other similar governmental agency.
SEC 8.9-25 FALL ZONE; SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. In addition to any other
applicable fall zone or setback standards as set forth in this Division or in an applicable code or
law, a wireless provider shall comply with the following fall zone and set back requirements:
A. Fall Zone. No small wireless facility shall be collocated any closer to a habitable
structure or outdoor area where people congregate than its fall zone. For purposes
of this section, the fall zone shall be 110% of the height of the small wireless
SEC. 8.9-25(Cont.1)
facility, the utility pole to which it is attached, the wireless support structure to
which it is attached, or any combination or variation thereof, whichever shall
result in the largest fall zone.
B. Setback.
1. All small wireless facilities including mounts, equipment shelters, related
equipment, or appurtenances shall comply with the minimum building and
landscape/screening setback requirements of the applicable zoning district
as set forth in the Town of Normal Zoning Code; provided, however, that
the following setbacks apply to the height of the small wireless facility,
utility pole, or wireless support structure above ground level or, if such
small wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure is attached
to a building, the height from the point of attachment:
(a) No small wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure
shall be set back a distance less than its height.
(b) No small wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure
shall be set back a distance less than its height from the nearest
overhead electrical power line which serves more than one
dwelling or place of business.
SEC. 8.9-30 DISPUTE RESOLUTION. The Circuit Court of McLean County has
exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on
municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the Town shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with
rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
SEC. 8.9-35 INDEMNIFICATION. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the
Town and its officers, employees, and agents harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the Town improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges
granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or
hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence
of the Town or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that
they may have against the Town with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
SEC. 8.9-40 INSURANCE. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's
own cost and expense, the following insurance:
(i) property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks and workers;
SEC. 8.9-40(Cont.1)
(ii) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
(iii) commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Town
improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its
requirements of other users of Town improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage
for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Town as an additional insured on the commercial
general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the Town in a
commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirement required by the Town. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds
under this Section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Town
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits
required by the Town.
(Entire Division 9 added 7/16/18 by Ord. No. 5745)
SEC. 9.1
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC SERVICES
(Deleted in its entirety 5/5/86 by Ordinance No. 3617)
SEC. 10.1-1
CHAPTER 10 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1 - BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SEC. 10.1-1 ADOPTION. The Town has heretofore adopted the provisions of an Act of
the Illinois Legislature entitled "Local Improvement Procedures Restricted to Certain
Municipalities" and does now incorporate into this Code the provisions of that Act. 65 ILCS 5/9-2-
1 et seq. (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 10.1-2 ESTABLISHMENT. The Board of Local Improvements of the Town of
Normal shall be composed of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) members. (Revised
10/15/73)(Revised 5/6/74)
SEC. 10.1-3 CONFIRMATION. It is the intent of this Chapter to confirm the Board of
Local Improvements heretofore appointed and that said Board heretofore appointed shall remain as
the Board of Local Improvements until the successors to the present Board are named and qualified.
By adoption of this Chapter, said Board of Local Improvements, who are acknowledged to have
been duly appointed and confirmed by their respective Councils.
SEC. 10.1-4 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board of Local Improvements shall have all
powers conferred and all duties imposed by 65 ILCS 5/9-2-1 et seq. (Revised 3/20/72)(Amended
6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 10.2-1
DIVISION 2 - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
SEC. 10.2-1 ESTABLISHMENT. A Human Relations Commission is hereby reestablished
with the following purposes:
A. To foster and promote better understanding and relations between all persons in
Normal, Illinois, to the end that our constitutional rights and heritages may be more
fully realized by all.
B. To promote actively better conditions among all persons with respect to housing,
employment, recreation, health, and other services which enhance the quality of life.
C. To strive for community-wide coordination and cooperation using available
resources and constructive means to achieve the economic and social well-being of
all persons in the community.
D. To provide educational opportunities and advice to citizens and public officials in
their endeavors to keep peace and good order.
E. To encourage participation by various persons who share these purposes.
F. To achieve these ends by means of education, consultation, and cooperative
planning.
G. To protect the human and civil rights of all citizens and endeavor to "make whole"
those persons who are illegally wronged of their rights, as set forth in this Division.
SEC. 10.2-2 COMPOSITION. The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall make
appointments to the Human Relations Commission that reflect a diversity of backgrounds within the
community protected by this Ordinance. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, one
of whom shall be the currently serving Vice President of the Illinois State University Student
Government Association, or that person's designee; the other six of whom shall be appointed for
four-year terms in the manner provided in SEC. 10.6-1 of this Code, provided, however, two of the
initial six appointments shall be appointed for two-year terms, two for three-year terms, and two for
four-year terms. The Commission shall elect its own officers. The City Manager of the Town of
Normal shall appoint a member of the Town's professional staff to serve as staff liaison to the
Commission and to assist the Commission as deemed appropriate in consultation with the City
Manager. (Amended 9/7/93 by Ord. No. 4166)(Amended 11/20/06 by Ord. No. 5099)
SEC. 10.2-3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Commission shall discharge the
duties and responsibilities found in this Division and Chapter 24 of the Town of Normal Municipal
Code. In addition to these and any other duties and responsibilities which are presently or will be
legally prescribed for the Commission, the Commission will undertake such activities that will
promote the purposes set forth in SEC. 10.2-1, including the adoption of rules of procedures,
regulations or bylaws deemed necessary to conduct its meetings, public hearings, and general
operations, in order to carry out the purposes or provisions of this Ordinance. (Amended 12/6/99 by
Ord. No. 4636)
SEC. 10.2-4
SEC. 10.2-4 MEETINGS. All meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, or
Vice-Chairman in the absence of the Chairperson. The Commission shall hold eight, regularly
scheduled meetings each year. Additional meetings will be held at such times as the Commission
shall determine. At its September meeting, the Commission shall elect officers and determine the
time, dates and place of its regularly scheduled meetings. The place of meeting shall be an
accessible environment. All meetings of the Commission will be open to the public and a notice of
the meeting time and place will be posted in compliance with the "open meetings" laws. With
permission of the Chairperson, persons who are not currently serving on the Commission may
address the Commission or may engage in the deliberations of the meeting. (Amended 2/5/07 by
Ord. No. 5115)
SEC. 10.2-5 (Deleted 4/5/99 by Ord. No. 4586)
SEC. 10.2-6 (Deleted 4/5/99 by Ord. No. 4586)
SEC. 10.2-7 (Deleted 4/5/99 by Ord. No. 4586)
SEC. 10.2-8 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause
of this Division is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect any remaining portion, section or part thereof.
(Entire Division 2 of Chapter 10 Revised 8/7/1989)
(Entire Division 2 of Chapter 10 Revised 12/5/1994 by Ord. No. 4275)
SEC. 10.3-1
DIVISION 3 - PLAN COMMISSION
SEC. 10.3-1 CREATION. There is hereby re-established the Plan Commission heretofore
appointed and its members for their respective terms and with their respective duties.
SEC. 10.3-2 COMPOSITION. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members who shall be residents of the Town of Normal. All members shall have the power to vote.
(Revised 5/6/74)
SEC. 10.3-3 TERMS. Members shall be appointed for a period of four (4) years, with
terms of two members expiring April 1st of each year, except for the year in which only one
member's term expires. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for unexpired terms and shall be
made in the same manner as original appointments. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation. All members of the Commission holding office at the time of the adoption
of this Ordinance shall continue to hold office until the expiration of their present respective terms.
(Revised 4/1/74)
SEC. 10.3-4 REPORTS. Said Commission annually shall elect its chairman, vicechairman
and such other officers as may in its judgment be necessary from among its own
membership, except that a secretary may be appointed who need not be a member of the
Commission.
Said Commission shall adopt and later change or alter rules or regulations of the
organization and procedure consistent with the Ordinances of the Town of Normal and the laws of
the State of Illinois. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which records
shall at all times be open to public inspection. The Commission shall also file an Annual Report
with the Mayor and Town Council in the month of March in each year, commencing with 1969,
setting forth its transactions and recommendations and shall also give such other reports at interim
periods as the said Commission deems advisable for the benefit of the Mayor and Town Council.
SEC. 10.3-5 DUTIES. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To prepare and recommend to the Council of the Town of Normal a comprehensive
plan of public improvements, looking to the present and future development and
growth of said Town. Such a plan, after its adoption by the Town Council, shall be
known as the Official Plan of the Town of Normal.
Such Plan shall include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys and
public grounds in unsubdivided lands situated within the corporate limits or in
contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate
limits and not included in any other municipality; these requirements shall be
effective whenever this unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of the
Official Plan.
B. To prepare and recommend to the Town Council of the Town of Normal, from time
to time, such changes, additions or deletions in the Plan, or any part thereof, as may
be deemed necessary by either the Town Council or by the Plan Commission.
SEC. 10.3-5
C. To prepare and recommend to the Town Council from time to time, plans and/or
recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such Official Plan of
said Town.
D. To give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction of projects for
improvements embraced within the Official Plan, to further the making of these
projects, and generally to promote the realization of the Official Plan.
E. To arrange and conduct some form of publicity relative to its activities for the
general purpose of public understanding. To establish a liaison committee with the
Plan Commission and to cooperate with all municipal and regional planning
commissions or agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
insure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
F. To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees concerning revisions in
ordinances pertaining to subdivision revisions, zoning and building codes and other
ordinances which in any way affect or pertain to planning or the general Town Plan
as heretofore adopted.
G. To review all proposed plats, after required notice to all interested parties, for new
subdivisions or resubdivisions of land within the corporate limits or within a one and
one-half mile radius of the corporate limits, and make recommendations thereon to
the Board of Trustees or Town Council of said Town of Normal.
H. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by statute to said duly
adopted Plan Commission as herein established by the Town of Normal according to
the Laws of the State of Illinois.
SEC. 10.3-6 MAPS AND PLATS. No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record
affecting land within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal or in contiguous territory outside
of and not more distant than one and one-half miles from the limits of the Town and not included in
any other municipality shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon
shall provide for streets and public grounds in conformity with any requirement applicable thereto
of such Official Plan, unless specifically waived at the discretion of the Town Council.
SEC. 10.3-7 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such times as the Plan Commission may determine. (Amended
11/5/73)(Amended 4/20/87)
SEC. 10.4-1
DIVISION 4 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC. 10.4-1 CREATION. The Zoning Board of Appeals heretofore constituted is hereby
re-established and shall operate in accordance with the powers and duties prescribed in the 65 ILCS
5/11-13-1 et seq. as it now stands or as hereafter amended. (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 10.4-2 MEMBERS. (Deleted 5/6/74 by Ord. No.1236)
SEC. 10.4-3 DUTIES. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have, in addition to those duties
assigned to it by Statutes of the State of Illinois, all those duties specifically given and granted to it
by the Zoning Ordinances of the Town of Normal and in particular those duties set forth in Chapter
15 of this Code.
SEC. 10.5
DIVISION 5
(Entire Division 5 Deleted 7/19/76 by Ord. No.1518)
SEC. 10.6-1
DIVISION 6 - APPOINTMENT AND RECALL
SEC. 10.6-1 APPOINTMENT PROCEDURE. Unless law or ordinance requires the
election of members of Boards, Commissions or Committees of the Town, all members thereof
shall be appointed, such appointments henceforth to be made as provided herein. All appointed
members of Boards, Commissions or Committees of the Town of Normal shall henceforth be
appointed by the President with the approval of the Board of Trustees, provided, however, where
law or ordinance requires the appointment of persons with particular qualifications or credentials,
only persons possessing those qualifications or credentials shall be appointed or approved.
SEC. 10.6-2 RECALL. The term of any appointed member of any Board, Commission or
Committee of the Town of Normal may be terminated prior to the end of the stated term, for cause,
in the following manner:
Pursuant to the vote of not less than 2/3 of the Board of Trustees, including the Mayor, after
the filing of a written complaint, and only after a hearing, either public or private, has been
held wherein said member was given an opportunity to be heard individually or by counsel
or both, said hearing to be held only after notice of the time and place thereof and of the
alleged cause or causes for said termination having been given to said member.
SEC. 10.6-3 CAUSE. Cause for recall or termination as provided for in SEC. 10.6-2 shall
include but shall not be limited to the following:
A. Three unexcused absences from regular meetings within a calendar year; (Amended
2/1/82)
B. Frequent unexcused tardiness in attending regular meetings;
C. Conduct unbecoming to a person holding a position of responsibility for the Town;
D. Election or appointment to any other similar political Board, Commission or
political office by any other municipal corporation or governmental entity;
E. A judicial finding of incompetency;
F. Conviction of a felony.
(Entire Division 6 revised 5/6/74)(Revised 5/7/07 by Ord. No. 5133)
SEC. 10.7-1
DIVISION 7 - RESERVED
SEC. 10.8-1
DIVISION 8 - BLOOMINGTON-NORMAL SISTER CITY COMMITTEE
SEC. 10.8-1 CREATION. There is hereby created a Bloomington-Normal Sister City
Committee which shall function as outlined in this Section.
SEC. 10.8-2 PURPOSE. The purpose of the Bloomington-Normal Sister City Committee
shall be to further international relations and good will between the Bloomington-Normal
community and Asahikawa, Hokkaido, Japan, pursuant to the People to People Program instituted
by the U.S. State Department.
SEC. 10.8-3 MEMBERSHIP. The Sister City Committee shall consist of twenty (20)
members, ten (10) of which shall be nominated by the Mayor of the City of Bloomington with the
advice and consent of the City Council; ten (10) of which are to be nominated by the Mayor of the
Town of Normal with the advice and consent of the Normal Town Council. Each member shall
serve a term of three (3) years and is not limited as to number of terms. Terms of office shall expire
on a staggered basis so that the terms of approximately one-third (1/3) of the officers shall expire
each year. Members whose terms have expired shall remain in office until a successor has been
duly appointed by the appropriate body. (Amended 4/17/89)
SEC. 10.8-4 OFFICERS - POWERS AND DUTIES. The Sister City Committee shall
have such officers as may be provided for in its by-laws with such powers and duties as may be
prescribed in those by-laws provided that no such powers and duties may be exercised in a manner
inconsistent with the laws of the United States or State of Illinois or the ordinances of the City of
Bloomington or the Town of Normal.
SEC. 10.8-5 FINANCING. The Sister City Committee shall be responsible for preparing
an annual budget for its operations to be submitted to the City Council annually. Its operations shall
be conducted with such funds as are provided in the budget or otherwise appropriated annually plus
any funds received in the form of donations, reimbursements, or other admission or other charges
provided for by the Committee. In obtaining approved of expenditures, the Committee shall follow
procedures prescribed by the Director of Finance. Otherwise its finances shall be as prescribed in
its by-laws.
SEC. 10.8-6 MEETINGS. The Committee shall meet in the manner prescribed in its bylaw
subject to the requirements of the Open Meetings law.
(Sections 1 Through 6 of Division 8 Added 1/17/83)
SEC. 10.8-7 INUREMENT OF INCOME. No part of the net earnings of the Committee
shall inure to the benefit, or be distributable to, its members, trustees, officers, or other private
persons except that the Committee shall be authorized and empowered to pay reasonable
compensation for services rendered in the standard manner in which expenditures are approved and
paid. (Added 7/16/84)
SEC. 10.8-8 LEGISLATIVE OR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES. No substantial part of
the activities of the Committee shall be the carrying on or propaganda or otherwise attempting to
influence legislation and the Committee shall not participate in or intervene in (including the
SEC. 10.8-8
publishing or distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for
public office. (Added 7/16/84)
SEC. 10.8-9 OPERATIONAL LIMITATIONS. Notwithstanding any other Section of
this Division, the Committee shall not carry on any other activity not permitted to be carried on:
A. By an organization exempt from Federal Income Tax under Sec. 501(C)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Act of 1954 (or the corresponding provisions of any future United
States Internal Revenue Law); or
B. By an organization, contributions to which are deductible under Sec. 170(c)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or the corresponding provisions of any future
United States Internal Revenue Law). (Added 7/16/84)
SEC. 10.8-10 DISSOLUTION CLAUSE. Upon the dissolution of the Committee, the
officers shall, after paying or making provisions for the payment of all of the liabilities of the
Committee, dispose of all the assets of the Committee exclusively for the purposes of the
Committee in such manner, or to such organization or organizations organized and operated
exclusively for charitable, educational, religious, or scientific purposes, including the lessening of
the burdens of government, as shall at the time qualify as an exempt organization or organizations
under Sec. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or the corresponding provision of any
future United States Internal Revenue Law), as the Committee shall determine. Any such assets not
so disposed of shall be disposed of by the Circuit Court of the County in which the principal office
of the Committee is then located, exclusively for such purposes or to such organization or
organizations, as said Court shall determine, which are organized and operated exclusively for the
purposes set forth herein. (Added 7/16/84)
SEC. 10.9-1
DIVISION 9 - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SEC. 10.9-1 BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION. The Board of Fire and
Police Commission was abolished by Ordinance No. 4946 and all authority to make employment
decisions regarding members of the Police and Fire Departments of the Town of Normal was
delegated to the City Manager, including, but not limited to, the power to select, appoint, discipline
and remove. Effective January 1, 2012, certain minimum standards were established by the Illinois
legislature for original appointments to the Fire Department in Illinois municipalities (Public Act
97-0251 amending Sections 10-2.1-6.3 and 10-2.1-6.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code). In order to
comply with the minimum standards established in Public Act 97-0251, the City Manager is hereby
appointed and deemed to constitute the Town of Normal Board of Fire and Police Commission for
the limited purpose of issuing Certificates of Original Appointment to the position of firefighter in
the Town of Normal Fire Department in conformance with the minimum standards established in 65
ILCS 10-2.1-6.3 or 65 ILCS 10-2.1-6.4 and other more stringent standards, if any, established by
the City Manager.
SEC. 10.9-2 COORDINATION OF DIVISION 2.1 OF ARTICLE 10 OF THE
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE AND THIS DIVISION. None of the provisions of Division 2.1
of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.) shall apply to or limit the
authority of the City Manager to make any and all employment decisions concerning the Normal
Fire and Police Departments. It is the intent of this Section to grant to the City Manager any and all
authority to make any and all decisions regarding employment and management of the Normal
Police and Fire Departments. As used herein employment includes, but is not limited to, selection
and appointment of persons as police officers and firefighters regardless of rank, and discipline and
removal of police officers and firefighters regardless of rank, provided, however, the foregoing
authority shall be limited to the extent the home rule authority of the Town of Normal is preempted
by State legislation and is further subject to any applicable codes and ordinances of the Town.
None of the statutory provisions of Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code
shall apply to the Board of Fire and Police Commission as constituted by this Division or to the City
Manager acting as the Board of Fire and Police Commission, except with regard to the minimum
standards set forth in said Division 2.1 for original appointments to the office of firefighter.
(Entire Section 10.9 was added 3/19/2012 by Ord. No. 5433)
SEC. 10.10-1
DIVISION 10
(Division 10 Deleted in its entirety 2/5/07 by Ord. No. 5115)
SEC. 10.11-1
DIVISION 11 - THEATER ADVISORY BOARD
SEC. 10-11.1 CREATION. There is hereby established the Theater Advisory Board of and
for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 10-11.2 COMPOSITION. The Theater Advisory Board shall be composed of seven
(7) members who shall be residents of McLean County.
SEC. 10.11-3 APPOINTMENT. Members of the Theater Advisory Board shall be
appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees with the advise and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
SEC. 10.11-4 TERM. Members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, two (2) of the initial appointments shall be for one (1) year, two (2)
of the initial appointments shall be for two (2) years, and three (3) of the initial appointments shall
be for three (3) years. All members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed and
approved. One (1) of the members shall be nominated by the President of the Uptown Normal
Business Association from among the Association's membership. All other vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as other appointments. All members of the Board shall
serve without compensation. A chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by the Board
from among its members for a term of one (1) year.
SEC. 10.11-5 PURPOSE. The Theater Advisory Board shall serve an advisory function to
the President and Board of Trustees concerning issues affecting use and operation of the Normal
Theater. The Board shall assist in creating and suggesting solutions to issues affecting the Normal
Theater. The Board shall also be responsible for providing input and feedback to Town government
on various Theater use and operation policies of the Town. The Board shall formulate and oversee
fundraising for the Normal Theater.
SEC. 10.11-6 POWERS. The Board shall have all of the authority necessary to carry out
its purposes but shall have no authority to expend funds except as approved by the corporate
authorities of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 10.11-7 DUTIES. The Board shall meet upon the call of the Chairperson and shall
hold four (4) regularly scheduled meetings each year. The Board may meet more often upon the
call of the Chairperson. All meetings will be open to the public and all requirements of the "open
meetings" law of the State of Illinois shall be complied with. The Board shall provide the President
and Board of Trustees with a quarterly report of its activities, concerns, and ideas. The Board shall
develop by-laws to govern its actions.
SEC. 10.11-8 STAFF. The Board may utilize the services of the Town staff to the extent
authorized by the Municipal Manager.
(Entire Division 11 of Chapter 10 Added 4/5/93 by Ord. 4126)
SEC. 10.12-1
DIVISION 12 - UPTOWN DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION
SEC. 10.12-1 CREATION. There is hereby established the Uptown Design Review
Commission for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 10.12-2 COMPOSITION. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members;
two (2) of whom shall have a background in design, including formal training or practical
experience in architecture or landscape design. Members of the Commission need not be
residents of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 10.12-3 APPOINTMENT. Members of the Uptown Design Review Commission
shall be appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
SEC. 10.12-4 TERM. Members shall be appointed from terms of three (3) years,
notwithstanding the foregoing, three (3) of the initial appointments shall be for one (1) year,
three (3) of the initial appointments shall be for two (2) years and one (1) of the initial
appointments shall be for three (3) years. All members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and approved. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as other appointments. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. A Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be elected from among its
membership for a one (1) year term.
SEC. 10.12.5 PURPOSE. The Uptown Design Review Commission is established for
the purpose of applying the design guidelines applicable in the B2 Central Business District in a
manner that will foster and promote high quality, attractive development and rehabilitation of
structures within the District.
SEC. 10.12-6 POWERS. The Uptown Design Review Commission shall have all of the
authority necessary to carry out its purposes, but it shall have no authority to expend funds
except as approved by the corporate authorities of the Town of Normal. In the event that a
conflict of interest arises during the exercise of the commission’s authority over the expenditure
of funds, such conflict shall be resolved in the following manner: The issue causing the conflict
shall not go before the commission for a formal decision. Instead, the issue shall be considered
directly by the Town Council, which will issue a final decision. Prior to the Council’s decision,
the Uptown Design Review Commission may consider the issue and forward a recommendation
on to the Council. The commissioner with the conflict shall recuse him or herself from this
discussion and recommendation. (Amended 8/18/03 by Ord. No. 4883)
SEC. 10.12-7 JURISDICTION. The Uptown Design Review Commission shall have
jurisdiction as follows:
A. To conduct Administrative Public Hearings, make findings of fact and decide
duly initiated completed applications for Certificates of Compliance under the
guidelines set forth in Division 17 of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code Town of
Normal, 1969, as amended.
SEC. 10.12-7
B. To recommend to the President and Board of Trustees amendments to Division 17
of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended.
C. To undertake any other activity referred to the Commission by the President and
Board of Trustees for the Town of Normal.
D. To undertake such other activities that will promote the purposes set forth in
Division 17 of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969,
as amended.
E. To adopt rules of procedure, regulations or bylaws deemed necessary to conduct
its meetings, public hearings and general operations in order to carry out its
purposes.
F. To keep written records of its proceedings and report at least annually to the
President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
(Entire Division 12 Added 3/18/02 by Ord. No. 4784)(Entire Division 12 Amended 4/15/02 by
Ord. No. 4787)
SEC. 10.13-1
DIVISION 13
(Division 13 of Chapter 10 Deleted 2/5/07 by Ord. No. 5115)
SEC. 11.1-1
CHAPTER 11 - BUILDING CODE
DIVISION 1 - BUILDING COMMISSIONER
SEC. 11.1-1 BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT.
A. Establishment. There has heretofore been established and is hereby continued, a
Building Inspection Department of and for the Town of Normal.
B. Duties and Responsibilities. The Building Inspection Department shall, among
other duties as authorized, apply, interpret and enforce the Building, Residential,
Existing Building, Fire, Plumbing, Electrical, Energy, Mechanical, Fuel Gas and
Property Maintenance Codes of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 11.1-2 POSITION OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
A. Establishment. There has heretofore been established and is hereby continued, the
Town of Normal employment position of Building Commissioner.
B. Supervision. The Building Commissioner shall be hired by and shall be under the
supervision of the City Manager, as provided in the Town's Personnel Code.
C. Assistants. The Building Commissioner may be assisted by other employees in the
Building Inspection Department, including but not limited to, those individuals
holding the employment positions of Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector,
Electrical Inspector, HVAC Inspector, Housing Inspector and such other personnel
as may be authorized by the Town Council and assigned by the City Manager.
Employees in and personnel assigned to the Building Inspection Department, at the
direction of the Building Commissioner, may exercise any power and perform any
duty, function or responsibility of the Building Commissioner.
SEC. 11.1-3 QUALIFICATIONS. No person shall be hired as Building Commissioner
who has not had experience as an architect, structural engineer, building inspector or superintendent
of building construction.
SEC. 11.1-4 DUTIES. The Building Commissioner shall have the following duties,
functions and responsibilities:
A. To be and perform the duties of the "Code Official" as that term is used in the
various International Code Council codes adopted by the Town of Normal.
B. To perform the duties, functions and responsibilities specified in the current job
description of the Town of Normal employment position “Building Commissioner”,
which job description is approved from time to time by the Town Council as part of
SEC. 11.1-4(Cont.1)
the Town’s Salary Administration Program.
C. To supervise, direct and assign employees in and personnel assigned to the Building
Inspection Department.
SEC. 11.1-5 RECORDS. All records and reports of the Building Inspection Department
shall be open to the public during regular office hours but shall not be removed from that office
without the written consent of the Building Commissioner or his designee.
SEC. 11.1-6 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Each employee in or person assigned to the Building
Inspection Department, in the discharge of his or her official duties and upon proper identification,
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premise at any reasonable hour and as
permitted by the United States Constitution.
SEC. 11.2-1
DIVISION 2 – BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC. 11.2-1 CREATION, COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND TERM. There is
hereby created a Building Board of Appeals consisting of fifteen members. The members of the
Board shall be individuals who are qualified by experience and training to decide upon matters
pertaining to building construction and shall have the specific qualifications of each discipline set
forth in this Section. Three members shall represent each of the following disciplines:
A. Design Professional. The Design Professional representative must be a licensed
architect, licensed structural engineer, or an individual with a minimum of a
Master’s Degree in Construction Technology or similar field.
B. General Construction. The General Construction representative must be a contractor
with a minimum of five years’ experience in general construction or an individual
with a minimum of a Master’s Degree in Construction Technology or related field.
C. Mechanical Construction. The Mechanical Construction representative must be a
licensed mechanical engineer or a licensed HVAC contractor with a minimum of
five years’ experience in HVAC installation and maintenance.
D. Electrical Construction. The Electrical Construction representative must be a
licensed electrical engineer or a licensed electrical contractor with a minimum of
five years’ experience in electrical installation and maintenance.
E. Plumbing Construction. The Plumbing Construction representative must be a
licensed plumber with a minimum of five years’ plumbing experience or an
individual with a minimum of a Bachelor’s Degree in environmental science.
The President of the Board of Trustees with the consent of the Board of Trustees shall make
appointments to the Building Board of Appeals. The initial board shall consist of representatives in
each category serving either a two, three, or a four-year term. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of four (4) years and shall serve until their successors are appointed and duly
qualified. The Board shall designate one of its members to serve as Chairperson. The Chairperson
shall serve a one (1) year term and may be reappointed. The Building Commissioner of the Town
of Normal shall serve as an advisor to the Board and may act as its Secretary. Vacancies among
Board members shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.
SEC. 11.2-2 FUNCTIONS. The Building Board of Appeals shall have the following
functions:
A. To hear and decide all appeals from rulings or determinations of the Building
Commissioner under this Chapter and to hear and decide all appeals from rulings or
determinations of the Chief Fire Inspector under the Fire Prevention Code (Chapter
6 of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, Illinois, as amended). In any appeal
stemming from a particular discipline, two representatives of that discipline must
SEC. 11.2-2(Cont.1)
attend and participate in any hearing and deliberation of the case unless such
participation would be prohibited by law.
B. To serve as the “Board of Appeals” as that term is used in the various International
construction and property maintenance codes adopted by the Town of Normal.
C. To recommend to the Town Council reasonable rules and regulations governing the
issuance of permits by the Building Commissioner under this Chapter.
D. To recommend to the Town Council reasonable fees to be paid for the inspections
performed by the personnel of the Building Inspection Department of the Town of
Normal under this Chapter.
E. To perform such other duties as may be given or assigned by the Town Council.
F. The Building Board of Appeals, in concurrence with the Building Commissioner,
shall have the authority to provide for experimental programs or pilot studies,
including studies which would allow for the installation of materials or methods
which are otherwise prohibited by Town ordinance. In determining whether to
approve such studies or pilot programs, the Building Board shall consider the health
and safety of the residents of the Town of Normal, the likely future use of the
product or method sought to be used, and the expected benefit of the intended
material or method. Any program or study approved shall be limited in duration and
scope such that a reasonable assessment can be made of the material or method. The
Building Commissioner shall report regularly to the Building Board of Appeals on
the effectiveness of such material or method approved for a pilot program or study.
SEC. 11.2-3 QUORUM. Five (5) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. All
decisions shall require an affirmative vote of a simple majority of the Board members present. No
member of the Board shall consider or vote on any question in which he, or any corporation in
which he is a shareholder, is financially interested to an extent greater than other persons, firms or
corporations performing or in business to perform comparable work.
SEC. 11.2-4 MEETINGS AND RECORDS. Meetings of the Board shall be held annually
and at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings
before the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member on every question. If a member is absent or fails to vote, the
minutes shall so indicate. The Board shall also keep records of its other official actions. Such
minutes and such records shall be public records.
SEC. 11.2-5 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
A. Application for Appeal. Any application for appeal shall be made within ten (10)
days from the date of the decision appealed from, by filing with the Building
Commissioner a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The
SEC. 11.2-5(Cont.1)
Building Commissioner shall transmit to the Board of Appeals the Notice of Appeal
and all papers or documents on which the matter appealed from was based.
B. Decision of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall in every case reach a
decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision of the Board
shall be in writing and shall promptly be filed in the office of the Building
Commissioner and served either by personal delivery or regular mail on the party
initiating the appeal. If a decision of the Board of Appeals reverses or modifies a
decision of the Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner shall take
action immediately in accordance with such decision. The decision of the Board
shall be final, subject only to judicial review.
SEC. 11.2-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Board may establish rules and
regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 11.3-1
DIVISION 3 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 11.3-1 SCOPE. The provisions of this Chapter shall control the design and
installation of all building construction within the Town of Normal, including but not limited to, the
erection, construction, maintenance, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, moving, shoring,
removal, demolition and conversion of occupancy of buildings, structures, property and portions
thereof, and the maintenance and installation of plumbing equipment, heating equipment, boilers,
elevators and electrical wiring and appliances, including mechanical ventilation and natural lighting
fixtures located therein.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any building construction
regulated by this Chapter in any way other than that authorized by this Chapter and the technical
codes as adopted and modified hereby.
The requirements contained in this Chapter covering the maintenance of buildings and
property shall apply to all property, buildings or structures now existing or hereafter erected. All
property, buildings or structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe condition and all
devices or safeguards which are required by this Chapter during the construction, alteration or repair
of any building shall be maintained in good working order.
This Chapter shall not be construed as permitting the removal or non-maintenance of any
previously authorized or required device or safeguards unless such removal or non-maintenance is
authorized in writing by the Building Commissioner.
SEC. 11.3-2 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to exempt any person, firm or corporation from liability now existing or that may in the
future arise to the Town of Normal or any other person, firm or corporation for damage from
negligence or from defective construction relating to the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy, or maintenance of any building or structure or the
service equipment located therein, within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal or on Town
property outside the corporate limits, nor to release any person, firm or corporation from any
franchise restrictions, nor shall the Town be held to assume any liability by reason of the inspections
authorized herein or certificates or permits issued hereunder or from failure of the Building Official
or member of the Building Inspection Department to perform his or her duties hereunder.
SEC. 11.3-3 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS OF CODES OF THE TOWN. In any case
where a provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any Zoning, Fire, Safety or Health
provision of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal existing on the effective date of this
Chapter or which hereafter may exist, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people of the Town shall prevail. In any
case where any other Code provisions of the Town establishes a lower standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the Town’s people, the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed to prevail.
SEC. 11.3-4
SEC. 11.3-4 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town
Council of the Town of Normal, Illinois, that the several provisions of this Chapter are severable in
accordance with the following:
A. If any Court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any provision of this Chapter to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not
specifically included in such judgment order.
B. If any Court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Chapter to a particular property, building or structure, such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,
building or structure not specifically included in such judgment order.
SEC. 11.3-5 PENALTIES. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the investigation or enforcement of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any of the Codes adopted and modified hereby, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars nor
more than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for the first offense and not less than Fifty ($50.00)
Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the second and each subsequent offense
in any 180 day period. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day
upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such violation to exist after
notification or knowledge of the existence thereof.
SEC.11.3-6 LEGAL ACTION AND ADOPTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
PROCEDURE. The Building Commissioner is authorized to bring any action at law or equity to
seek compliance with this Chapter or to seek fines for the violation of any provision. Any violation
of any provision of this Chapter may also be processed through the Administrative Adjudication
System adopted by the Town of Normal. The adoption and establishment of the Administrative
Adjudication System does not preclude the Town from using other lawful methods to enforce the
provisions of the Municipal Code including filing actions to assess and collect fines due the Town,
and actions seeking injunctive or other equitable relief in McLean County Circuit Court or any other
court with jurisdiction over the subject matters or parties.
SEC. 11.4-1
DIVISION 4 – ADOPTION OF CODES
SEC. 11.4-1 ADOPTION OF APPLICABLE CODES. The following Codes are adopted
by the Town of Normal. Not less than one copy of any Code adopted by this Division with the
specified additions, deletions, insertions, modifications, and amendments shall be filed and kept at
the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Normal.
A. Adoption of the International Building Code 2015 with Amendments. There is
hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules,
standards, regulations and procedures for the location, construction, maintenance,
alteration, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings and structures and
the service equipment located within such buildings or structures, a Building Code
known as the International Building Code 2015, published by International Code
Council, with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and
amendments as set forth in this Chapter, which said Code as so amended is
hereinafter referred to as the “IBC.” The provisions of said Code are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length and the provisions thereof as
added, deleted, inserted, modified and amended by this Chapter shall be controlling
in regard to all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the Town.
Amendments to the Building Code. The International Building Code, 2015, is
amended as follows:
1. Insert the phrase “Town of Normal, Illinois” in all locations in the IBC
where parenthetical reference is made to the “name of jurisdiction”.
2. Section 101.2 - Scope. Add the Phrase “in zero lot-line construction,” before
the words “multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress.”
3. Section 101.4.3 - Plumbing. Substitute the word “Town’s” for the word
“International” in the first sentence and delete the second sentence.
4. Delete Section 102.4, 102.4.1, and 102.4.2 and substitute the following:
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of
the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and other adopted
codes and standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
5. Delete Section 103 - Department of Building Safety and insert in lieu thereof
the following:
Section 103.0 - Department of Building Safety
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.1)
Section 103.1 - Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection
Department of the Town of Normal shall be the “Department of Building
Safety” as that term is used in this Code.
Section 103.2 - Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of the
Town of Normal shall be the “Building Official” as that term is used in this
Code.
Section 103.3 - Restriction of Employees. The Building Official or
employee connected with the Department of Building Inspection except one
whose only connection is that of a member of the Board of Appeals
established under the provisions of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in or
directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the preparation of plans or the specifications therefore, unless
he is the owner of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in
any work which conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the
Department.
6. Delete Sections 104.8 and 104.8.1.
7. Add a new sentence at the beginning of Section 105.5 - Expiration as
follows:
Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid 180 days after issuance
or a later date if a later date is indicated on the permit by the building
official.
8. Add the following Section 105.8 - Additional Permit Requirements:
Section 105.8 - Miscellaneous Permit Requirements: No building permit
shall issue until the following conditions are met:
a. Storm Water Storage. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall
be issued a building permit under this Chapter unless and until all
applicable requirements are met as set forth in Chapter 7, Division 31
of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, 1969, as amended.
b. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall be issued a building
permit under this Chapter unless and until a Bloomington-Normal
Water Reclamation District connection permit has been obtained for
the proposed construction. This subsection shall not apply to
building permits issued solely for the alteration, repair, shoring, or
maintenance of existing buildings or structures.
c. No person, firm, corporation, agency, partnership or other entity shall
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.2)
undertake or cause to be undertaken any type of alteration to the
exterior of any property designed a historical landmark by the Town
of Normal or any property located within an area designated as a
historical district by the Town of Normal without first submitting
plans and obtaining from the Town a building permit for such
alteration. As used herein, the term alteration means any type of
modification or repair including but not limited to maintenance,
shoring, repair work, alteration, additions, rejuvenations,
rehabilitations, remodeling, or any other action which changes in any
manner the existing physical appearance of such property, except for
painting. In addition to the general penalties set forth in this Chapter,
any violation of the foregoing shall be subject to the following: (a)
Equitable relief as provided by law; or (b) A fine in any amount no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded each day upon which
said violation shall continue after knowledge or notification of the
existence thereof to or by the violator.
9. Section 107.5 - Retention of Construction Documents. Delete this Section.
10. Add at the end of Section 109.2 - Schedule of Permit Fees the following:
a. General. The fee for a permit shall be based upon the reasonable
cost of the improvements, including material and labor in accordance
with the fee schedule of sub-section (b) of this Section. Estimated
cost shall include all cost of labor and material given a fair market
value. In the absence of a bona fide contract establishing the
estimated costs, the values for arriving at the fee for a permit shall be
established by the Code Official upon the basis of area and type of
construction.
If any person initiates construction without first taking out a permit,
such person shall pay, in addition to the regular fees prescribed for
permits, an additional amount equal to one hundred per cent (100%)
of the fee required, and may be subject to all penalty provisions of
this Chapter.
b. Fee Schedule. Fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 25 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
11. Add to the existing language of Section 111.3 - Temporary Occupancy, the
following:
Temporary use or occupancy may be granted by the Code Official for a
maximum duration of one (1) month from the date of issuance. Such
occupancy may be further extended only by approval of the City Manager,
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.3)
subject to a favorable safety inspection by the Building Inspection
Department.
12. Add to the existing language of Section 112.1 - Connection of Service
Utilities the following:
No utility meters shall be placed on the street side(s) of any commercial or
multiple-family building.
13. Delete the existing language of Section 113 - Board of Appeals and
substitute therefore the following:
Section 113 - General. Decisions of the Building Official may be appealed
to the Building Board of Appeals pursuant to SEC. 11.2-5 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal except no appeal may be filed after the Town
has initiated legal or administrative proceedings seeking compliance with
this Code or penalties for violation of this Code.
14. Delete Section 114.3 - Prosecution of Violation and substitute therefore the
following:
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Building Official
may cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or
with the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of an unlawful occupancy of the structure. The Town may take
action to abate any violation, and any costs incurred in abating such
violations may be charged against the real estate upon which such abatement
occurs and shall be a lien upon such property.
15. Delete the existing language of Section 114.4 - Violation Penalties, and
insert in lieu thereof, the following:
Section 114.4 - Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
of the Codes as adopted and modified hereby may be subject to the penalties
prescribed in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, 1969, as amended.
16. Add to Section 1027.1 - Exterior Exit Stairways and Ramps, as follows:
No exterior stairways shall be placed or construed on the street side(s) of
commercial or multi-family buildings.
17. Add to Table 1607.1 Balconies (exterior) and Decks. Section 5 – Hotels
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.4)
and Multiple-Family Dwellings – 100.
18. Delete the existing language of Section 2901.1 – Scope, and substitute in lieu
thereof, the following:
Section 2901.1 – Scope. The design and installation of plumbing systems,
including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and
storm water and sewage disposal in buildings and structures, shall comply
with the requirements of this Article, and the requirements of the Plumbing
Code of the Town of Normal.
19. Add Section 3001.5, as follows:
Section 3001.5 Each elevator must comply with all state laws, including
required inspections, and must display any certificate of inspection. A copy
of proof of compliance with the state statute must be sent to the Building
Official upon the demand of the Building Official.
B. Adoption of the International Residential Code 2015 with Amendments. There is
hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use of maintenance of building
systems in residential buildings thereto, a building code known as the International
Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, as
amended thereto with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications, and
amendments, as set forth in this Chapter which said Code as so amended is
hereinafter referred to as the “International Residential Code.” The provisions of
said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length and the
provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and amended by this Chapter
shall be controlling in regard to all matters pertaining to the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use of or maintenance of building systems in residential
buildings thereto. Amendments to the International Residential Code. The
International Residential Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. In Section 101.2 - Delete the exceptions and insert the phrase “in zero lotline
construction” before the words:
“townhouses not more than three stories above grade plan in height with a
separate means of egress and their accessory ...”
2. Delete Sections 102.4 inclusive of the exception, 102.4.1, and 102.4.2 and
substitute the following:
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of
the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.5)
Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and other adopted
codes and standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
3. Delete Section 103 - Department of Building Safety and insert in lieu
therefore, the following:
Section 103.0 - Department of Building Safety
Section 103.1 - Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection
Department of the Town of Normal shall be the “Department of Building
Safety” as that term is used in this Code.
Section 103.2 - Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of the
Town of Normal shall be the “Building Official” as that term is used in this
Code.
Section 103.3 - Restriction of Employees. The Building Official or
employee connected with the Department of Building Inspection except one
whose only connection is that of a member of the Board of Appeals
established under the provision of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in or
directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the preparation of plans or the specifications therefore, unless
he is the owner of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in
any work which conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the
Department.
4. Section 104.6 - Right of Entry. Delete this entire section and substitute
therefore the following: The Code Official of his designee is authorized to
enter the structure or premises to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions
on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained,
the Code Official is authorized to seek a search warrant as authorized by law.
5. Section 105.2 - Work Exempt from Permit. In section Building 1, delete the
phrase “200 square feet (18.8 m2) and substitute therefore 144 square feet”.
In section Building 2, substitute ‘6 feet’ for ‘7 feet.’ Delete section Building
10.
6. Add at the beginning of Section 105.5 - Expiration as follows:
Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid 180 days after the
issuance or a later date if a later date is indicated on the permit by the
building official. A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for a
one-time ninety (90) day extension provided the permittee can show good
and satisfactory reasons that the work cannot be completed within the initial
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.6)
one hundred eighty (180) day period. No additional fee is required for a onetime
extension.
7. Section 105.8 - Responsibility. Add at the end of the Section the following:
Condition of Permits: A construction permit issued pursuant to the
Residential Code does not permit a person to perform electrical, plumbing,
or other mechanical work. All construction work performed in the Town of
Normal shall be performed in accordance with all plans and specifications
submitted to the Town of Normal for the issuance of a permit. It shall be
unlawful for any person to perform construction in a manner not consistent
with the permit issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform
construction work for which a permit is required without a permit. It shall be
unlawful for any person to perform construction work after a stop work order
has been issued. All framing, mechanical, plumbing, and electrical work
must be inspected before being covered. It is the responsibility of the permit
holder to call for all inspections. No permit shall be assigned or transferred
to any other person.
8. Add the following Section 105.10 - Additional Permit Requirements.
Section 105.10 - Miscellaneous Permit Requirements. No building permit
shall be issued until the following conditions are met:
a. Storm Water Storage. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall
be issued a building permit under this Chapter unless and until all
applicable requirements are met as set forth in Chapter 7, Division 31
of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, 1969, as amended.
b. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall be issued a building
permit under this Chapter unless and until a Bloomington-Normal
Water Reclamation District connection permit has been obtained for
the proposed construction. This subsection shall not apply to
building permits issued solely for the alteration, repair, shoring, or
maintenance of existing buildings or structures.
c. No person, firm, corporation, agency, partnership or other entity shall
undertake or cause to be undertaken any type of alteration to the
exterior of any property designated a historical landmark by the
Town of Normal or any property located within an area designated as
a historical district by the Town of Normal without first submitting
plans and obtaining from the Town a building permit for such
alteration. As used herein, the term alteration means any type of
modification or repair including but not limited to maintenance,
shoring, repair work, alteration, additions, rejuvenations,
rehabilitations, remodeling, or any other action which changes in any
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.7)
manner the existing physical appearance of such property, except for
painting.
In addition to the general penalties set forth in this Chapter, any
violation of the foregoing shall be subject to the following: (a)
Equitable relief as provided by law; or (b) A fine in any amount no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded each day upon which
said violation shall continue after knowledge or notification of the
existence thereof to or by the violator.
9. Section 106.3.1 - Approval of Construction Documents. Delete this
Section.
10. Amend Section 109.1.5 - Other Inspections to include:
In addition to the called inspections above, a site inspection prior to
excavation, a pre-footing inspection prior to the placement of concrete and a
lot grading inspection shall all be required inspections enforced by the
Building Department.
11. Delete Section 112 and substitute therefore, the following:
Section 112 - Board of Appeals – All persons shall have the right to appeal
any decision of the Building Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the
Town of Normal in the manner provided by SEC. 11.2-5 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended, except no appeal may be
taken after the Town of Normal has initiated legal or administrative
proceedings seeking compliance with this Code or fines for violation of this
Code.
12. Delete Section 113.3 – Prosecution of Violation and substitute therefore:
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Building Official
may cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or
with the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of an unlawful occupancy of the structure. The Town may take
action to abate any violation, and any costs incurred in abating such
violations may be charged against the real estate upon which such abatement
occurs and shall be a lien upon such property.
13. Delete the existing language of Section 113.4 - Violation Penalties and
substitute in lieu therefore the following:
Section 113.4 - Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.8)
violating any provision of this Code shall be subject to the penalty provisions
provided in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, 1969, as amended.
14. Amend Table No. 301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria as
follows:
a. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (20psf) under “Ground Snow
Load”.
b. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (115 mph) under “Wind Design
(Speed)”.
c. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (No) under “Wind Design”
(Topographic effects).
d. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (No) under “Wind Design”
(Special wind region).
e. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (No) under “Wind Design”
(Wind-borne debris zone).
f. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (B) under “Seismic Design
Category”.
g. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (Severe) under “Subject to
Damage From” (Weathering).
h. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (40”) under “Subject to Damage
From” (Frost Line Depth).
i. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (Moderate to Heavy) under
“Subject to Damage From” (Termite).
j. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (-4 Degrees) under “Winter
Design Temp.”
k. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (Yes) under “Ice Barrier
Underlayment Required.”
l. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (Engineering Insurance Study)
under “Flood Hazards.”
m. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (1500) under “Air Freezing
Index.”
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.9)
n. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting (52 degrees) under “Mean
Annual Temp.”
15. Delete the word “Townhouse” from Sections 302.2, 302.2.1, and 302.2.4,
and insert “Zero Lot Line Unit”.
16. Amend Section 302.2 - Townhouses to read:
Section 302.2 - Zero Lot Line Units. Each zero lot line unit shall be
considered a separate building and shall be separated by 2-hour assembly
from the foundation to roof underside. The assembly shall be continuous
and shall not be interrupted by unit partitions. This assembly shall be a UL
listed or USG approved.
17. Amend Section 302.6 - Dwelling/garage fire separation by adding the
following sentence:
With a detached garage where the separation between the garage and another
structure is less than 10’, the entire garage shall be protected by ½” gypsum
board applied to the inside of the garage.
18. Amend Section R311.7.8 - Handrails, specifically R311.7.8.1 through
R311.7.8.4 as follows:
The Code Official shall have the authority to provide relief from the
provisions of these sections where an existing structure is located in a
designated Historic District, identified in The Legacy, or included in a Town
Initiated historical survey as a potential historic structure.
The relief shall be limited to exterior applications and attributed to
maintaining the architectural integrity of the structure as approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission, or an appointed designee. (Added
12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5724)
19. Amend Section R312.1 - Guards, specifically R312.1.1 through R312.1.3 as
follows:
The Code Official shall have the authority to provide relief from the
provisions of these sections where an existing structure is located in a
designated Historic District, identified in The Legacy, or included in a Town
Initiated historical survey as a potential historic structure.
The relief shall be limited to exterior applications and attributed to
maintaining the architectural integrity of the structure as approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission, or an appointed designee. (Added
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.10)
12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5724)
20. Section 313 - Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. In Section 313.2 change
the effective date to upon adoption by the City of Bloomington, Illinois. In
Section 313.2.1 delete the phrase “Section P2904 or”. (Revised 11/7/11 by
Ord. No. 5402)
21. Amend Section 401.3 - Drainage to read:
Lot grading shall comply with the approved verified subdivision grading
plan as submitted by the lot developer. In addition, sump pump discharge
lines shall be connected to the storm water drainage system where provided.
22. Amend Section 403.1.6 - Foundation Anchorage. Delete exceptions 2 and 3.
23. Delete the following Chapters in their entirety.
a. Chapter 11 – Energy Efficiency.
b. Chapter 25 – Plumbing Administration.
c. Chapter 26 – General Plumbing Requirements.
d. Chapter 27 – Plumbing Fixtures.
e. Chapter 28 – Water Heaters.
f. Chapter 29 – Water Supply and Distribution.
g. Chapter 30 – Sanitary Drainage.
h. Chapter 31 – Vents.
i. Chapter 32 – Traps.
j. Chapter 33 – Storm Drainage.
k. Chapter 34 – General Requirements.
l. Chapter 35 – Electrical Definitions.
m. Chapter 36 – Services.
n. Chapter 37 – Branch Circuit and Feeder Requirements.
o. Chapter 38 – Wiring Methods.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.11)
p. Chapter 39 – Power and Lighting Distribution.
q. Chapter 40 – Devices and Luminaires.
r. Chapter 41 – Appliance Installation.
s. Chapter 42 – Swimming pools.
t. Chapter 43 – Class 2 Remote Control Signaling and Power-Limited
Circuits.
24. Delete the following Appendices:
a. Appendix A. Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
b. Appendix B. Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances
Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances
Listed for Use with Type B Vents.
c. Appendix C. Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems.
d. Appendix D. Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an
Existing Appliance Installation.
e. Appendix E. Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.
f. Appendix F. Radon Control Methods.
g. Appendix G. Piping Standards for Various Applications.
h. Appendix H. Patio Covers.
i Appendix I. Private Sewage Disposal.
j. Appendix L. Permit Fees.
k. Appendix M. Home Day Care – R-3 Occupancy.
l. Appendix N. Venting Methods.
m. Appendix P. Sizing of Water Piping System.
C. Adoption of the International Existing Building Code 2015 with Amendments.
There is hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.12)
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use of and
maintenance of existing buildings, a building code known as the International
Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council,
as amended thereto with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications, and
amendments, as set forth in this Chapter which said Code as so amended is
hereinafter referred to as the “International Existing Building Code.” The provisions
of said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length and
the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and amended by this
Chapter shall be controlling in regard to all matters pertaining to the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
replacement, addition to, use of or maintenance of existing buildings. Amendments
to the International Existing Building Code, The International Existing Building
Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. Insert the phrase “Town of Normal, Illinois” in all locations in the
International Existing Building Code where parenthetical reference is made
to the “name of jurisdiction”.
2. Delete Section 101.7 - Correction of Violations of Other Codes.
3. Delete Section 102.4, 102.4.1, and 102.4.2 and substitute the following:
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of
the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and other adopted
codes and standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
4. Delete Section 103 – Department of Building Safety and insert in lieu
thereof the following:
Section 103.0 – Department of Building Safety
Section 103.1 – Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection
Department of the Town of Normal shall be the “Department of Building
Safety” as that term is used in this Code.
Section 103.2 – Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of the
Town of Normal shall be the “Code Official” as that term is used in this
Code.
Section 103.3 – Restriction of Employees. The Building Official or
employee connected with the Department of Building Inspection except one
whose only connection is that of a member of the Board of Appeals
established under the provisions of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in or
directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.13)
appliances for the preparation of plans or the specifications therefore, unless
he is the owner of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in
any work which conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the
Department.
5. Section 104.2.2. Replace the word “shall” with the word “may” in this
Section and delete the exception.
6. Delete Sections 104.8 and 104.8.1.
7. Delete Section 105.1.1 and 105.1.2.
8. Add a new sentence at the beginning of Section 105.5 Expiration as follows:
Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid 180 days after issuance
or a later date if a later date is indicated on the permit by the building
official.
9. Add the following Section:
Section 105.8 - Permit - Demolition.
Before any permit required by this Division is issued granting authority to
wreck a building or structure, the person engaged in the work of wrecking,
hereafter the wrecking contractor, shall file with the Town Clerk, a
Certificate of Liability Insurance from an insurance company authorized to
do business in the State of Illinois. Said Certificate shall designate the
specific job to be performed by said contractor and designate coverage
provided by such policy as required below. Said Certificate shall name the
Town as an additional insured. The policy shall:
a. Insure both parties for single limit coverage for bodily injury and
property damage for at least $300,000.00 per occurrence and
aggregate, and shall contain both general and automobile coverages;
or
b. Provide at least $100,000.00 worth of coverage for bodily injury per
individual and $300,000.00 of bodily injury coverage per occurrence
and $100,000.00 of property damage coverage for both general and
automobile coverages. A Certificate shall also be provided showing
the wrecking contractor has adequate worker’s compensation
insurance in accordance with the Workmen’s Compensation Act and
the Workmen’s Occupational Disease Acts of Illinois, as amended.
The foregoing insurance requirement may be waived at the discretion
of the Code Official where:
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.14)
(1) The estimated cost of demolition of a structure including
removal of the debris and clearing of the site is less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(2) No extra hazardous conditions exist.
(3) The demolition permit is being sought by the owner of the
structure.
10. Add the following Section:
Section 105.9 – Moving Buildings.
a. Permit Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall move any
building along the public streets, alleys or other places within said
Town unless he shall first obtain a license as a house mover under a
penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each
offense or be imprisoned for not to exceed six (6) months, or both
such fine and such imprisonment. Each day that any such violation
or failure continues shall be considered as a separate and distinct
offense and shall be punishable as such.
b. Bond. Any person may obtain a license as a house mover upon the
payment of a license fee of $25.00 per annum and the furnishing to
the Town Clerk, a Certificate of Liability Insurance from an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois.
Said Certificate shall designate the specific job to be performed by
said mover and designate coverage provided by such policy as
required below. Said Certificate shall name the Town as an
additional insured. The policy shall:
(1) Insure both parties for single limit coverage for bodily injury
and property damage for at least $300,000.00 per occurrence
and aggregate, and shall contain both general and automobile
coverages; or
(2) Provide at least $100,000.00 worth of coverage for bodily
injury per individual and $300,000.00 of bodily injury
coverage per occurrence and $100,000.00 of property
damage coverage for both general and automobile coverages.
A Certificate shall also be provided showing the mover has
adequate Workmen’s Compensation Insurance in accordance
with the Workmen’s Compensation Act and the Workmen’s
Occupational Disease Acts of Illinois, as amended.
c. Application and Permit Required. Prior to an issuance of a moving
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.15)
permit, a “Building Moving Application” must be submitted to the
Inspection Department for approval. The fee for a permit authorizing
the moving of buildings shall be $200.00 for a dwelling unit or other
structure and a $100.00 for a garage.
d. Building Moved to Comply with Ordinances. No wooden building,
within or not within the fire limits, shall be moved to any lot or part
of lot within the fire limits and all buildings, when so moved, shall
thereafter comply with the existing building regulations as set forth
in various Ordinances of the Town.
e. Lights and Warnings. Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a
house or structure which is being moved, warnings to that effect shall
be placed by the Police Department so as to warn vehicles and
persons from entering that portion of the street so blocked. The
person, firm or corporation moving any building through the streets
shall keep warning signs and lanterns or lights on the building so as
to guard against any person or vehicle from colliding with it.
f. Cutting Wires. Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with the
wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of
any special or franchise Ordinance governing shall apply and the
bond therein specified shall be given. If no specific terms are spelled
out, approval shall first be obtained from the utility company
involved and the costs or expenses involved shall be paid to such
utility company.
g. Fire Alarm Wires. When any moving building shall approach any
firm alarm wire or pole which shall be endangered by the removal of
such building or structure, it shall be the duty of the mover to notify
the Chief of Police at least six (6) hours before reaching such wire or
pole so that they may be removed or cared for by the Town
authorities.
h. Additional Restrictions. No buildings shall be moved upon or along
any alley or other public thoroughfare without at least twenty-four
(24) hours’ notice in writing to the Fire Chief of the Town and
whenever possible, paved surfaces of streets, alleys or sidewalks
shall be planked so as not to be damaged by such moving operation.
No permit shall entitle the mover to cut or injure any tree unless
special permission for same has been obtained from the Director of
Public Works.
11. Add the following Section 105.10 - Additional Permit Requirements:
Section 105.10 - Miscellaneous Permit Requirements: No building permit
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.16)
shall issue until the following conditions are met:
a. Storm Water Storage. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall
be issued a building permit under this Chapter unless and until all
applicable requirements are met as set forth in Chapter 7, Division 31
of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, 1969, as amended.
b. No person, firm, corporation or agency shall be issued a building
permit under this Chapter unless and until a Bloomington-Normal
Water Reclamation District connection permit has been obtained for
the proposed construction. This subsection shall not apply to
building permits issued solely for the alteration, repair, shoring, or
maintenance of existing buildings or structures.
c. No person, firm, corporation, agency, partnership or other entity shall
undertake or cause to be undertaken any type of alteration to the
exterior of any property designed a historical landmark by the Town
of Normal or any property located within an area designated as a
historical district by the Town of Normal without first submitting
plans and obtaining from the Town a building permit for such
alteration. As used herein, the term alteration means any type of
modification or repair including but not limited to maintenance,
shoring, repair work, alteration, additions, rejuvenations,
rehabilitations, remodeling, or any other action which changes in any
manner the existing physical appearance of such property, except for
painting.
In addition to the general penalties set forth in this Chapter, any violation of
the foregoing shall be subject to the following: (a) Equitable relief as
provided by law; or (b) A fine in any amount no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded each day upon which said violation shall continue after knowledge
or notification of the existence thereof to or by the violator.
12. Add at the end of Section 108.2 - Schedule of Permit Fees the following:
a. General. The fee for a permit shall be based upon the reasonable
cost of the improvements, including material and labor in accordance
with the fee schedule of sub-section (b) of this Section. Estimated
cost shall include all cost of labor and material given a fair market
value. In the absence of a bona fide contract establishing the
estimated costs, the values for arriving at the fee for a permit shall be
established by the Code Official upon the basis of area and type of
construction.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.17)
b. Fee Schedule. Fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 25 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
13. Section 108.4 – Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Delete the
language of this section and substitute in lieu thereof the following:
If any person initiates construction without first taking out a permit, such
person shall pay, in addition to the regular fees prescribed for permits, an
additional amount equal to one hundred per cent (100%) of the fee required,
and may be subject to all penalty provisions of this Chapter.
14. Add to the existing language of Section 110.3 – Temporary Occupancy, the
following:
Temporary use or occupancy may be granted by the Code Official for a
maximum duration of one (1) month from the date of issuance. Such
occupancy may be further extended only by approval of the City Manager,
subject to a favorable safety inspection by the Building Inspection
Department.
15. Add to the existing language of Section 111.1 – Connection of Service
Utilities the following:
No utility meters shall be placed on the street side(s) of any commercial or
multiple-family building.
16. Delete the existing language of Section 112 – Board of Appeals and
substitute therefore the following:
Section 112 –Board of Appeals. Decisions of the Building Official may be
appealed to the Building Board of Appeals pursuant to SEC. 11.2-5 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal except no appeal may be filed after
the Town has initiated legal or administrative proceedings seeking
compliance with this Code or penalties for violation of this Code.
17. Delete Section 113.3 – Prosecution of Violation and substitute therefore the
following:
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Building Official
may cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or
with the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of an unlawful occupancy of the structure. The Town may take
action to abate any violation, and any costs incurred in abating such
violations may be charged against the real estate upon which such abatement
occurs and shall be a lien upon such property.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.18)
18. Delete the existing language of Section 113.4 – Violation Penalties, and
insert in lieu thereof, the following:
Section 114.4 – Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
of the Codes as adopted and modified hereby may be subject to the penalties
prescribed in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, 1969, as amended.
19. Section 115.4 - Method of Service. Add the following to the end of this
Section.
Notice sent by regular First class mail to the last known address of the owner
shall be deemed to proper service.
20. Section 116.5 - Emergency Repairs. Substitute the word “owner” for the
word “jurisdiction” in the first sentence of this section.
21. Section 116.6 Hearing. Delete this Section.
D. Adoption of the International Fire Code, 2015 with Amendments. There is hereby
adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules, standards,
regulations and procedures for the location, construction, maintenance, alteration,
use and occupancy of buildings, property and structures with regard to fire safety
and the materials and equipment located within such buildings or structures and
on property, a fire code known as the International Fire Code 2015 Edition
published by the International Code Council as amended thereto with specific
additions, deletions, insertions, modifications, and amendments, as set forth in this
Chapter which said Code as so amended is hereinafter referred to as “IFC” The
provisions of said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length and the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and
amended by Paragraph C of this Section shall be controlling in regard to all
buildings, materials, equipment, property and structures within the corporate
limits of the Town. Nothing in the adoption of this International Fire Code is
intended to abrogate or modify provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted at
SEC. 6.4-1 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal. Whenever provisions
of this International Fire Code conflict or are different from the Fire Prevention
Code or any other Code adopted by the Town of Normal, the stricter Code
Sections shall prevail. Amendments to the International Fire Code, The
International Fire Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. Delete Chapter 1 except for Section 105 and substitute for the deleted
Sections Chapter 1 of the International Building Code as adopted and
amended by the Town of Normal at SEC. 11.4-1 of the Municipal Code of
the Town of Normal as the administration chapter of this Fire Code. All
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.19)
provisions of the International Fire Code shall be enforced in the manner
provided in the International Building Code, including penalties for
violation. Wherever in the International Fire Code reference is made to the
“Fire Official” the term “Building Official” as used in the International
Building Code shall be substituted.
2. Delete Appendix A – Board of Appeals, Appendix C – Fire Hydrant
Locations and Distributions and Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access
Roads.
3. Adopt as part of the International Fire Code Appendix B – Fire-Flow
Requirements for Buildings, Appendix E – Hazard Categories, Appendix F
Hazard Ranking and Appendix G Cryogenic Fluids – Weight and Volume
Equivalents.
4. Adopt as part of the International Fire Code, Chapter 99 of the National Fire
Code, also known as NFPA 99, for the installation of all Medical Gas
Systems.
E. Adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 with Amendments. There is
hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the utilization of materials, construction, installation, alteration,
maintenance and repair of all mechanical systems, heating systems, ventilating
systems, cooling systems, steam and hot water heating system process piping, boiler
and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuels, chimneys and
vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, barbecues, incinerators,
crematories and other process matter or material regulated by or within the scope of
the International Mechanical Code, 2015, placed in or utilized in connection with
any building or structure within the Town of Normal, a certain Code known as the
International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
particularly the 2015 Edition thereof, with specific additions, deletions, insertions,
modifications and amendments as set forth in this Chapter, which said Code as so
amended is in this Chapter is referred to as the “International Mechanical Code.”
The provisions of said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length and the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and
amended by this Chapter shall be controlling in regard to all buildings and structures
within the corporate limits of the Town. Amendments to the International
Mechanical Code, The International Mechanical Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. Insert the phrase “Town of Normal, Illinois” in all locations in the
International Mechanical Code, 2015, where parenthetical reference is made
to the “name of jurisdiction”.
2. Delete Section 102.8 - Referenced Codes and Standards and substitute
therefore the following:
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.20)
the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between the provisions of this Code and other
adopted codes and standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
3. Delete Sections 103.1 – 103.3 and substitute therefore the following:
Section 103.0 – Department of Building Inspection.
Section 103.1 – Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection
Department of the Town of Normal shall be the “Department of Mechanical
Inspection” as that term is used in this Code.
Section 103.2 – Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of the
Town of Normal shall be the “Code Official” as that term is used in this
Code.
Section 103.3 – Restriction of Employees. The Code Official or employee
connected with the Department of Building Inspection except one whose
only connection is that of a member of the Board of Appeals established
under the provisions of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in or directly or
indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for
the preparation of plans or the specifications therefore, unless he is the owner
of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work which
conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the Department.
4. Section 104.7 – Department Records. Delete this Section.
5. Section 106.4.3 - Expiration. Add the following sentence to the beginning of
this Section 106.4.3:
Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid 180 days after issuance
or a later date if a later date is indicated on the permit by the building
official.
6. Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 Annual permits. Delete these sections.
7. Section 106.4.6 – Retention of Construction Documents. Delete this
Section.
8. Section 106.4.7 – Previous Approvals. Delete this Section.
9. In Section 106.5.2 insert the following: “See SEC. 25.16 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended”.
10. Delete Section 106.5.3 - Fee Refunds.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.21)
11. Add Section 106.6.1 - License or Registration Required as follows:
SEC. 106.6.1 License or Registration Required. Except as specifically
otherwise provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to do or perform any installation, alteration, maintenance or
repair of or to any mechanical system, heating system, ventilating system,
cooling system, steam and hot water heating system process piping, boiler
and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuel, chimneys
and vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, barbecues,
incinerators, crematories, or other process, matter or material regulated by or
within the scope of the International Mechanical Code, 2015, as adopted and
modified hereby, without being appropriately licensed and/or registered
under the provisions of this Chapter. Exceptions:
a. Owner-Occupants. The owner-occupant of a one-family dwelling
may, with the assistance of any member of his family, personally
carry on in such house any work governed by this Chapter without a
license or registration, provided that such owner shall obtain a permit
for any such work and shall call for inspections as provided in this
Chapter. Such owner-occupancy shall be retained for at least one
year from the date of final inspection and approval of such work.
b. Holders of Electrical Licenses and/or Registration. Persons, firms or
corporations holding any validly issued Town of Normal electrical
licenses or being appropriately registered under Chapter 11 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended,
may install totally electric, self-contained heating equipment not
requiring the installation of any duct or pipe work.
12. Add Section 106.6.2 - Licensing Procedure as follows:
SEC. 106.6-2 – Licensing Procedure. The procedure for obtaining a
Mechanical, Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, or Refrigeration
License shall be as follows:
a. Applications for a Mechanical, Heating, Ventilating, Air
Conditioning, and Refrigeration License shall be received by the
HVAC Inspector on forms which may be obtained from him. The
application shall state on it the name, address and place of business
of the applicant.
b. All applicants for Mechanical, Heating, Ventilating, Air
Conditioning, and Refrigeration License shall be at least eighteen
years of age and shall have had at least four years practical
experience in the type of work authorized by the type of license
sought, or shall have satisfactorily completed a course of study in the
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.22)
subject for which the license is sought, given by a recognized school,
and have had at least one year of practical experience in addition
thereto.
c. Each applicant for a license under this Division must pass the
Standard Master Mechanical Exam established by the International
Code Council.
d. Each applicant must pay a $50 application fee with the application
for a license. If the applicant is successful, then the fee may be
applied to the first year’s license.
e. No License or registration shall be required for the installation,
maintenance, alteration, or repair of any solid fuel burning fireplace,
room heater, or barbeque.
13. Add Section 106.6.3 - Reciprocity and Registration as follows:
SEC. 106.6.3 - Reciprocity and Registration. Any person, firm or
corporation who is registered or licensed for the current year in any city,
village or town in the State of Illinois where the requirements of registration
or licensing on the date of such registration or licensing were substantially
equal to or greater than the requirements provided in this Chapter, and if
such city, village or town extends a similar privilege to persons licensed
under this Chapter, shall not be required to take the examination or pay the
license fee as provided in this Chapter, in order to engage in the type of
mechanical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning or refrigeration work
authorized by the individual’s license, but prior to commencing any work,
shall file a copy of his registration or license with the HVAC Inspector of the
Town and pay an annual $50 registration fee.
14. Add Section 106.6.4 - Non-transferability as follows:
SEC.106.6.4 Non-Transferability. No license issued under this Division or
registration hereunder shall be loaned, rented, assigned or transferred.
15. Add Section 106.6.5 - Renewal and Reinstatement as follows:
SEC.106.6.5 – Renewal and Reinstatement. Any person, firm or corporation
receiving a Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning or Refrigeration License,
as provided for in this Chapter, has the right, without further examination, to
have that license renewed annually upon payment to the Town Treasurer of a
license fee and the execution or renewal of the bond required by this
Chapter. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
Any license forfeited for non-payment of a renewal fee may be reinstated
upon the payment of the annual renewal fee without re-examination,
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.23)
provided however, after the same has been delinquent for a period of one
year, then the same shall be null and void and may not be renewed or
reinstated.
16. Add Section 106.6.6 - Revocation of Rights and Privileges as follows:
SEC. 106.6.6 – Revocation of Rights and Privileges. Any licensee or person
registered in the Town of Normal under this Chapter may have his license or
registration revoked by the Building Board of Appeals for cause, after notice
and an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. Cause for revocation of a
license or registration shall include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Refusal or failure to make any necessary corrections to mechanical,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning or refrigeration work within a
reasonable time after notification of the defects therein.
b. Failure to obtain permits required by this Chapter.
c. Transfer of permits.
d. Failure to call for required inspections.
e. Unwillingness or inability to install mechanical, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning or refrigeration work in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this Chapter.
f. Performing work not authorized by the Class of license held.
g. Violation of any provision of this Chapter.
17. Section 108.1 – Unlawful Acts. Add the following at the end of Section
108.1:
It shall be unlawful for any property owner to have on his or her property
any equipment which is in violation of any provision of this Code or to allow
any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove,
demolish or utilize a mechanical system in violation of this code.
18. Section 108.2 – Notice of Violation. Substitute the word “may” for the word
“shall” in this Section. Add the following at the end of this Section:
In addition Notice may be provided to the owner of any property upon which
a violation occurs. The owner of any property shall be responsible that all
mechanical systems on the property are in compliance with this Code.
19. Section 108.3 – Prosecution of Violation. Delete this Section and substitute
therefore the following:
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.24)
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code Official may
cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or with
the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of an
unlawful occupancy of the structure. The Town may take action to abate any
violation, and any costs incurred in abating such violations may be
charged against the real estate upon which such abatement occurs and shall
be a lien upon such property.
20. Delete Section 108.4 - Violation Penalties and insert in lieu thereof the
following:
Violation penalties. Persons who violate any provision of this Code shall be
subject to a penalty as set forth in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Code.
21. In Section 108.5 - Stop work orders, delete everything after the word “fine”
and insert in lieu thereof the following: “as set forth in SEC. 11.3-5 of this
Code.”
22. Delete Section 109 - Means of Appeal and all sub-paragraphs; insert in lieu
thereof the following: "See Division 2 of Chapter 11 of the Municipal Code
of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended."
23. Delete Appendix B - Recommended Fee Schedules.
F. Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 with Amendments. There is
hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the design, installation, alteration, maintenance and repair of all fuel
gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment and related accessories within the
scope of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 placed in or utilized in connection
with any building or structure within the Town of Normal, a certain Code known as
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015, of the International Code Council, Inc., with
specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and amendments as so
amended is in this Chapter referred to as the International Fuel Gas Code. The
provisions of said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length and the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and amended
by this Chapter shall be controlling in regard to all buildings and structures within
the corporate limits of the Town Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code,
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. Insert the phrase “Town of Normal, Illinois” in all locations in the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2015, where parenthetical reference is made to
the “name of jurisdiction.”
2. Delete Section 102.8 – Referenced Codes and Standards and substitute
therefore the following:
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.25)
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of
the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and other adopted
codes and standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
3. Delete Section 103 and substitute therefore the following:
Section 103.0 – Department of Building Inspections.
Section 103.1 – Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection
Department of the Town of Normal shall be the “Department of Inspection”
as the term is used in this Code.
Section 103.2 – Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of the
Town of Normal shall be the “Code Official” as that term is used in this
Code.
Section 103.3 – Restriction of Employees. The Code Official or employee
connected with the Department of Building Inspection except one whose
only connection is that of a member of the Board of Appeals established
under the provisions of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in or directly or
indirectly connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for
the preparation of plans or the specifications therefore, unless he is the owner
of the building, nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work with
conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the Department.
4. Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 - Annual permits. Delete these sections.
5. Section 106.5.3 - Expiration. Add the following sentence at the beginning of
this Section:
Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid 180 days after the
issuance or a later date if a later date is indicated on the permit by the Code
official.
6. Section 106.5.6 – Retention of Construction Documents. Delete this
Section.
7. Section 106.5.7 – Previous Approvals. Delete this Section.
8. Section 106.6.2 - Fee Schedule. Insert “See Section 25.16 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal.”
9. Delete Section 106.6.3 - Fee Refunds.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.26)
10. Section 108.1 - Unlawful Acts. Add the following sentence at the end of this
Section:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow or permit any
erection, construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or utilization of
any equipment or piping in violation of any provision of this Code.
11. Section 108.2 - Notice of Violation. Substitute the word “may” for the word
“shall” in this section.
12. Section 108.3 - Prosecution of Violation. Delete this section and insert in
lieu thereof the following:
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Building Official
may cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or
with the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of an unlawful occupancy of the structure. The Town may take
action to abate any violation, and any costs incurred in abating such
violations may be charged against the real estate upon which such abatement
occurs and shall be a lien upon such property.
13. Section 108.4 - Violation Penalties. Delete this Section and substitute
therefore the following:
Section 108.4 - Violation Penalties – Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this Code shall be subject to the penalty provisions
provided in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, 1969, as amended.
14. Section 108.5 - Stop Work Orders. Delete the phrase “of not less than
(amount) or more than (amount) dollars” and substitute therefore the
following phrase “as set forth in SEC. 11.3-5 of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal.”
15. Delete Section 109 - Means of Appeal and substitute therefore, the
following:
Section 109 - Board of Appeals – All persons shall have the right to appeal
any decision of the Code Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the
Town of Normal in the manner provided by the Municipal Code of the Town
of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended.
G. Adoption of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 with Amendments.
(Entire SEC 11.4-1 G deleted 08/05/19 by Ord. No. 5790 Effective August 15,
2019)
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.30)
H. Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015. There is hereby
adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of ensuring the public health, safety
and welfare insofar as they are effected by the continued occupancy and
maintenance of structures and premises in the Town of Normal, and to prevent
blight and deterioration of neighborhoods, a property maintenance code known as
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015, published by the International
Code Council, Inc. with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and
amendments as set forth in this Chapter. The provisions of said International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length, and the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted,
modified and amended by this Chapter shall be controlling in regard to all premises,
buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the Town. Amendments to
the International Property Maintenance Code, The International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015, is amended as follows:
1. Insert the phrase “Town of Normal, Illinois” in all locations in the
International Property Maintenance Code where parenthetical reference is
made to the “name of jurisdiction”.
2. Section 101.3 - Delete the second sentence and substitute therefore the
following:
An additional purpose of this Code is to prevent blight and deterioration of
neighborhoods. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions and which do not meet a minimum level of health and
safety shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and
safety as required herein.
3. Section 102.1 – Delete the second sentence.
4. Section 102.2 – Delete the last sentence and substitute therefore the
following:
The owner and the owner’s designated agent shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures and premises.
5. Section 102.3 – Delete this section in its entirety and substitute therefore the
following:
Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy shall
be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the appropriate
zoning, building, mechanical, and other Codes of the Town of
Normal. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set
aside any provision of the zoning, building, mechanical, or other Code of the
Town of Normal.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.31)
6. Section 102.6 – Delete this section and substitute therefore the following:
The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for structures designated
by the state or the Town of Normal as historic buildings when such buildings
or structures are judged by the Code Official to be safe and in the public
interest of health, safety, and welfare.
7. Delete Sections 102.7, 102.7.1, and 102.7.2 and substitute therefore the
following:
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be those that are listed
in this Chapter and considered part of the requirement of this Code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this Code and the referenced standards, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
8. Section 103 – Delete the entirety of Section 103 - Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection and insert in lieu therefore the following:
Section 103 – Building Inspection Department.
Section 103.1 - The Building Inspection Department of the Town of Normal
shall be the “Department of Property Maintenance Inspection” as that term is
used in this Code.”
Section 103.2 - The Building Commissioner of the Town of Normal shall
be the “Code Official” as that term is used in this Code.
Section 103.3 - Restriction of Employees. The Code Official or employee
connected with the enforcement of this Code, except one whose only
connection is that of a member of the Building Board of Appeals established
under the provisions of SEC. 11.2-1 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, shall not be engaged in, or directly or
indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation
of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the
building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work that
conflicts with official duties or with interests of the department.
9. Section 104.3 - Right of Entry. Delete this entire Section and substitute
therefore the following: The Code Official or his designee is authorized to
enter the structure or premises to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions
on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Code Official is authorized to seek a search warrant as
authorized by law.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.32)
10. Section 106.2 – Notice of Violation. Add the following sentence:
However, the failure to serve a notice shall not prevent the prosecution of
legal actions, including administrative adjudication procedures, seeking fines
and compliance with this Code.
11. Section 106.3 – Prosecution of Violation. Delete the existing language and
substitute therefore the following:
In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code Official may
cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity or with
the Town’s Administrative Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of an
unlawful occupancy of the structure. Any violation of any provision of this
Code shall be deemed a strict liability offense. The Town may take action to
abate any violation, and any costs incurred in abating such violations may be
charged against the real estate upon which such abatement occurs and shall
be a lien upon such property.
12. Section 106.4 – Violation Penalties. Delete the existing language and
substitute therefore the following:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code, upon being
found guilty, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than
$200.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or
remains shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.
13. Section 107.1 – Notice to Person Responsible. Delete this section and
substitute therefore the following:
Notice to Owner, Agent or Other Responsible Person. Whenever the Code
Official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has
grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice may be given in the
manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the owner, agent or person
responsible for the maintenance of the property as specified in this Code.
Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3.
14. Section 107.2 - Form. Delete this Section and substitute therefore the
following:
Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the
following:
a. Be in writing.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.33)
b. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
c. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued.
d. May include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make
the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this Code.
e. Inform the property owner, agent or other person responsible of the
right to appeal.
f. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Section 106.3.
15. Section 107.3 - Method of Service.
Add the following language before the semi-colon in Section 107.3(2):
“or the address listed in the Normal Tax Assessor’s Office for receipt of the
property tax bill for the property”
16. Section 108.1 – General. Delete this section and substitute therefore:
When a structure, property, or equipment is found by the Code Official to be
unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found
unlawful, such a structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this Code.
17. Section 108.1.1 – Delete this section and substitute therefore:
Unsafe property or structures. An unsafe property or an unsafe structure is
one that has any condition that is found to be an imminent danger to the life,
health, or safety of the occupants or the public. A structure is to be deemed
unsafe if the structure does not contain minimum safeguards to protect from
fire and to warn occupants in the event of fire.
A structure is to be deemed unsafe if it contains unsafe equipment.
A structure or property shall be deemed unsafe if it has holes in the floors or
ground such that a person could fall through the floor or into the hole, except
for excavation, which is lawfully fenced.
A structure or property shall be deemed unsafe if it is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.34)
18. Section 108.1.3 – Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy. Delete word
“unlawful” from this Section.
19. Section 108.2 – Closing of Vacant Structures.
Delete the language of Section 108.2 and substitute therefore:
Vacant structures shall be registered and rehabilitated or demolished as set
forth in SEC.11.7 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969 as
amended.
20. Section 108.2.1 – Authority to Disconnect Utilities. Delete the existing
language and substitute the following therefore: The Code Official or his
designee shall have the authority to authorize the disconnection of utility
service to the building, structure, or system in case of emergency where
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property.
21. Section 108.3 – Notice. Delete this section and substitute therefore:
Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under
the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or
the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in
accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall
also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form
prescribed in the Section 107.2.
22. Section 108.7 – Record. Delete this Section in its entirety.
23. Section 109.5 – Costs of Emergency Repairs. In the first sentence delete the
word “jurisdiction” and substitute therefore the word “owner.”
24. Section 110.1 – General. Delete this Section and substitute therefore the
following:
The Code Official may order the owner of any premises upon which is
located any structure, which is so dilapidated or out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, to
demolish and remove such structure, or, if such structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe at the owner’s option. The
Code Official may also order the demolition and removal or completion of
any structure under construction (including repairs) for which there has been
a cessation of construction for more than six months, or for which a
construction permit has been expired for more than six months.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.35)
25. Section 111
Delete the existing language of Section 111 and substitute in lieu therefore
the following:
Section 111- All persons shall have the right to appeal any decision of the
Code Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the Town of Normal in
the manner provided by SEC. 11.2-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended, however if the Town of Normal has
instituted legal or administrative proceedings against any person, the
Building Board of Appeals shall not have jurisdiction unless specifically
authorized by the court or Administrative Hearing Officer.
26. Section 112.4 – Failure to Comply. Delete all of the language after the word
“liable” and substitute therefore the following: “for a fine as set forth in this
Code. Additionally, the Code Official may seek immediate injunctive action
to prevent further violation of the stop work order. Each day upon which a
violation occurs is a separate offense.”
27. Section 201.3 – Terms Defined in Other Codes. Delete this Section.
28. Section 202 - General Definitions.
Delete the definitions of “Code Official”, Cost of Such Demolition or
Emergency Repairs”, “dwelling unit”, “historic building” “inoperable
vehicle,” “public way,” “rooming house”, “rooming unit” and “yard”.
Insert the following definitions in the appropriate alphabetical place:
Bed and Breakfast Establishments. An operator-occupied residence of
historical significance providing public accommodations for a charge only
breakfast may be provided to the guest. Bed and Breakfast establishments
shall not include motels, hotel, boarding rooms, boarding houses, rooming
housing or food service establishments.
Code Official. The Code Official is the Building Commissioner of the Town
of Normal, or any duly authorized representative of the Building
Commissioner.
Deadbolt lock. Deadbolt lock shall mean a single cylinder deadbolt that is
locked or unlocked by key from the outside and thumb turn on the inside.
The deadbolt automatically deadlocks when it is fully extended. The
deadbolt shall contain case hardened steel material. Deadbolt locks shall
meet the following specification:
a. Throw. Minimum throw of one (1) inch which penetrates the strike
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.36)
not less than three fourths (3/4) inch.
b. Cylinders. The solid brass cylinder must have a minimum of five (5)
pin tumblers. The solid brass cylinder guard shall be designated or
protected so that it cannot be gripped by pliers or other wrenching
devices.
c. Back-set. The back-set must be a minimum of two and three-eights
(2 3/8) inches for a wood door and a minimum of two and threefourths
(2 3/4) inches for a metal door.
d. Striker Plate. Steel striker plates shall be located at the point where
the required lock engages the jamb and shall be secured with
hardened steel screws of sufficient length to screw one (1) inch into
the two by four (2X4) in the door frame.
Domestic Utility Trailer. A single-axle trailer used for domestic or
recreational purposes only and not exceeding any of the following
dimensions: six (6) feet in width; twelve (12) feet in length or eight (8) feet
in height. No domestic utility trailer may be used for business or
commercial purposes.
Dormitory. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons
not members of the same family.
Duplex. A Duplex is a two-family dwelling.
Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit is one or more rooms arranged or designed
for the use of one group living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Dwelling, Multiple Family. A multiple-family dwelling is a building
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, One Family. A one family dwelling is a building containing one
(1) dwelling only.
Dwelling, Two Family. A two family dwelling is a building containing two
(2) dwelling units only.
Efficiency Unit. An efficiency unit is a dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room with bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove off
the principal room.
Fire Equipment Distributor. A person or entity licensed as a Fire Equipment
Distributor by the State of Illinois pursuant to 225 ILCS 216/1 et seq.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.37)
Inoperable vehicle. Inoperable vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is
incapable of being operated on a public highway or which has not operated
on the highway for a period of eight (8) weeks whether the vehicle is
operable or not.
Kitchen. A kitchen is any space used for the storage and preparation of
foods.
Major Recreational Equipment. Major recreational equipment means travel
trailers (a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used
as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses, or one
permanently identified as a Travel Trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer);
Pick-up Coaches (a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for
use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation);
Motorhomes (a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation
and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle);
Camping trailers (a canvas, material or metal folding structure, mounted on
wheels designed for travel, recreation and vacation use); boats;
snowmobiles; jet skis; all-terrain vehicles (ATV); dirt bikes; golf carts; and
trailers holding boats, snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), dirt
bikes or golf carts.
Noxious Weeds. Noxious weeds means any plant now or hereafter listed by
the State of Illinois as a noxious weed pursuant to the Illinois Noxious Weed
Act, 505 ILCS 100/1 et seq., any plant now or hereafter listed as an exotic
weed by the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, 525 ILCS 10/1 et seq., dandelions,
poison ivy (Toxicendron Radicans), Poison Oak (Toxicendron Quericofolium)
and Poison Sumac (Toxicendron Vernix).
Person. Person means any natural person, partnership, corporation, trust or
other legal entity.
Private Alarm Contractor. A person licensed by the State of Illinois as a
Private Alarm Contractor pursuant to 225 ILCS 446/1 et seq.
Rodent. A rodent means a rat or a mouse.
Rooming house. A rooming house is a residential building containing one
(1) or more rooming units.
Rooming unit. A rooming unit is any room or group of rooms forming a
single unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking.
Turf grass. Turf grass means any grass except grasses being grown for food
or agricultural purposes and ornamental grasses which are intentionally and
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.38)
sporadically planted as part of a landscape design.
Unlicensed vehicle. An unlicensed vehicle is any vehicle which does not
display a valid license plate or license applied for sticker.
Yard. A yard is any area on a lot that does not contain a structure, driveway,
or permitted hard-surfaced parking area.
29. Section 301.2 – Responsibility. Insert the words “including the interior of
the structure” after the word “structures’ in the first sentence. Insert the
words “exclusively” after the word “they” in the third sentence.
30. Section 301.3 - Vacant structures and Land. Add the following line:
Additionally, vacant structures must comply with Division 3 of Chapter 11
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended, Vacant
Buildings.
31. Section 302.1 - Sanitation.
Delete the second sentence and substitute therefore:
"No well, cistern, excavation or other depression shall exist in a dangerous or
unprotected condition."
32. Section 302.2 – Grading and Drainage. Add at the end of this section:
No fill excavation dirt, or concrete chunks should be mounded above the
natural terrain. SEC. 21.3.9 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal
must be complied with in regard to standing water.
33. Section 302.4 - Weeds.
Delete the language of this Section and substitute therefore the following:
Section 302.4 - Vegetation.
a. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
noxious weeds or turf grass, which exceed 8 inches in height.
b. All areas not containing a structure, paved pathway, driveway, or
permitted hard surfaced parking area must be covered with
vegetation such as grass, shrubs, trees or gardens. Where the
vegetation has died, the area must be re-planted.
c. All dead trees, tree limbs and shrubs shall be removed.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.39)
d. All bushes and trees must be trimmed to allow for free passage along
sidewalks and streets, and to allow for adequate line of sight for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic along streets and sidewalks.
e. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut
and destroy weeds after service of a notice violation, the Town of
Normal shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation
and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such
removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property and such costs may become a lien on the property.
34. Section 302.7 - Accessory Structures.
Add the word "sheds" after the word garages.
35. Section 302.8 - Motor Vehicles. Delete the entire Section and substitute
therefore:
No unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle shall remain on a premises unless
such vehicle is in an enclosed building, or unless said premises has as its
principal use the maintenance, repair, sale, storage or manufacture of
vehicles. Motor vehicles may not be parked other than on a permitted hardsurfaced
area except major recreational equipment and domestic utility
trailers as provided by SEC. 15.7-2(B) of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, 1969, as amended. In areas where repeated violations of this
section occur, the Code Official can require a property owner to install curbs,
fences, posts or other devices intended to prevent violations of this section.
No truck with more than two axles or any vehicle with a height in excess of
8 feet or a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds, or any trailer, except
for major recreational equipment or domestic utility trailers, shall be parked
on any premises outside of a building which are zoned for residential
purposes except when such vehicle is being used for delivery purposes, or
when a construction permit has been issued for the property and the truck or
trailer is reasonably necessary for the completion of the construction, or as
otherwise provided by law. No owner of property or person responsible for
the maintenance of property shall permit a violation of this Section to occur
on their property.
36. Section 302.9 - Defacement of Property.
Delete this Section.
37. Section 304.1.1 – Add at the end: The foregoing list shall not be considered
an exhaustive list of unsafe conditions, but shall be considered as examples
of unsafe conditions. Any condition which causes a structure to be unsafe so
as to create a danger to the occupants or the public may be declared an
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.40)
unsafe condition requiring repair, removal, replacement, or closure.
38. Section 304.2 - Add the following language at the end of this Section:
All exterior surfaces including windows and doors shall be maintained in
good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster,
decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
Exterior painted surfaces of dwelling and child and day care facilities,
including fences and accessory structures, which contain lead levels equal to
or greater than 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or an excess of 0.50
percent lead by weight shall be maintained in a condition free from peeling,
chipping and flaking paint.
39. Section 304.5 - Foundation walls. Add the words "and water" after the word
"pests".
40. Section 304.7 - Roofs and Drainage. Delete the entire section and substitute
therefor the following:
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. The roof shall not have curled or missing shingles or tiles. Only
approved roofing materials may be used for repairs. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion
of the structure, and the exterior of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.
Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a private or
public nuisance or the accumulation of standing water, either on the property
or other property. Gutters and downspouts shall be required on all buildings
originally designed to have gutters and downspouts.
41. Section 304.13 – Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Add the following:
Boarding Up. No window, door or other opening shall be boarded up or
otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the
design of the building or otherwise permitted for new construction of similar
type for a period in excess of thirty (30) days unless authorized pursuant to a
vacant building plan.
42. Section 304.14 - Insect Screens.
Insert the dates "April 15" and "October 15" as the beginning and ending
dates for the requirement of insect screens.
43. Section 305.1.1 –Add at the end: The foregoing list shall not be considered
an exhaustive list of unsafe conditions, but shall be considered as examples
of unsafe conditions. Any condition which causes a structure to be unsafe
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.41)
so as to create a danger to the occupants or the public may be declared an
unsafe condition requiring repair, removal, replacement, or closure.
44. Section 305.3 - Interior Surfaces.
Delete this section and substitute in lieu therefore the following:
Section 305.3 - Interior Surfaces. All interior surfaces including windows
and doors shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling
paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected. Interior painted surfaces of dwelling and child
and day care facilities, which contain lead levels equal to or greater than 1.0
milligram per square centimeter or an excess of 0.50 percent lead by weight
shall be maintained in a condition free from peeling, chipping and flaking
paint. No interior surface shall have an excess accumulation of mold or
mildew. All worn, frayed or un-cleanable carpet or vinyl shall be replaced.
45. Section 307.1 - Handrails and Guardrails. Delete the number 30 wherever it
appears in this Section and substitute therefore the number 36.
46. Section 308.1.1 – Outdoor Storage of Indoor Upholstered Furniture.
Add the following:
Section 308.1.1 – Outdoor Storage of Indoor Upholstered Furniture. No
person shall place, use, keep, store or maintain outdoors any indoor
upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, but not
limited to, upholstered chairs and couches, except when said indoor
upholstered furniture is placed at the curb on the customary collection day
for it to be removed as part of bulky waste removal or when said indoor
upholstered furniture is placed outdoors as part of a garage sale allowed
under SEC. 15.4-4(D) of the Code. No real property owner or real property
manager or other person in control of such real property shall permit indoor
upholstered furniture to remain on such real property after it has been placed
there in violation of this Section. As used herein indoor upholstered
furniture means any furniture constructed with stuffing or cushions or
springs, not intended for outdoor use. As used herein outdoors means any
place visible from a public place and exposed to precipitation, including but
not limited to yards, rooftops, and unenclosed porches, decks, patios, and
balconies. As used herein “unenclosed” means an area not totally surrounded
with a combination of walls, windows, doors, floor and roof
47. Section 308.2.1 - Rubbish Storage Facilities.
Add the phrase “of adequate size and number” before the word “and”.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.42)
48. Section 308.3.1 - Garbage Facilities. Delete this Section and substitute
therefore:
The owner of every dwelling unit shall supply approved leak-proof, covered
outside garbage containers of sufficient size to accommodate all garbage
generated by the dwelling unit(s).
49. Section 309.2 – Owner. Delete the phrase “within the structure prior to
renting or leasing the structure.”
50. Section 309.3 – Single Occupant. Delete this Section.
51. Section 309.4 – Multiple Occupancy. Delete this Section.
52. Section 309.5 – Occupant. Delete this Section.
53. Section 401.1 – Add the following to the end of this Section:
Nothing in this Code shall abridge the requirements of the Mechanical Code
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended. In places
where this Code and the Mechanical Code conflict, the stricter restriction
shall control.
54. Section 402.1 Habitable Spaces - Add the following to the end of this
Section:
a. Bedrooms which are below grade which existed prior to the adoption
of this Code shall cease their use as bedrooms effective August 1,
2005, unless those rooms can meet the following standards:
(1) Stair and hallway geometry. All stairs leading to such
bedrooms must have a riser height of no more than 8.25
inches, a tread depth of no less than 9 inches, a tread width of
no less than 32 inches and a headroom clearance of no less
than 76 inches. Hallways and doors serving bedrooms must
be at least 32 inches wide.
(2) Ceiling height. The ceiling height in the bedroom and all
hallways and doors serving bedrooms shall be a minimum of
80 inches high. Projections from the ceiling into the room,
such as beams and ducts, may not intrude so that the
remaining height is below 76 inches. Projections into the
room may not constitute more than 25% of the overall ceiling
area.
(3) Egress windows and doors. Except as set forth in Subsection
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.43)
(1) of this Section, egress must be provided as set forth in
Section R310 and R311 of the 2009 Edition of the
International Residential Code adopted at SEC. 11.4-4 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
(4) Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms must be provided as set forth
in the International Residential Code adopted at SEC. 11.4-4
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
55. Section 403.3 – Cooking Facilities. Delete the second exception.
56. Section 404.1 - Privacy.
Add at the end of this Section the following language:
No dwelling unit shall be constructed so that access to the street or additional
facilities such as laundry rooms or heating facilities requires a person to pass
through any other dwelling unit or commercial unit.
57. Section 404.5 – Overcrowding. Add the phrase at the end of the first
sentence “or as permitted by the Zoning Code, Chapter 15 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended.”
58. Section 404.6 - Efficiency Unit. Delete the language “Nothing in this
Section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following
requirements:” and substitute therefore “All efficiency units must meet the
following requirements:”
59. Section 404.6(1) - Add the following sentence at the end of part (1).
These required areas shall also be exclusive of any dining alcove in excess of
125 square feet.
60. Section 404.7 - Food Preparation.
Add the following at the end of the Section: In dwelling units all kitchens
shall include a refrigerator to be used for the storage of food, a stove for the
preparation of cooked foods and a sink and faucet connected to both hot and
cold water supplies. Any appliance supplied by the owner shall be in good
and safe working order and in a condition in which they may be kept clean
and sanitary. No more than one kitchen per dwelling unit shall be permitted.
61. Section 501.1 – Add the following to the end of this Section:
Nothing in this Code shall abridge the requirements of the Plumbing Code,
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended. In places
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.44)
where this Code and the Plumbing Code conflict, the stricter restriction shall
control.
62. Section 502.5 – Public Toilet Facilities. Delete the word “International.”
63. Section 503.4 – Floor Surface. Add at the end of this Section the following:
In dwelling units, the floor must be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
64. Section 504.3 – Delete Section 504.3.
65. Section 505.1 – General. Omit word “International.”
66. Section 507.1 – Storm Drainage.
Delete the words “a public nuisance” and substitute therefor “a private or
public nuisance. The accumulation of standing water, either on the property
or other property, is prohibited. Gutters and downspouts shall be required
and shall be in good repair.”
67. Section 601.1 – General.
Add the following to the end of this Section:
Nothing in this Code shall abridge the requirements of the Mechanical or the
Electrical Code of the Town of Normal. In places where this Code and the
Mechanical or Electrical Code conflict, the stricter restriction shall control.
68. Section 602.2 - Residential Occupancies.
Delete the exception and the phrase “based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the plumbing code”
and substitute therefore “when the outdoor temperature is minus ten degrees
Fahrenheit (-10° F). Portable heating equipment shall not be considered as
heating facilities”.
69. Section 602.3 – Heat Supply.
Insert October 1 and May 1 for the starting and ending dates of the heating
season.
Delete the exception and add the following at the end of the sentence: “when
the outdoor temperature is above minus ten degrees Fahrenheit (-10°F).
When the outdoor temperature is below minus ten degrees Fahrenheit (-10°
F), the heating system must be operating at full capacity”.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.45)
70. Section 602.4
Insert October 1 and May 1 for the starting and ending dates of the heating
season.
71. Section 606 – Elevators, Escalators, and Dumbwaiters. Delete Section 606.
72. Section 701.1 - Add the following to the end of this Section:
Nothing in this Code shall abridge the requirements of the Fire Code,
Chapter 6, Division 4 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969,
as amended, or any other Code of the Town of Normal. In places where this
Code and any other Code conflict, the stricter restriction shall control.
73. Section 702.1 - Omit the second sentence and substitute therefore the
following: No egress door shall be blocked by any chair, table, or other
object at any time.
74. Section 702.2 - Omit this Section and substitute therefore the following:
Arrangements of chairs or tables and chairs shall provide for ready access by
aisle accessways and aisles to each egress door. The clear width of aisles
shall not be blocked by chairs, tables or other objects.
75. Section 702.3 - Locked Doors. Add the following after the word “Code”:
“and is approved by the Code Official for security purposes.”
76. Add Section 702.5 – Arrangements as follows:
Arrangements. Exits from dwelling units, rooming units, guest rooms, or
dormitory units shall not lead through other such units or through toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
77. Add Section 702.6 - Exit Signs as follows:
Exit Signs. All means of egress shall be indicated with approved exit signs
as required by the Building Code. All exit signs shall be maintained visible
and illuminated at all times that the building is occupied.
78. Add Section 702.7 - Stairway Identifiable.
Stairway identifiable. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in all
interior stairways more than three stories above grade, designating the floor
level above the floor of exit discharge.
79. Add Section 702.8 - Emergency escape.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.46)
Emergency escape. Every sleeping room located below the third story in
residential occupancies shall have at least one operable window or exterior
door approved for emergency egress or rescue, or shall have access to not
less than two approved independent exits, except for buildings equipped
throughout with an automatic fire suppression system.
80. Section 703.1- Fire Resistance-Rated Assemblies. Add the word “ceilings,”
after the word “walls.”
81. Section 703.2 - Opening Protectives. Add the following sentence at the end:
Fire doors shall not be held open by door stops, wedges or other unapproved
hold-open devices.
82. Section 704.1- General. Delete this Section and substitute therefor the
following:
Systems, devices, and equipment to detect carbon monoxide, smoke, or fire,
to actuate an alarm, or to control or suppress a fire, or any combination
thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times.
83. Section 704.1.2 - Fire Department Connection. Delete this Section.
84. Section 704.2 - Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms. Delete this
Section and substitute therefor the following:
Approved smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in all structures
except sheds with no electrical service and which are generally not occupied
by persons.
85. Section 704.2.1 - Where Required. Delete this Section.
86. Section 704.2.1.1- Group R-1. Delete this Section.
87. Section 704.2.1.2 - Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. Delete the words “Group
R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1” and substitute therefor the words “all buildings” and
add the following at the end of this Section: “4. Hard-wired smoke alarms
or smoke detectors may not be replaced with battery operated smoke
detectors or smoke alarms.”
88. Section 704.3 - Fire extinguishers. Add as follows:
Fire extinguishers shall be maintained in operating condition and shall be
visible with ready access thereto. Fire extinguishers shall display a
certificate of inspection a licensed Illinois Fire Equipment Distributor
bearing a date no more than one year old.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.47)
89. Add Section 704.4 - System Certification as follows:
Every fire alarm, smoke alarm, smoke detector, fire detector and fire
suppression system shall be tested in the manner and frequency prescribed in
the Fire Code. Every fire suppression system and every fire alarm system,
smoke alarm, smoke detector and smoke detector system which is not able to
be easily tested by the Code Official must be tested by a licensed Illinois
Fire Equipment Distributor or a licensed Illinois Private Alarm Contractor as
set forth in the Fire Code, but in no event less than on an annual basis. Any
building owner or owner’s agent, shall produce a copy of the fire alarm,
smoke alarm and fire suppression system certificate with a date not more
than one year old upon demand by the Code Official.
90. Section 704.5 - Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Add as follows:
Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved carbon
monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of every room used
for sleeping purposes.
91. Add Section 705 - Hazardous Materials as follows:
Combustible, flammable, explosive or other hazardous materials such as
paints, volatile oils, and cleaning fluids or combustible trash such as
wastepaper, boxes and rags shall not be accumulated or stored unless such
storage complies with applicable requirements of the Fire Code.
I. Adoption of the National Electrical Code, 2017 with Amendments. There is hereby
adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations
for the utilization of materials, construction, installation and alteration of all
electrical work placed in or utilized in connection with any building or structure
within the Town of Normal, a certain electrical code known as the National
Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, particularly the 2017
Edition thereof, with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and
amendments as set forth in this Chapter and referred to as the National Electrical
Code. The provisions of said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length and the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and
amended by this Chapter shall be controlling in regard to all buildings and structures
within the corporate limits of the Town. Amendments to the National Electrical
Code, The National Electrical Code, 2017, is amended as follows: (Amended
12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5723)
1. Article 230-91. Location of Overcurrent Protection. The service
overcurrent device shall be connected by no more than 8 feet of raceway or
service entrance cable from the meter device, in dwellings.
2. Article 240-54. Type “S” fuses and fuse holders for plug fuses are
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.48)
mandatory, unless circuit breaker type panels are installed.
3. The use of #10 or smaller aluminum or copper-clad aluminum building wire
shall be prohibited.
4. Ceiling mounted lighting outlet boxes more than 3 feet from any wall shall
be listed as paddle fan rated and be secured according to the listing
directions, dwelling garages and basements are excluded.
5. Add at the end- of the National Electrical Code- Section 1A - Local
Administration.
Section 1A.1 - Application. Nothing in this Local Administration Portion is
intended to modify the obligations of persons performing electrical work in
the Town of Normal as required by the National Electrical Code. Rather,
this Section is intended to provide the means of obtaining compliance with
the National Electrical Code.
Section 1A.2 - Position of Electrical Inspector.
a. Establishment - There has heretofore been created and is hereby
continued the Town of Normal employment position of Electrical
Inspector (occasionally referred to in this Chapter as "Inspector").
b. Supervision - The Electrical Inspector shall be hired by the City
Manager, shall be under the supervision of the Building
Commissioner and shall be subject to the provisions of the Town's
Personnel Code.
c. Qualifications – The Electrical Inspector shall be knowledgeable
about electricity and the installation and alteration of electrical
equipment and appurtenances and well versed in the rules,
regulations, and requirements of the National Electrical Code to
perform the duties of the Electrical Inspector.
d. Duties - The Electrical Inspector shall have the following duties,
functions and responsibilities:
(1) To interpret and apply this Chapter;
(2) To issue all electrical permits hereunder;
(3) To inspect or cause the inspection of all construction,
installation, maintenance and alteration of electrical
appliances, apparatus, systems of electrical wiring, systems
of poles for the carriage of such electrical wiring, electric or
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.49)
illuminated signs or billboards and the electrical wiring of all
buildings or structures to see that such work is in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter;
(4) To perform the duties, functions and responsibilities specified
in the current Job Description of the Town of Normal
employment position "Electrical Inspector", which Job
Description is approved from time to time by the Town
Council as part of the Salary Administration Program.
Section 1A.3 - License Required. Except as specifically otherwise provided
in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do
or perform any installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of or to any
electrical conductor, equipment or other process, matter or material regulated
by or within the scope of the National Electrical Code as adopted and
modified thereby, without being appropriately licensed and/or registered
under the provisions of this Chapter. EXCEPTIONS:
a. The owner-occupant of a one-family dwelling may, with the
assistance of any member of his family, personally carry on in such a
house any work governed by this Division without a license,
provided that such owner shall obtain a permit for any such work and
shall call for inspections as provided in this Chapter. Such owneroccupancy
shall be retained for at least one year from the date of
final inspection and approval of such work.
b. Public service agencies installing, altering or repairing electrical
equipment for the operation of communication and signals. This
exemption applies only to equipment and conductors owned by the
serving agency which are exterior to any premises or dwelling unit.
c. Power companies performing the installation, alteration or repair of
electrical equipment of power or public service companies for use in
the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity,
and other such maintenance or construction as may be required to
insure the safe and adequate transmission of electricity to the
premises being served by said company.
d. Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system
required for the testing or service of electrical equipment or
apparatus. Such system must be approved by the Electrical Inspector
as being safe for the location on which or in which it is to be used;
e. Railway utilities. Installing equipment used by a railroad utility in
the exercise of its function as a public carrier and located outdoors or
in buildings used exclusively for that purpose;
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.50)
f. Transmitting equipment. The installation, alteration, modification or
use of electrical equipment for radio and television transmission,
except the equipment and wiring for power supply therefore.
Section 1A.4 - Classes of Electrical License and Type of Work Authorized.
a. General Electrical Contractor. A General Electrical Contractor
license authorizes any person, firm or corporation to do any type of
residential, commercial or industrial electrical wiring, including
without limitation the installation or alteration of electrical
equipment for utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or
power.
b. Maintenance Electrical Contractor License. A Maintenance
Electrical Contractor license authorizes an individual employed by a
single employer to maintain and/or repair, but not install, electrical
conductors or equipment owned or otherwise under the exclusive
control of that employer.
Section 1A.5 - Licensing Procedure. The procedure for obtaining any class
of license shall be as follows:
a. Application for any class of electrical license shall be received by the
Electrical Inspector on forms which may be obtained from him. The
application shall state on it the class of license applied for and shall
include the name, address and place of business of the applicant.
b. All applicants for electrical license shall be at least eighteen years of
age and shall have had at least four years practical experience in the
type of work authorized by the type of license sought, or shall have
satisfactorily completed a course of study in the subject for which the
license is sought, given by a recognized school, and have had at least
one year of practical experience in addition thereto.
c. Each applicant for a license under this Division must pass an
examination prior to the issuance of such license. Candidates for the
General Electrical Contractor License must pass the “National
Standard Master Electrician” examination administered by the
International Code Council or its designated testing agent.
Candidates for the Maintenance Electrical Contractor License must
pass the “National Standard Maintenance Electrician” examination
administered by the International Code Council or its designated
testing agent. (Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5723)
d. Each applicant shall pay to the Town Treasurer the non-refundable
sum of $50.00. This sum shall be applied as a fee toward the first
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.51)
year’s license or portion thereof, if the applicant is successful in
obtaining a license.
Section 1A.6 - Reciprocity and Registration. Any person, firm or
corporation who is registered or licensed for the current year in any city,
village or town in the State of Illinois where the requirements of registration
or licensing on the date of such registration or licensing were substantially
equal to or greater than the requirements in force in the Town of Normal, and
if such city, village or town extends a similar privilege to persons licensed
under this Chapter, shall not be required to take the examination or pay the
license fees as provided in this Chapter, in order to engage in the
type of electrical work authorized by the individual’s license, but prior to
commencing any work, shall file a copy of his registration or license with the
Electrical Inspector of the Town of Normal and pay an annual $50.00
registration fee.
Section 1A.7 - Non-Transferability. No license issued under this Chapter or
registration hereunder shall be loaned, rented, assigned or transferred.
Section 1A.8 - Renewal and Reinstatement. Any person, firm or corporation
having received an Electrical License as provided for in this Chapter has the
right, without further examination, to have that license renewed annually
upon payment to the Town Treasurer of a license fee. The license fee for an
annual renewal of a General Electrical Contractor shall be $50.00 and for a
Maintenance Electrical Contractor, shall be $25.00. All licenses shall expire
on the 31st day of December or each year. Any license forfeited for nonpayment
of a renewal fee may be reinstated upon the payment of the annual
renewal fee without re-examination, provided, however, after the same has
been delinquent for a period of one year, then the same shall be null and void
and may not be renewed or reinstated.
Section 1A.9 - Suspension or Revocation of Rights and Privileges. Any
licensee or person registered in the Town of Normal under this Chapter may
have his license or registration suspended or revoked by the Building Board
of Appeals for cause, after notice and an opportunity to be heard in his own
defense. Cause for suspension or revocation of a license or registration shall
include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Refusal or failure to make any necessary corrections to electrical
work within a reasonable time after notification of the defects
therein.
b. Failure to obtain electrical permits.
c. Transfer of electrical permits.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.52)
d. Failure to call for required inspections.
e. Unwillingness or inability to install electrical work in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this Chapter.
f. Performing work not authorized by the class of license held.
g. Violation of any provision of this Chapter.
Section 1A.10 - Permits Required. Except as specifically otherwise provided
in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do
or perform any installation, alteration, maintenance or
repair of any electrical conductors, equipment or other material regulated or
within the scope of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and modified
hereby, without first obtaining a permit in the manner provided by this
Chapter. EXCEPTIONS:
a. Persons, firms, or corporations holding Maintenance Electrical
Licenses may maintain or repair conductors or equipment of their
employer without a permit, provided that such licensee call for
inspections as provided in this Chapter.
b. Public service agencies installing, altering or repairing electrical
equipment for the operation of communication and signals. This
exemption applies only to equipment and conductors owned by the
serving agency which are exterior to any premises or dwelling unit.
c. Power companies performing the installation, alteration or repair of
electrical equipment of power or public service companies for use in
the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity,
and other such maintenance or construction as may be required to
insure the safe and adequate transmission of electricity to the
premises being served by said company.
d. Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system
required for the testing or service of electrical equipment or
apparatus. Such system must be approved by the Electrical Inspector
as being safe for the location on which or in which it is to be used.
e. Railway utilities. Installing equipment used by a railroad utility in the
exercise of its function as a public carrier and located outdoors or in
buildings used exclusively for that purpose.
f. Transmitting equipment. The installation, alteration, modification or
use of electrical equipment for radio and television transmission,
except the equipment and wiring for power supply therefore.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.53)
Section 1A.11 – Permits: Application, Issuance, Transfer-Ability And
Expiration. Persons desiring an electrical permit shall make application
therefore to the Electrical Inspector on forms prescribed by him. Before
issuing any permit, the Electrical Inspector may require such detailed plans,
specifications and drawings as are necessary to describe the work, materials
and manner of installation, alteration or repair. The Electrical Inspector shall
issue a permit when such plans show that said electrical work will be
installed in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. After a permit
has been issued by the Electrical Inspector, no change or modification in the
plans or specifications shall be made unless such change has been submitted
to the Electrical Inspector and approved by him. No electrical permit shall
be issued to any person other than someone appropriately licensed under this
Chapter unless the permit is for a dwelling or accessory structure that the
permittee occupies as his residence.
If electrical work is not commenced under a permit within six months after
the date of issuance, the permit shall be considered to have expired.
Electrical permits shall not be transferable and if after issuance, another
person, firm or corporation desires to complete the work initiated under a
permit, it shall be necessary to obtain a new electrical permit authorizing
such completion.
Section 1A.12 - Fees. The fees for electrical permits and inspection of work
performed thereunder shall be as follows:
a. Fees as set forth in Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, shall be paid.
b. Doing Work Without a Permit – If any person initiates construction,
erection or alteration of electrical work in any structure without first
taking out a permit, such person shall pay, in addition to the regular
fees prescribed for permits, an additional amount equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the fee required, and upon conviction,
may be subject to all penalty provisions of this Chapter.
Section 1A.13 - Inspections.
a. Inspection Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to conceal electrical conductors or equipment, energize
an electrical service or occupy or permit the occupancy of any
building or structure having wiring, equipment or components within
the scope of regulation provided by the National Electrical Code as
adopted and modified hereby, without in each case and in each stage
of installation, calling for an electrical inspection in the manner
provided in this Chapter and obtaining approval thereof by the
Electrical Inspector.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.54)
b. Procedure. The Electrical Inspector shall be notified by the person
performing the electrical work when it or any portion of it is ready
for inspection, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the requested
inspection time. All work shall be left uncovered and convenient for
inspection until inspected and approved.
The Inspector shall endeavor to examine the work within one
working day after being notified that it is ready for inspection. All
electrical work when placed in position may be required to be tested
by appropriate tests in the presence of the Inspector and any and all
defects corrected. Upon satisfactory completion of the electrical
work and approval by the Inspector, the premises, installation or
portion thereof obtaining approval shall be so posted.
c. Inspection Upon Complaint. Upon complaint, in writing, of any
citizen of this Town as to the unsafe condition of any part of any
such electrical system within the Town, it shall be the duty of said
Electrical Inspector to inspect such part complained of, and if he
finds that such complaint is well grounded, or if he otherwise finds
any defect, to require the owner of the property on which the
defective condition is located to put such part in proper condition,
and it shall then be the duty of such person, firm or corporation to put
such defective part in proper condition.
d. Condemnation of Electrical Work or Equipment. The Town
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority upon inspection or
reinspection to condemn any or all electrical work installed or being
installed that may be considered unsafe or hazardous to life and
property. Upon condemnation of such work, he shall serve a written
notice upon the person owning, using or installing the same to place
the work in a secure and safe condition and in compliance with the
provisions herein contained.
Upon condemnation of any electrical work, the Electrical Inspector is
authorized to refuse the connection or to order the disconnection
of any electrical supply lines until the condemned electrical work has
been made safe and is approved by the Electrical Inspector. Such
order shall be in writing, signed by the Electrical Inspector and
served upon both utilities furnishing services in the Town and upon
the owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to utilize
condemned electrical work or to reconnect an electrical supply to any
condemned electrical work from which the Electrical Inspector has
refused to authorize a connection or ordered a disconnection of
electrical supply lines.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.55)
Section 1A.14 - Violations, Penalties and Appeals.
a. Violations. In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the
Electrical Inspector may cause to be instituted the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity or with the Town’s Administrative
Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of an unlawful
occupancy of the structure. The Town may take action to abate any
violation, and any costs incurred in abating such violations may be
charged against the real estate upon which such abatement occurs
and shall be a lien upon such property.
b. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or
opposing the investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or any of the Codes adopted and modified hereby, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars nor more than Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars for the first offense and not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars
nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the second and
each subsequent offense in any 180 day period. A separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which
said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such
violation to exist after notification or knowledge of the existence
thereof.
c. Appeals. All appeals of rulings or determinations of the Electrical
Inspector shall be to the Building Board of Appeals. However, no
appeal shall be taken after the Town has initiated legal or
administrative proceedings seeking fines for violation of this Code or
compliance with this Code.
J. Adoption of the Illinois State Plumbing Code, 2014 with Amendments. There is
hereby adopted by the Town of Normal for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for materials, construction, alteration and inspection of all plumbing
placed in or in connection with any building or structure, a certain plumbing code
known as the Illinois State Plumbing Code, particularly the 2014 Edition thereof,
with such amendments to said Code as are published from time to time by the State
of Illinois with specific additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and
amendments as set forth in this Chapter and referred to as the “Illinois State
Plumbing Code” or “Code.” The provisions of said Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length and the provisions thereof as added,
deleted, inserted, modified and amended by this Chapter shall be controlling in
regard to all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the Town.
Amendments to the Illinois State Plumbing Code, The Illinois State Plumbing Code,
2014, is amended as follows:
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.56)
1. Section 890.120 – Definitions. Add to the existing definitions in its
appropriate alphabetical location, the following:
Authorities Having Jurisdiction. Within its corporate limits, the Town of
Normal shall be the “Authorities Having Jurisdiction” as that term is used in
this Code.
2. Section 890.120 – Definitions. Add to the existing language thereof, the
following:
“Building Classification” as used in this Code shall refer to the building
classifications set forth in the Building Code of the Town of Normal, being
Chapter 11 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois 1969, as
amended.
3. Section 890.510 - Grease Interceptor Requirements. Amend Section 890.510
by adding to the existing language thereof the following:
In all new construction and remodeling in which a grease interceptor is
required, only a grease interceptor with a capacity of no less than 1000
gallons placed outside of the building no closer than 5 feet from the wall of
the building shall be approved. If physical limitations prohibit installation of
a 1000 gallon grease interceptor, then the Plumbing Inspector may permit a
250 gallon interceptor if the Plumbing Inspector believes that there are
adequate safeguards in place to prevent grease from entering the sewer
system. Grease interceptors may only be placed inside a building in the
event of a remodel of a building for which there is no space available outside
of the building for a grease interceptor, or where the expected use of the
property is that of a restaurant that will not cook food, but serve only
prepared foods that will produce so little grease as to not require an exterior
grease interceptor as determined by the Plumbing Inspector. In the event
that the use of the property becomes such that an exterior grease interceptor
is needed, the Plumbing Inspector may order that an exterior grease
interceptor be placed on the property. All interior grease traps shall be
Plumbing Drainage Institute approved with a solid waste interceptor located
before the grease trap.
4. Section 890.1200 - Water Service Sizing. Delete from Section 890.1200 the
following:
“Water service pipe and fittings shall be at least three-fourths (3/4) inch
diameter.”
Add in place thereof the following:
“Water service pipe and fittings shall be at least one (1) inch in diameter.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.57)
Except that existing water service pipe and fittings may be repaired or
replaced with pipe and fittings at least ¾ inch in diameter.”
5. Section 890.1910 – Inspections. Amend Section 890.1910 by adding to the
existing language the following:
All drain, waste and vent piping in commercial, industrial or multiple family
buildings shall be tested with water while the Plumbing Inspector is present.
6. Section 890 .Appendix A – Plumbing Materials, Equipment, Use
Restrictions and Applicable Standards. Amend Table A – Approved
Materials for Water Service Pipe by adding the following at the end thereof:
When polyethlene (PE) tubing is used as water service pipe, it must meet
ASTM D 2737 standards. Polyethlene (PE) pipe shall be installed only with
compression fittings with insert and clamp type fittings. All clamps shall be
of corrosion resistant material. The inside diameter (ID) of any insert fitting
shall not be less than the minimum allowable size for water service as
required by the Town of Normal ordinances and State plumbing code. PE
tubing water service shall be one continuous pipe from the curb stop or pig
tail to the building water meter. Every plastic, polyethylene (PE) or other
non-metallic water service pipe shall have a solid 12 gauge blue sheathed
coated, suited for direct burial, tracer wire connected to the coupling or curb
stop secured to the service every 6 feet, unbroken, and accessible at the water
meter.
7. Section 890 Appendix A – Plumbing Materials, Equipment, Use Restrictions
and Applicable Standards. Amend Table A – Approved Materials for Water
Distribution Pipe by adding at the end thereof:
Every plastic, polyethlene (PE) or other non-metallic water distribution pipe
which is not inside a building shall have a solid 12 gauge blue sheathed
coated, suited for direct burial, tracer wire connected to the coupling or curb
stop secured to the service every 6 feet, and be unbroken for the length of the
pipe.
8. Add at the end of the State Plumbing Code, Section 1A - Local
Administration, Section 2A Cross Connection Program and Section 3A
Water Conservation:
Section 1A - Local Administration.
Section 1A.1 - Application. Nothing in this Local Administration Portion is
intended to modify the obligations of persons performing plumbing work in
the Town of Normal as required by the State Plumbing Code. Rather, this
Section is intended to provide the means of obtaining compliance with the
State Plumbing Code.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.58)
Section 1A.2 - Position of Plumbing Inspector.
a. Establishment. There has heretofore been created and is hereby
continued the Town of Normal employment position of Plumbing
Inspector (occasionally referred to in this Chapter as "Inspector").
b. Supervision. The Plumbing Inspector shall be hired by the City
Manager, shall be under the supervision of the Building
Commissioner and shall be subject to the provisions of the Town's
Personnel Code.
c. Qualifications. The Plumbing Inspector shall be certified as a
Plumbing Inspector by the State of Illinois.
d. Duties. The Plumbing Inspector shall have the following duties,
functions and responsibilities:
(1) To interpret and apply this Chapter;
(2) To issue all plumbing permits hereunder;
(3) To inspect or cause the inspection of all construction,
installation, maintenance and alteration of plumbing,
drainage and ventilation systems to see that such work is in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;
(4) To perform the duties, functions and responsibilities specified
in the current Job Description of the Town of Normal
employment position "Plumbing Inspector", which Job
Description is approved from time to time by the Town
Council as part of the Salary Administration Program.
Section 1A.3 - State License Required. Except as specifically otherwise
provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to do or perform any plumbing, as that term is defined in the
Illinois State Plumbing Code as adopted and modified hereby, within the
corporate limits of the Town of Normal without being appropriately licensed
under the provisions of the Illinois Plumbing License Law. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, all materials attached to water supply mains, including water
piping up to the outlet valve of a backflow preventative device must be
installed by a licensed plumber. All fire hydrants and water pipes
downstream of the backflow prevention device used exclusively for fire
protection, shall be installed by a licensed plumber or a sprinkler fitter.
EXCEPTION: The owner-occupant of a one-family dwelling may, with the
assistance of any member of his family, personally carry on in such house
any work governed by this Chapter without a plumbing license, provided
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.59)
that such owner shall obtain a permit for any such work, shall call for
inspections as provided in this Chapter and the State Plumbing Code as
adopted and modified hereby, and shall install all plumbing to meet or
exceed the standards provided in this Chapter and in the manner depicted on
the approved plans, specifications and drawings, if any. Such ownership and
occupancy shall be retained for at least one year from the date of final
inspection and approval of such work.
Section 1A.4 - Permits Required. Except as specifically otherwise provided
in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do
or perform any "plumbing" as that term is defined in the Illinois State
Plumbing Code as adopted and modified hereby without first obtaining a
permit in the manner provided by Rule 14.4 of said Code, as so adopted and
modified.
a. Transferability. Plumbing permits shall not be transferable and if
after issuance, another person, firm or corporation desires to
complete the work initiated under a permit, it shall be necessary to
obtain a new plumbing permit authorizing such completion.
b. Expiration. If plumbing work is not commenced under a permit
within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall be
considered to have expired.
Section 1A.5 - Fees.
a. Charges. Fees for plumbing and irrigation permits and the inspection
of work performed thereunder shall be as set forth in Chapter 25 of
the Town of Normal Municipal Code. For the purpose of calculating
fees the word “opening” shall mean to include all openings left for
waste pipes, whether fixtures are set or not, including, but not limited
to, the following:
1. Bathtub - with or without shower
2. Water closets - floor and wall mount
3. Bidet
4. Shower - stall or compartment
5. Lavatory - bar sinks
6. Urinal - pedestal, wall type, floor and trough
7. Drinking fountains
8. Kitchen sink - including garbage disposal and dishwasher
9. Drain - floor, explosion proof, grease, oil, sand and all other
interceptors
10. Automatic washer standpipe and all "p" traps that catch
indirect waste
11. Dishwasher - restaurant or commercial
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.60)
12. Any other plumbing fixture
b. Doing Work Without a Permit. If any person initiates construction,
erection or alteration of plumbing in any structure without first taking
out a permit, or installs an irrigation system, such person shall pay, in
addition to the regular fees prescribed for permits, an additional
amount equal to 100% of the fee required. Any such individual may
be subject to the penal provisions of this Chapter for violation of the
Plumbing Code. No change or modifications of
plans or specifications shall be made after a permit has been issued
unless said changes have first been approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
Section 1A.6 - Inspections.
a. Inspection Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to conceal or utilize any plumbing work, appurtenance,
appliance, fixture, system or portion thereof without at each
appropriate stage in the installation, alteration or repair, calling for a
plumbing inspection in the manner provided in Article XIV of the
Illinois State Plumbing Code as adopted and modified hereby.
b. Procedure. The Plumbing Inspector shall be notified by the person
performing the plumbing work when it or any portion of it is ready
for inspection at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the requested
inspection time. All work shall be left uncovered and convenient for
inspection until inspected and approved. The Inspector shall
endeavor to examine the work within one working day after notified
that it is ready for inspection. All plumbing work when placed in
position may be required to be tested by appropriate tests in the
presence of the Inspector and any and all defects corrected. On
satisfactory completion of the plumbing work and approval by the
Inspector, the premises, installation or portion thereof obtaining
approval shall be so posted.
c. Inspection Upon Complaint. Upon complaint, in writing, of any
citizen of this Town alleging the existence of an unsafe condition in
any part of any such plumbing system within the Town, it shall be
the duty of such Plumbing Inspector to inspect such part complained
of, and if he finds that such complaint is well grounded, or if he
otherwise finds any defect, to require the owner of the property on
which the defective condition is located to put such part in proper
condition, and it shall then be the duty of such owner to put such
defective part in proper condition.
d. Condemnation of Plumbing Work or Equipment: Right of Appeal.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.61)
The Town Plumbing Inspector shall have the authority upon
inspection or reinspection, either pursuant to permit, on complaint or
on his own initiative, to condemn any and all plumbing work
installed or being installed that may be done without permit; that may
be done contrary to approved plans, specifications and drawings; that
may be done in violation of the State Plumbing Code; or that may be
done by any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation not
entitled to do plumbing within the Town of Normal; or that is in a
condition which may be considered unsafe or hazardous to life or
property. Upon condemnation of such work, he
shall serve a written notice upon the person owning, using or
installing the same, or the person, firm or corporation owning the
property on which such plumbing is located, requiring such person to
place the work in a secure and safe condition and one which is in all
respects in compliance with the provisions herein contained. It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to utilize condemned
plumbing work.
Section 1A.7 - Violations, Penalties and Appeals.
a. Violations. In case of a violation of any provision of this Code, the
Plumbing Inspector may cause to be instituted the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity or with the Town’s Administrative
Hearing Unit to obtain penalties or to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of an unlawful
occupancy of the structure. The Town may take action to abate any
violation, and any costs incurred in abating such violations may be
charged against the real estate upon which such abatement occurs
and shall be a lien upon such property.
b. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or
opposing the investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or any of the Codes adopted and modified hereby, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars nor more than Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars for the first offense and not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars
nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the second and
each subsequent offense in any 180 day period. A separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which
said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such
violation to exist after notification or knowledge of the existence
thereof.
c. Appeals. All appeals of rulings or determinations of the Plumbing
Inspector shall be to the Building Board of Appeals. However, no
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.62)
appeal shall be taken after the Town has initiated legal or
administrative proceedings seeking fines for violation of this Code or
compliance with this Code.
Section 2A.1 - Cross Connection Control.
a. Purpose. The purpose of these Rules and Regulations is:
1. To protect the public water supply system from
contamination or pollution by isolating within the
customer’s water system contaminants or pollutants which
could back flow through the service connection into the
public water supply system.
2. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the public or
customer’s potable water system and non-potable water
systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems
containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
3. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross connection control which will prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and customer’s
potable water systems.
4. Nothing in these Rules and Regulations is intended to
abrogate any provision of the State Plumbing Code.
Rather, these rules are intended to obtain compliance with
State Environmental Regulations. To the extent any
provision conflicts with the State Plumbing Code, the
stricter regulation shall apply.
b. Application. These Rules and Regulations shall apply to all
premises served by the public potable water supply system of the
Town of Normal.
c. Owner’s Obligation. The owner of property shall be responsible
for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination
due to back flow or back siphonage of contaminants through the
customer’s water service connection. If in the judgment of the
Town of Normal plumbing inspector or his authorized
representative, an approved back flow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, Town
of Normal plumbing inspector shall give notice to the owner to
install such approved back flow prevention device at each service
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.63)
connection where such device is needed. The owner shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own
expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the owner to
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed. Failure, refusal or inability on the part
of the owner to install such device or devices immediately shall be
unlawful and the Town is authorized to seek immediate injunctive
and equitable relief in Court as well as seeking fines and penalties
as provided in SEC. 11.3 herein. The owner shall retain records of
installation, maintenance, testing and repair below for a period of
at least five years. All cross-connection inspections shall be
conducted by a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector
certified by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
Section 2A.2 - Definitions for Cross Control Regulations.
Backflow. The term “backflow” shall mean water, wastes or other
contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of
flow.
Connection. The term “connection” shall mean any arrangement of piping
or appurtenances attached to a public water supply system.
Cross Connection. The term “cross connection” shall mean a connection
or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow
could occur.
Cross Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI). The term Cross
Connection Control Device Inspector shall mean any person certified by
the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to perform cross
connection device inspections.
Owner. The term “owner” shall include the record titleholder of property,
a water customer served by the Town’s water system, and any person,
corporation, firm or other entity actually in control of property.
Water system. The term “water system” shall have the following
meaning:
a. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the customer’s water system.
b. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of
the potable water system under the control of the Director of Water
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.64)
up to the point where the customer’s water system begins.
c. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system.
d. The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits or watermains used to deliver water from the
source to the owner’s water system.
e. The owner’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the water service connection used to convey water from the
public water supply distribution system to points of use.
Section 2A.3 - Cross Connection Prohibited.
a. Connections between the public water supply systems and other
systems or equipment containing water or other substances are
prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to
insure proper operation on a continuing basis. Fire protection
systems and irrigation systems which contain installed piping and
are connected to the public water supply system are prohibited
except when and where approved back flow preventers are
installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a
continuing basis.
b. (1) No physical connection shall be permitted between the
potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not
of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as
determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
(2) There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an
unsafe substance may enter a water supply.
c. It shall be unlawful for any owner to have on his or her property
any connection in violation of this Section.
Section 2A.4 - Survey and Investigations.
a. An owner’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved Cross-connection Control Device Inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within
the owner’s premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of crossconnection
control devices within the owner’s premises.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.65)
b. On request by the Town of Normal plumbing inspector, or his
authorized representative, the owner shall furnish information
regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the
owner’s premises. The premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the Town of Normal plumbing inspector, or his authorized
representative, for the verification of information submitted by the
inspection customer to the public water supply custodian regarding
cross-connection inspection results.
c. Every owner of non-residential property receiving water from the
public water supply shall cause his property to be surveyed by a
Cross Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI) for the water
use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual
or potential cross connections to his water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could back flow into his or the public
potable water system. Every owner of residential property
receiving water from the public water supply which has a fire
suppression system or irrigation system connected to the public
water supply system shall cause the property to be surveyed by a
Cross Connection Control Device Inspector for the water use
practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or
potential cross-connections to his water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could back flow into his or the public
potable water system. The survey must be done every other year
and recorded with the Town of Normal on a form issued by the
Town’s Plumbing Inspector. All cross-connection control
inspections must be conducted by a Cross Connection Control
Device Inspector in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
d. It is the responsibility of the owner to prevent back flow into the
public water system by ensuring that:
(1) All cross connections are removed; or approved crossconnection
control devices are installed for control of back
flow and back siphonage.
(2) Cross connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
(3) Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the
time of installation and at least annually by a person
approved by the State of Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency as a Cross Connection Control Device Inspector
(CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall
include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. A record of the annual
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.66)
inspection shall be filed with the Town of Normal
Plumbing Inspector.
(4) Testing and Records.
(a) Each device shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently
if recommended by the manufacturer.
(b) Records submitted to the community public water
supply shall be available for inspection.
(c) Each device shall have a tag attached listing the
date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type
and date of repairs.
(d) Every owner shall maintain for a period of five
years, a maintenance log for each cross-connection
device which shall include:
(i) date of each test;
(ii) name and approval number of person
performing the test;
(iii) test results;
(iv) repairs or servicing required;
(v) repairs and date completed; and
(vi) serving performed and dated completed.
Section 2A.5 - Where Protection Is Required.
a. An approved back flow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency’s regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an
approved back flow prevention device shall be installed on each
water service line to an owner’s water system serving premises,
where in the judgment of the Town of Normal plumbing inspector,
actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
b. An approved back flow prevention device shall be installed on
each water service line to an owner’s water system serving
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.67)
premises where the following conditions exist:
(1) Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the
Director of Water and the source is approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
(2) Premises on which any substance is handled which can
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water
supply system. This shall include premises having sources
or systems containing process fluids or waters originating
from the public water supply system which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the Director of Water or the
Town of Normal Plumbing Inspector.
(3) Premises having internal cross connections that, in the
judgment of the Town of Normal plumbing inspector
and/or the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector, are
not correctable or which have intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist.
(4) Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical
to make a complete cross connection survey.
(5) Premises having a repeated history of cross connections
being established or reestablished.
c. An approved back flow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations, 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 653. In addition, an approved back flow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system
serving, when the potential of a high hazard cross connection to the
public water system exists as determined by The Town of Normal
plumbing inspector.
d. All yard hydrants, wall hydrants, hose bibs and boiler drains used
to supply domestic water, shall have an integral, non-removable,
backflow device. Vacuum breakers that are not factory installed
and can be removed are not permissible.
e. All boilers shall have a Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow
Device (RPZ), an approved break tank, or approved air gap device
located on the water supply piping to the boiler. All other
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.68)
backflow devices are prohibited. The back flow device shall be
installed by a licensed plumber and certified annually by a licensed
Cross Connection Control Device Inspector.
Section 2A.6 - Type of Protection Required.
a. The type of protection required under Section 2A.5 (B)(1), (2) and
(3) of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which
exists as follows:
(1) An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with substances that could cause a severe
health hazard.
(2) An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle back flow prevention assembly
shall be installed where the public water supply system
may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a
system or health hazard.
(3) An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle back flow prevention assembly
or a double check valve assembly shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
b. The type of protection required under Section.2A.5(B)(4) and (5)
of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle back flow
prevention device.
c. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle back flow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the
public water supply when:
(1) the fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals; or,
(2) water is pumped into the system from another source; or,
(3) water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, water
can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other
source; or,
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.69)
(4) there is a connection whereby another source can be
introduced into the fire safety system; or,
(5) a private water service supplying potable water to a fire
hydrant on private property.
All fire protection systems which have a supply line greater than
two inches shall have a reduced pressure principle detector
assembly (RFDA).
d. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered
service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on
unmetered service lines.
Section 2A.7 – Back-Flow Prevention Devices.
a. All back-flow prevention devices or methods required by these
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, American Water Works Association,
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, Canadian Standards
Foundation, or
American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry
specification.
b. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance as recommended by
the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer’s
maintenance manual shall be available on-site.
Section 2A.8 - Inspection and Maintenance.
a. It shall be the duty of the owner at any premises on which back
flow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed
to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in
accordance with the following schedule or more often where
inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer’s
instructions.
(1) Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a proper vertical distance is maintained
between the discharge point of the service line and the
flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation
and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.70)
by-passed air gap shall be made within 24 hours.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter
and required service performed within five (5) days.
(3) Reduced pressure principle back flow prevention
assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer and required service performed within five
(5) days.
b. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as competent to
service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
c. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of
repairs.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(1) date of each test or visual inspection;
(2) name and approval number of person performing the test or
visual inspection;
(3) test results;
(4) repairs or servicing required;
(5) repairs and date completed; and
(6) servicing performed and date completed.
e. Whenever back flow prevention devices required by these
regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or
replaced at the expense of the owner without delay as required by
this Section.
f. Back flow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without
specific authorization by the Town of Normal Plumbing Inspector.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.71)
Section 2A.9 - Booster Pumps.
a. Where a booster pump has been installed on the water service line
to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low
pressure cutoff device designed to shutoff the booster pump when
the pressure in the water service line on the suction side of the
pump drops to 20 psi or less.
b. It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain the low-pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the Town of
Normal Plumbing Inspector, at least once a year, that the device is
operable.
Section 2A.10 - Fees.
a. There shall be a fee for filing the survey submitted to the Town of
Normal Plumbing Inspector as set forth in SEC. 25.16-4 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal. The fee shall be assessed
for each survey filed. This fee shall be assessed each time a survey
is filed, regardless of whether the survey submitted had been filed
previously and is being resubmitted to correct deficiencies or
errors in a previously filed survey.
b. There shall be a fee for filing the annual certification of cross
connection control devices in the amount set forth in SEC. 25.16-4
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal. The fee shall be
assessed for each device certified.
c. All fees provided for herein shall be paid to the Town of Normal.
Section 2A.11 - Violations.
a. The Director of Water of the Town of Normal is authorized and
may discontinue, after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, the
water service to any property which fails to provide any survey,
inspection report, or fee required by this Division. The Director of
Water, shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
back flow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to
the Town of Normal Plumbing Inspector, or if it is found that the
back flow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if
an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or if a low
pressure cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.72)
b. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
owner has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the
Town of Normal plumbing inspector, and the required
reconnection fee is paid.
c. Neither the Town of Normal, the Director of Water, Town of
Normal plumbing inspector or its agents or assigns shall be liable
for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of said water supply in accordance with the terms of
this ordinance, whether or not said termination of the water supply
was with or without notice.
d. An owner is responsible for back-siphoned material or
contamination through back flow, if contamination of the potable
water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or
an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device
which has been bypassed. The owner must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
e. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance
may be served with written notice stating the notice of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation.
f. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
become liable to the Town of Normal for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the Town of Normal by reason of such
violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice.
g. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Division shall, in
addition to any other penalties or equitable relief provided, be
subject to penalties as set forth in SEC. 11.3-5 of this Code.
Section 3A - Water Conservation Requirements.
Section 3A.1. Nothing in this Water Conservation Section shall abrogate the
requirements of the State Plumbing Code. These provisions are intended to
preserve the quantity of fresh water available to the citizens of Normal.
Section 3A.2. All new and replacement plumbing fixtures hereafter
installed within the Town of Normal shall meet or exceed the following
water conservation requirements:
SEC. 11.4-1(Cont.73)
a. All landscape irrigation systems shall be designed and installed to
use no more than 6.0 gallons per minute. All landscape irrigation
systems shall also be equipped with a timer on the main control valve
to shut off automatically after one (1) hour.
b. All water used for cooling of equipment and machinery shall be
recirculated.
c. All car washes must be designed and built to recirculate wash and
rinse water.
d. Installation of water-cooled ice machines is prohibited.
SEC. 11.7-1
DIVISION 5 – Reserved
DIVISION 6 – Reserved
DIVISION 7 – VACANT BUILDINGS
SEC. 11.7-1 SCOPE OF DIVISION. This Division shall apply to all vacant buildings and
premises thereof in the Town of Normal now existing or hereafter becoming vacant.
SEC. 11.7-2 INTENT. It is in the intent of this Division to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by establishing a registration process for vacant buildings and requiring
responsible parties to implement a maintenance plan for such buildings to remedy any public
nuisance, prevent deterioration, unsightly blight and consequent adverse impact on the value of
nearby property.
This Division shall be construed liberally and justly to effect its purposes.
SEC. 11.7-3 OTHER LAWS, CODES, ORDINANCES, AND REGULATIONS. This
Division shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws, codes, ordinances, and
regulations which prescribe standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict,
the most restrictive shall apply.
SEC. 11.7-4 DEFINITIONS.
A. Building. A structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of a person’s
animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind and which is permanently affixed
to the ground.
B. Exterior Property Areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
C. Maintenance. Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of
grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the condition does not fall below the
standards established by this code and other applicable statutes, codes and
ordinances.
D. Occupant. Any person (including domestic service employees) living and/or
sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building.
E. Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises
which is let or offered for occupancy.
F. Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or
municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
SEC. 11.7-4(Cont.1)
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real
property by a court.
G. Person. Includes a corporation or co-partnership as well as an individual.
H. Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon.
I. Public Nuisance. Includes the following:
1. The physical condition, or uses of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law; or
2. Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but
not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe
fences or structures; or
3. Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
4. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
5. Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
6. Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
7. Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors, windows, or other
openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction
of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in
danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the
premises.
J. Renovation. A building and its facilities made to conform to present day minimum
standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
K. Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and
dust and other similar materials.
SEC. 11.7-4(Cont.2)
L. Vacant.
1. Empty; or
2. Not occupied on a regular basis by an occupant; or
3. Not used by a person on a regular basis for the usual and customary purposes
for which a building is designed and lawfully permitted.
M. Workmanlike. Whenever the words “workmanlike state of maintenance and repair”
are used in this code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be
made in a reasonably skillful manner.
N. Yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the
entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line.
SEC. 11.7-5 OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDINGS.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, whenever any building in the Town is vacant
for more than sixty (60) days or whenever any building in the Town is vacant and
such building or premises thereof contains one or more of the public nuisances
described in this Division, then the owner of such building shall, within ten (10)
days of notification, register such building as a vacant building and submit a vacant
building plan.
B. Whenever any building designed as a single-family dwelling is vacant and such
building or premises thereof contains one or more of the public nuisances described
in this Division, then the owner of such building shall, within ten (10) days of
notification, register such building as a vacant building and submit a vacant building
plan.
SEC. 11.7-6 NOTICE OF VACANCY. The Building Commissioner shall provide notice
to the owner and person who last paid the general real estate taxes on the building by letter sent by
first class mail, return receipt requested, requesting the owner of the building to register the building
and submit a vacant building plan with the Building Commissioner.
SEC. 11.7-7 NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE. In the event any public nuisance exists
in connection with the building or premises thereto then the Building Commissioner shall specify in
the notice the existence of such nuisance(s).
SEC. 11.7-8 REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS. The owner registering a
vacant building shall supply the following information:
A. Name, address, and telephone number of owner.
B. Name, address, and telephone number of any local agent or representative.
SEC. 11.7-8(Cont.1)
C. Name, address and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the
property, building, and premises.
D. Legal description and tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the
building is situated.
E. The common address of the building.
F. Date on which building became vacant.
G. Vacant building plan.
The vacant building registration shall be filed with the Building Commissioner accompanied
with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee.
Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for a period of six (6) months. If the building
is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and requirements of the vacant building plan are
not completed, then the owner shall re-register such building and pay another one hundred dollar
($100.00) filing fee.
If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period and the requirements of
the vacant building plan are completed, the owner shall re-register such building without filing a
new vacant building plan or paying the one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee.
SEC. 11.7-9 OTHER ENFORCEMENT. The registration of a vacant building shall not
preclude action by the Town to demolish or force rehabilitation of the building pursuant to other
provisions of this code or other law.
SEC. 11.7-10 VACANT BUILDING PLAN. When a building is registered as required
herein, the owner or agent shall submit a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain the following:
A. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded
up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the
design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type. The
proposed repair shall result in openings secured by conventional methods used in the
design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type.
B. For buildings and premises thereof which are identified as being or containing public
nuisances, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy
such public nuisance(s).
C. For each required plan, a time schedule shall be submitted identifying a date of
commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly
secured opening and identified nuisance.
SEC. 11.7-10(Cont.1)
D. When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall
submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
E. A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with
this Division.
SEC. 11.7-11 APPROVAL OF PLAN. The Building Commissioner shall have sole
discretion to approve the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards governing
Building Board of Appeals review. If the Building Commissioner approves the plan, notice shall be
sent to the owner or agent of the vacant building.
SEC. 11.7-12 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN AND APPEAL RIGHT. The
Building Commissioner shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner or agent, have the right to
modify the vacant building plan by altering the dates of performance or the proposed methods of
action. If the owner or agent of the vacant building objects to the modifications made by the
Building Commissioner, such owner shall have the right of appeal to the Town Building Board of
Appeals for final determination. Such appeal shall be filed with the Building Commissioner within
ten (10) days of receipt of the Building Commissioner’s notice of modification.
SEC. 11.7-13 STANDARDS GOVERNING BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
REVIEW. In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the Building Board of
Appeals shall consider the following:
A. The purposes of this Division and intent of the Town Council to minimize the
period of time a building is boarded up or otherwise vacant.
B. The effect of the proposed plan on adjoining property.
C. The general economic conditions of the community.
D. The financial condition of the owner.
E. The cost to implement the proposed plan.
F. The length of time the building has been vacant.
G. The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
H. The relative hardship on or gain to the public as contrasted and compared to the
hardship or gain of the owner resulting from approval or modification of the
proposed plan.
SEC. 11.7-14 DECISION BY BUILDING BOARD OF APPEAL. The Building Board
of Appeals, after considering the testimony of the Building Commissioner, the building owner and
any interested person, shall render its decision on the owner’s appeal of the Building
Commissioner’s modifications to the proposed vacant building plan. The Building Board of
SEC. 11.7-14(Cont.1)
Appeals shall have authority to fashion its own vacant building plan or approve the plan submitted
by the owner or the plan modified by the Building Commissioner. The decision of the Building
Board of Appeals shall be final and constitute the approved vacant building plan.
SEC. 11.7-15 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN. Failure to comply with the
approved plan shall constitute violation of this Division subjecting the owner of the building to
penalties upon conviction as provided in this Chapter.
SEC. 11.7-16 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. The vacant building plan shall remain in
effect notwithstanding a change in ownership. The new owner is required to file a new registration
with the Building Commissioner and supply the name and address and telephone number of the new
owner(s). The new registration shall be in the same form as the original registration, however, the
one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee shall waived.
SEC. 11.7-17 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS. The owner of a vacant building shall
comply with the International Property Maintenance Code as amended from time to time, with
specific additions, deletions, insertions, and modifications as hereafter set forth in SEC. 11.4-5.
SEC. 11.8-1
DIVISION 8– MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL OCCUPANCY LICENSE
SEC. 11.8-1 MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL OCCUPANCY LICENSE.
A. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, trust,
partnership, or other legal entity, to conduct, keep, manage, or operate, or cause to
be conducted, kept, managed or operated any bed and breakfast establishment,
apartment, rooming house, multiple-use dwelling, duplex (except the owneroccupied
side of the duplex), hotel or motel without the premises having a rental
occupancy license issued by the Building Commissioner.
B. Duration of License. Licenses shall run from January 1 through December 31 of a
given year unless sooner terminated or revoked. Licenses shall be specific to one
owner and one property and are not transferable without payment of a transfer fee
and a completed application from the new owner.
C. License Application. A written application for a license required by this section
shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner on forms provided by the Building
Commissioner. The application shall include the address of the property, type of
building and number of units, name, street address, mailing address and telephone
number of the owner of the property. If the owner is an entity other than a natural
person, the application must also include the name, street address and telephone
number of the agent of the owner upon whom service of process can be affected,
and the name, address and telephone number of any agent responsible for
maintenance of the property. Rooming houses which are licensed for 10 or more
occupants must also provide a resident agent’s name, street address and telephone
number. A resident agent is any competent person over 25 years of age residing in
McLean County. Notice to an agent or resident agent shall be notice to the owner
for all purposes of Chapter 11 of this Code. An owner of property shall include in
all lease agreements, a provision which allows the Town access to the premises upon
reasonable notice to the tenant for the purpose of the inspections required by this
Code.
D. Inspections.
1. Prior to the issuance of any license pursuant to this section, the Building
Commissioner shall cause an inspection to be made of the property,
including all public and private areas of the building. The owner shall be
responsible for notifying tenants of the inspection and providing the Town of
Normal with access to the property including the interior of all dwelling
units and all other public and private spaces. Rooming houses which are
licensed for 10 or more occupants shall be inspected three times annually.
The Building Commissioner may reduce the number of inspections of
rooming houses licensed for 10 or more occupants if the Building
Commissioner finds that the building or property has passed three (3)
SEC. 11.8-1(Cont.1)
consecutive inspections and has not had more than three (3) violations of
Town ordinances regarding Fire Safety, Building, Property Maintenance, or
Zoning codes in a twelve (12) month period. After the Building
Commission has reduced the number of inspections of rooming houses
licensed for ten (10) or more occupants, the Building Commissioner may
increase the number of inspections to three (3) per year if the Building
Commissioner finds that the Building or property has failed an inspection or
has had more than three violations of Town ordinances regarding Fire
Safety, Building, Property Maintenance, or Zoning codes within a twelve
(12) month period.
2. No license shall be issued until the building is approved by the Building
Commissioner as being in compliance with Town of Normal Fire Safety,
Building, Zoning, and Property Maintenance Codes.
3. If a tenant or owner refuses access for purpose of inspection pursuant to this
Section, the Town of Normal may seek a search warrant for the purpose of
this inspection.
E. Fees. Fees shall be paid and collected as set forth in Chapter 25 of this Code.
F. Revocation. The Building Commissioner may revoke a license by notifying the
owner. A license may be revoked upon the occurrence of any of the following
events:
1. A violation of Town Code which remains on the property after notice to the
owner. The Building Commissioner may assume that a violation remains on
the premises if the owner does not arrange for a reinspection and pay a
reinspection fee.
2. A change of owner.
3. Discovery of a falsehood on an application.
4. A serious violation of Town Code on the property which causes an
immediate and present danger to the occupants or public at large.
G. Appeals.
1. Appeals to the Building Commissioner. An owner may appeal a refusal to
issue a license or a revocation of a license, by filing a written appeal to the
Building commissioner within 30 days of the notice of revocation or refusal
to issue a license. The Building Commissioner shall make due inquiry into
the matter and shall respond to the appeal in writing in a final decision within
30 days of the appeal to the Commissioner.
SEC. 11.8-1(Cont.2)
2. Appeals to the Building Board of Appeals. An owner may appeal a final
decision of the Building Commissioner to the Building Board of Appeals in
the manner provided in SEC. 11.2-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, 1969, as amended, except no appeal may be taken after the Town of
Normal has initiated legal or administrative proceedings seeking compliance
with this Chapter or a fine for violation of this Chapter.
H. Penalties. Any person or entity found guilty of violating this Section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for a first offense
and not less than Fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for the second or subsequent offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day upon which said violation occurs.
SEC. 11.9-1
DIVISION 9– SINGLE FAMILY RENTAL OCCUPANCY LICENSE
SEC. 11.9-1 SINGLE FAMILY RENTAL OCCUPANCY LICENSE.
A. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, trust,
partnership, or other legal entity to allow or permit the occupancy of any rented
dwelling unit in the Town of Normal without the premises having a rental
occupancy license issued by the Building Commissioner, provided, however, no
such license shall be required for any unit licensed pursuant to SEC. 11.4-6 of this
Code.
B. Duration of License. Licenses shall run from January 1 through December 31 of
a given year unless sooner terminated or revoked. Licenses shall be specific to
one owner and one property and are not transferable without payment of a transfer
fee and a completed application from the new owner.
C. License Application. A written application for a license required by this section
shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner on forms provided by the
Building Commissioner. The application shall include the address of the
property, type of building and number of units, name, street address, mailing
address and telephone number of the owner of the property. If the owner is an
entity other than a natural person, the application must also include the name, street
address and telephone number of the agent of the owner, upon whom service of
process can be affected, and the name, address and telephone number of any agent
responsible for maintenance of the property. Notice to an agent shall be notice to the
owner for all purposes of Chapter 11 of this Code. An owner of property shall
include in all lease agreements, a provision which allows the Town access to the
premises upon reasonable notice to the tenant for the purpose of the inspections
required by this Code. The owner shall provide to the Town of Normal a document
signed by all tenants of a building subject to this Section that no more than the
permitted number of unrelated persons may reside in the premises. The document
shall state the number of unrelated persons permitted to reside in the premises. If
more than the permitted number of tenants are named in the document, the
document must contain the exact nature of the family relationship of the tenants.
D. Inspections. Prior to the issuance of an initial license pursuant to this section, the
Building Commissioner shall cause an inspection to be made of the property,
including all public and private areas of the building. The owner shall be
responsible for notifying tenants of the inspection and providing the Town of
Normal with access to the property including the interior of all dwelling units and all
other public and private spaces. No license shall be issued until the building has been
inspected and approved by the Building Commissioner. After the initial license has
been issued, any building subject to this Section shall be subject to random
inspections, re-inspections upon a failure to pass a prior inspection, inspections at the
request of a tenant or owner, and inspections based on a reasonable suspicion of a
violation. No building will be subject to a random
SEC. 11.9-1(Cont.1)
inspection more than once in one year. If a tenant or owner refuses access for
purpose of inspection pursuant to this Section, the Town of Normal may seek a
search warrant for the purpose of an inspection. (Amended 12/15/08 by Ord. No.
5232)
E. Fees. Fees shall be paid and collected as set forth in Chapter 25 of this Code.
F. Revocation. The Building Commissioner may revoke a license by notifying the
owner in writing. A license revocation shall take effect 14 days after a notice of
revocation is sent to the owner. Prior to the effective date of a revocation, a property
owner can ask for a hearing in front of the Building Commissioner. The Building
Commissioner shall hold a hearing on the revocation and shall issue a ruling in
writing within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing. A license may be
revoked upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. A violation of Town Code which remains on the property after notice to the
owner. The Building Commissioner may assume that a violation remains on
the premises if the owner does not arrange for a reinspection and pay a
reinspection fee.
2. A change of owner.
3. Discovery of a falsehood on an application.
4. A serious violation of Town Code on the property which causes an
immediate and present danger to the occupants or public at large.
G. Appeals.
1. Appeals to the Building Commissioner. An owner may appeal a refusal to
issue a license by filing a written appeal to the Building Commissioner
within 30 days of the notice of refusal to issue a license. The Building
Commissioner shall make due inquiry into the matter and shall respond to
the appeal in writing in a final decision within 30 days of the appeal to the
Commissioner.
3. Appeals to the Building Board of Appeals. An owner may appeal a final
decision of the Building Commissioner to the Building Board of Appeals in
the manner provided in SEC. 11.2-5 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, 1969, as amended except no appeal may be taken after the Town of
Normal has initiated legal or administrative proceedings seeking compliance
with this Chapter or fines for a violation of this Chapter..
SEC. 11.9-1(Cont.2)
H. Penalties. Any person or entity found guilty of violating this Section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for a first offense
and not less than Fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for the second or subsequent offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day upon which said violation occurs.
(Comprehensive Amendment of Chapter 11 on 1/4/2016 by Ord. No. 5614)
SEC. 15.1-1
CHAPTER 15 - ZONING
DIVISION 1 - TITLE
SEC. 15.1-1 TITLE. This Chapter of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois,
l969, as amended may be known, cited and referred to as the Town of Normal Zoning Code. In this
Chapter, it is, at times referred to as the "Code".
SEC. 15.2-1
DIVISION 2 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
SEC. 15.2-1 GENERAL. It is the general purpose and intent of this Code to foster the use
and development of land in an orderly manner by both private and public interests with
consideration being given to the Town's social, environmental, economic and physical development
goals and objectives. It is further recognized that the Town needs to regulate and manage land use
in order to implement sound comprehensive planning policies, and to protect individual landowners
and general neighborhoods from incompatible and detrimental land uses. Therefore, the
establishment of zoning districts and the regulations pertaining thereto as provided for in this Code
is declared to be essential to the public interest and is expressly found to be a matter pertaining to
the Town's government and affairs.
SEC. 15.2-2 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the
Town Council of the Town of Normal, Illinois that the several provisions of this Code are separable
in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code to be
invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other provisions of this Code not
specifically included in such judgement order.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code to a
particular property, building, or other structure, such judgement shall not affect the
application of said provision to any property, building, or structure not specifically
included in such judgement order.
SEC. 15.2-3 SPECIFIC PURPOSES. In addition to this general purpose and intent, this
Code or portions thereof are further intended to give effect to the following specific purposes:
A. To provide for the orderly and functional arrangement of land uses and buildings;
B. To establish standards for the orderly development or redevelopment of geographic
areas within the Town;
C. To facilitate the adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewage
disposal, storm water drainage, schools, parks and other public facilities;
D. To conserve and protect natural resources including prime agricultural land, mineral
resources and areas of scientific interest;
E. To permit public involvement in the planning of private land uses which have the
potential for significant impact on the use and enjoyment of surrounding property or
on the public resources and facilities of the community;
F. To secure for the public, locations for housing, employment, shopping, education
and recreation that are adequate in terms of health, safety, convenience and number;
SEC. 15.2-3
G. To conserve and protect the taxable value of land, buildings and neighborhoods in
the community;
H. To protect the air, water and land resources within Normal from the hazards of
pollution and misuse;
I. To protect land and buildings from natural hazards, including flooding and erosion;
J. To preserve and protect historic locations, structures, and groups of structures;
K. To preserve, protect and encourage the development of buildings, groups of
buildings and neighborhoods of distinguished architectural character and
appearance;
L. To promote the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Town of Normal and
coordinate said Plan with land use plans adopted by other governmental entities.
SEC. 15.3-1
DIVISION 3 – RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SEC. 15.3-1 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. The language set forth in this Code shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction, unless the context clearly
requires a different construction:
A. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and future and the future includes the present.
C. The word “shall” is mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive.
D. Terms connotating a particular gender shall include each and every gender.
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Code its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definitions thereof, and any word
appearing in the parenthesis between a word and its definition shall be construed in
the same sense as that word.
F. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot and if a fraction is onehalf
(1/2) foot or more the integral foot next above shall be taken.
G. All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their generally accepted
meanings.
H. The terms Corporate Authority, Mayor and Council, President and Board of
Trustees, Town Council and Council all mean the President and Board of Trustees
of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 15.3-2 DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this
Code, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
Abutting (Contiguous, Adjacent). Abutting means have one or more common boundary
lines or district lines.
Accessory Building or Use. An accessory building or use is one which:
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; and
B. Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or principal use
served; and
C. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal
building or principal use served; and
SEC. 15.3-2
D. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served, which the
single exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to
locate elsewhere than on the same lot with the building or use served.
Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building featuring dancing or other live
entertainment if the dancing or other life entertainment involves the exhibiting of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical area, as defined in this Code, for observation by
patrons therein. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit
television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions fifty (50) percent or more of the number of
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Code; and rents, leases, or
lets any single room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single
room more than twice in a twenty-four (24) hour period. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Lingerie Modeling Studio. An establishment or business that provides for any form
of compensation, monetary or other consideration, the services of live models modeling
lingerie to individuals, couples, or small groups and “specified anatomical areas” of the
models are displayed for the purpose of sexual stimulation of the patrons and further
provided such modeling takes place in a room smaller than six hundred (600) square feet in
area. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Media. Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices used
to record computer images, or other media that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to hard-core material. (Added 6/17/02
by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Media Store. An establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that media meets
any of the following tests:
A. Fifty (50) percent or more of the gross public floor area is devoted to adult media as
defined in this Code.
B. Fifty (50) percent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of adult media as defined in
this Code.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Modeling Studio. A business which provides for any form of compensation,
monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of
sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas”, as defined herein, to be
observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons
paying such consideration. “Adult Modeling Studio” does not include schools maintained
pursuant to standards set by the State of Illinois. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.1)
Adult Motion Picture Theater. An establishment emphasizing or predominantly showing
sexually oriented movies distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to “hard-core material”, “specified anatomical areas” and
/or “specified sexual activities” (as defined in this Code) for observation by patrons therein.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Adult Sex Business. Any sexually oriented entertainment business, including any business
establishment that regularly features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as
defined herein, or any business establishment whose primary purpose is the sale or display
of any explicit sexual material which, pursuant to state law or other regulatory authority, can
be offered only to persons over the age of eighteen (18) years. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be within any building that is the site of an
“Adult Sex Business”. “Adult Sex Business” may include an adult cabaret, adult
hotel/motel, adult media store, adult modeling studio, adult motion picture theater, adult
video arcade, adult lingerie modeling studio, or a sex shop. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No.
4801)
Adult Video Arcade. Any place in an adult media store to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture, or video machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “hard-core material”, “specified
anatomical areas” and/or “specified sexual activities” (as defined in this code) in videoviewing
booths or arcade booths for observation by patrons therein. Adult video arcades are
prohibited except when located within an adult media store. Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No.
4801)
Alteration. As applied to a building or structure, alteration shall mean any change in size,
shape, or character of a building or structure or change in the use thereof. As applied to a
building or structure in the S-4 Historic and Cultural District alteration also means any act or
process that changes one (1) or more of the exterior architectural features of a building or
structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal
of any building or structure.
Agriculture. Agriculture means the growing, harvesting and storing of crops including
legumes, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture, horticulture, viticulture,
mushroom growing, orchards and forestry; farm buildings for storing and protecting farm
machinery and equipment from the elements; and farm dwellings occupied by farm owners,
operators, tenants or seasonal or year 'round hired farm workers. This definition of
Agriculture includes all types of agricultural operations, but excludes therefrom animal
husbandry and industrial operations such as a grain elevator, canning or slaughterhouse,
wherein agricultural products produced primarily by others are stored or processed.
Aircraft. An aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or
designed for navigation or flight in the air.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.2)
Airplane Hangar, Private. A private airplane hangar is a hanger for the storage of four (4) or
less single motor aircraft and in which no volatile of flammable oil is handled, stored or kept
other than that contained in the fuel storage tank of the aircraft.
Airplane Hanger, Public. A public airplane hangar is a building for the storage, care or
repair of private or commercial aircraft not included in the term "private airplane hangar."
Airport. An airport is any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for
use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary
taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and
open spaces.
Alley. An alley is a public right-of-way which is less than thirty (30) feet wide and affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property. Frontage on an alley shall not be construed
as satisfying the requirements related to a frontage on a public street.
Alteration. Alteration shall mean any change in size, shape or character of a building or
structure or change in the use thereof.
Ambulatory Surgical Treatment Center or Surgi-Center. Ambulatory Surgical Treatment
Center or Surgi-Center means any institution, place or building devoted primarily to the
maintenance and operation of facilities for the performance of surgical procedures or any
facility in which a medical or surgical procedure is utilized to terminate a pregnancy,
irrespective of whether the facility is devoted primarily to this purpose. Such facility shall
not provide beds or other accommodations for the overnight stay of patients; however,
facilities devoted exclusively to the treatment of children may provide accommodations and
beds for their patients for up to 23 hours following admission. Individual patients shall be
discharged in an ambulatory condition without danger to the continued well being of the
patients or shall be transferred to a hospital. The term 'ambulatory surgical treatment
center' or 'surgi-center' does not include any of the following:
A. Any institution, place, building or agency required to be licensed pursuant to the
"Hospital Licensing Act" approved July 1, 1953, as amended.
B. Any person or institution required to be licensed pursuant to the 'Nursing Home Care
Act', approved August 23, 1979, as amended.
C. Hospitals or ambulatory surgical treatment centers maintained by the State or any
department or agency thereof, where such department or agency has authority under
law to establish and enforce standards for the hospitals or ambulatory surgical
treatment centers under its management and control.
D. Hospitals and ambulatory surgical treatment centers maintained by the Federal
Government or agencies thereof.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.3)
E. Any place, agency, clinic, or practice, public or private, whether organized for profit
or not, devoted exclusively to the performance of dental or oral surgical procedures.
Entire Ambulatory surgical treatment center or surgi-center definition added 5/15/00 by
Ord. No. 4653)
Amusement Center. An amusement center is an establishment, the principal use of which is
the operation of mechanical, electronic and/or video type game machines. Said
establishment shall be posted "No Smoking", shall not contain cigarette vending machines,
shall be supervised by an adult over 2l years of age, shall have a minimum level of
illumination of at least 20 footcandles, and there shall be a minimum of six (6) inches of
space between each game machine.
Auction House. An Auction House is a building, area or areas within a building used for the
public sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment to the highest bidder. This
definition excludes therefrom an auction, the principal purpose of which is the sale of
livestock or motor vehicles.
Automobile Salvage Yard. An automobile salvage yard means an area of land where three
(3) or more vehicles and equipment inoperable or unlicensed, or parts thereof in an amount
equivalent to three (3) motor vehicles, are stored in the open and are not being restored to
operation.
Automobile Service Station. An automobile service station means buildings and premises
where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail. In addition, any of the following services may be rendered and sales
made:
A. Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors, and distributor parts;
B. Tire servicing and repair, but no recapping or regrooving;
C. Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light
bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease
retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
D. Radiator cleaning and flushing;
E. Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials;
F. Greasing and lubrication;
G. Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;
H. Servicing and repair of carburetors;
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.4)
I. Emergency wiring repairs;
J. Adjusting and repairing brakes;
K. Minor motor adjustments not involving the removal of the head or crankcase or
racing the motor.
Activities permissible at an automobile service station do not include aviation sales,
automobile sales, boat sales, farm implement sales, house-car trailer sales, mobile home
sales, recreation vehicle sales or auto body work, straightening of auto body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise,
glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in
automobile service stations.
Awning. An awning is a roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a building and
overhangs into the yard or public or private street.
Basement. The basement is that portion of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade and having at least one-half (1/2) its height above grade.
Bed and Breakfast Establishments. An operator-occupied residence of historical
significance providing public accommodations for a charge. Only breakfast may be
provided to the guests. Bed and Breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels,
boarding houses, rooming houses or food service establishments. (Added 7/19/99 by Ord.
No. 4606)
Birthing Center. A birthing center is defined as "a facility offering low-risk, generally
healthy pregnant females the option of experiencing childbirth in a non-hospital setting on
an outpatient basis. Generally these individuals will be discharged to home after a short
observance during the post-partum period not to exceed 24 hours after delivery. The facility
shall comply with all statutory and administrative regulations that may be enacted from
time-to-time and shall include a collaborative agreement with a physician specializing in
obstetrical care or physician licensed to practice medicine in all branches. Advanced
practice nurses, including certified nurse midwives as defined and mandated by 225 ILCS
65/15-5 and 225 65/15-15, may participate in the childbirth process provided all statutory
and administrative regulations are complied with and met. (Added 6/19/2000 by Ord. No.
4657)
Block. A block is a tract of land bounded by public streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, the corporate
limits of the Town of Normal or other lines of demarcation.
Building. A building is any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the
ground.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.5)
Building Height. Building height is the measurement of vertical distance from grade to the
top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of the highest gable or slope
of a hip roof. When a building faces on more than one street, the height shall be measured
from the average of the grades at the center of each street front.
Building, Principal. A principal building is a building in which the principal use of the lot,
on which it is located, is conducted.
Building, Residential. A residential building is a building which is arranged, designed, used
as intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more persons and which includes,
but is not limited, to the following types:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Multiple-family dwellings.
D. Rooming houses.
E. Student residence halls.
F. Nursing homes.
G. Dormitory.
Bulk. Bulk is a term used to measure, assess and regulate the impact of buildings, structures
or land uses on other nearby buildings, structures or land uses and includes the following
factors:
A. Size and height of buildings;
B. Location of exterior walls and required on-site facilities at all levels in relation to lot
lines, public streets, or to other buildings;
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings;
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit; and
F. Type, amount and location of landscaping and site screening used to shield or reduce
the impact of land uses on surrounding property.
Car Wash. A car wash is a building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
motor vehicles, using automatic production-line methods with a chain conveyor blower,
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.6)
steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, and
equipment for the handwashing of autos, whether by the customer or the operator.
Card Reading. Card reading involves the following activity for money, to-wit: It involves
the offering of opinions or interpretations of a person's personal characteristic history and
present characteristics by that person shuffling a deck of common playing cards at the
direction of a card reader and then drawing cards from that deck at the direction of the card
reader. Thereafter, based on the relative position or positions of the various cards, after
certain cards are drawn as aforestated, and after matching and/or comparing same against
that person's birth date, certain conclusions or opinions may be drawn by the card reader
concerning the person's personal characteristic history and present characteristics.
Afterwards and if the person so desires, the card reader may offer to that person to the best
of the card reader's ability, opinions in relation to what may or may not have been shown by
the position of the cards after drawn as aforestated and matched against that person's birth
date as aforestated. Card reading is not a form of "fortune telling". By engaging in card
reading, the person doing the card reading as aforestated does not hold himself or herself out
to be what is commonly referred to as an astrologer.
Carport. A carport is an automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from
the side of a building and enclosed on not more than two (2) sides by a wall.
Cellar. A cellar is that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade and
having at least one-half (l/2) of its height below grade.
Certificate of Appropriateness. Certificate of Appropriateness means a certificate issued by
the Historic Preservation Commission indicating its approval of plans for alteration,
construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within an S-4 Historic
and Cultural District.
Certification of Economic Hardship. Certification of Economic Hardship means a
certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission authorizing an alteration,
construction, removal, or demolition, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has
previously been denied.
Common Driveway. A common driveway is a driveway serving two or more structures or
off-street parking areas, which are located on individual lots.
Common Recreation Space (Common Open Space). Common recreation space is a parcel
or parcels of land unoccupied by structures, buildings, public streets, private streets, alleys,
or automobile parking lots which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents of a planned unit development. Common recreation space may contain structures
for recreational use; however, no area within thirty (30) feet of any building or structure
except a structure used for recreational use shall be includable as common recreation space.
All common recreation space shall have an area of not less than ten thousand (l0,000) square
feet; no median of such common recreation space shall be less than 100 feet and such
common recreation space shall not be less than fifty (50) feet in width.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.7)
Compatible Use. A compatible use is a property, use, or service which is capable of direct
association with certain other uses because it is complimentary, congruous, or otherwise not
detrimental.
Conforming Building or Structure. A conforming building or structure is any building or
structure which complies with all the regulations of this Zoning Code or of any amendment
hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located.
Construction. Construction means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure or
the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot.
Curb Level. The curb level for any building is the level of the established curb in front of
such building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the
curb level is the elevation of the centerline of the street adjacent to the lot on which the
building is or is to be located measured at the center point of the lot frontage.
Day Care Center. A Day Care Center is a premise licensed by the State of Illinois and
receiving more than eight (8) children for care during all or part of a day or night. As used
herein the term children does not include the children of the operator(s) of the Day Care
Center. (Amended 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
Day Care Home. A day care home is a dwelling unit licensed by the State of Illinois in
which one (1) or more persons provides care during the day or night to not more than eight
(8) children, excluding all natural, adopted and foster children of the residents of the
dwelling unit. (Amended 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)(Amended 4/15/96 by
Ord. No. 4385)
Demolition. Demolition means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a
building or structure.
Design Guideline. Design Guideline means a standard of appropriate activity that will
preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or a historic district.
Display Publicly. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion
displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may
be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing
it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from property of others, or from any portion
of the premises where items and material other than adult media are on display to the public.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Dormitory. A dormitory is a residential building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided for persons not members of the same family and where the number accommodated
exceeds that allowed in a dwelling unit in the district. The group sleeping accommodations
may be in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under occupancy and single
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.8)
management as in college dormitories, fraternity houses, sorority houses, military barracks,
etc., regardless of whether meals are provided.
Development. Development means both the act of changing and the state of a tract of land
after its function has been purposefully changed by man including, but not limited to,
erection of structures on the land, and alterations to the land.
Diagnostic Imaging Center. A diagnostic imaging center is defined as "a facility offering
diagnostic imaging services on an outpatient basis to ambulatory patients. The imaging
modalities may include general X-ray services, CT scans, MRI scans, ultri-sound,
fluoroscopy, mammography and any other generally recognized imaging methods
commonly utilized on an outpatient basis." (Added 6/19/2000 by Ord. No. 4657)
Diagnostic Laboratory Testing Facility. Diagnostic Laboratory Treatment Facility is
defined as "a facility offering diagnostic and/or pathological testing and analysis of blood,
blood fluids, pathological specimens, DNA sampling and analysis and any other diagnostic
test generally recognized in the healthcare industry." (Added 6/19/2000 by Ord. No. 4657)
District. A district is a portion of the territory of the Town of Normal within which certain
generally uniform regulations and requirements unique thereto, apply under the provisions
of this Chapter.
Domestic Utility Trailer. A single-axle trailer used for domestic or recreational purposes
only and not exceeding any of the following dimensions: six (6) feet in width; twelve (12)
feet in length or eight (8) feet in height. No domestic utility trailer may be used for business
or commercial purposes. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Drive-In Establishment. A drive-in establishment is a business or institution where the
principal use is either the offering of goods or services directly to customers waiting in
parked motor vehicles or carry-out food service.
Driveway. A driveway is a private accessway for motor vehicles between a public or
private street and one or more structures or off-street parking areas.
Dwelling. A dwelling is a building designed or used principally for residential occupancy,
including, without limitation, single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiplefamily
dwellings.
Dwelling Unit, Attached. An attached dwelling unit is one which is joined to another
dwelling unit on one (1) or more sides by a vertical party wall or walls.
Dwelling Unit, Detached. A detached dwelling unit is one which is entirely surrounded by
open space.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A multiple-family dwelling is a building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.9)
Dwelling, Single-Family. A single-family dwelling is a building containing one (1)
dwelling unit only.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A two-family dwelling is a building containing two (2) dwelling
units only.
Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit is one or more rooms arranged or designed for the use of
one family living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities in a self-contained unit, so that access to the street in any additional
facilities (such as laundry, heating units, etc.) can be gained without passing through any
other residential or commercial unit.
Dwelling unit, Mobile Home. A mobile home dwelling unit is a dwelling unit of vehicular,
portable design built on a chassis and designed to be moved from one site to another and
capable of being used without a permanent foundation.
Efficiency Unit. An efficiency unit is a dwelling unit consisting of one principal room
together with bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal
room, providing such dining alcove does not exceed 125 square feet in area.
Establishment. Any business. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Excavation. An excavation is any breaking of ground, except common household gardening
and ground care.
Explicit Sexual Material. Any hard-core material as defined by this Code. (Added 6/17/02
by Ord. No. 4801)
Exterior Architectural Appearance. Exterior Architectural Appearance means the
architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but
not limited to the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and
character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
Family.
A. In the R-1AA, Single-Family Residence District, R-1A, Single-Family Residence
District, and R-1B, Single-Family Residence District, a family is one of the
following:
1. One (1) person or two (2) or more persons each related to each other by
blood, marriage, or legal adoption, any foster children residing with such
person or persons in a "foster family home" as that term is defined in the
Illinois Child Care Act of 1969 as amended and an aggregate of not more
than one (1) roomer or boarder, whether or not gratuitous, maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.10)
2. An aggregate of not more than five (5) individuals having a developmental
disability as defined by Illinois Mental Health and Developmental
Disabilities Code as amended January 1, 1979, and not more than two (2)
persons supervising such person or person(s). (Amended 12/15/97 by Ord.
No. 4487)(Amended 1/16/01 by Ord. No. 4706)
3. A group of not more than two (2) persons not so related maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit.
B. In all other zoning districts, a family is either one (1) person or two (2) or more
persons each related to each other by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, any foster
children residing with such person or persons in a "foster family home" as that term
is defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as amended, and an aggregate of
not more than two (2) roomers or boarders not related to each other, whether or not
gratuitous, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit; or a group of not
more than four (4) persons not so related maintaining a common household in a
dwelling unit. However, in no case shall more than two (2) unrelated individuals
occupy an efficiency unit or one (1) bedroom dwelling unit.
Fence. A fence is a structure other than a building or a portion thereof which is a barrier and
is used as a boundary, screen, separation, means of privacy, protection or confinement and is
constructed of wood, plastic, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or comparable material. A fence
may not be electrified or constructed of barbed wire or similar material except as follows:
In the Agriculture Districts; in the Manufacturing Districts barbed wire or similar material
only; in the Special Public Interest Districts barbed wire or similar material only. (Amended
11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Floor Area. (For the purposes of determining the floor area ratio, conversions of existing
structures and maximum size of business establishments). Floor area is the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors measured in square feet, including the cellar floor of
the building; measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of
walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall also include elevator
shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment, except
equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof, penthouses, and attic space having
headroom of seven (7) feet ten (10) inches or more; interior balconies and mezzanines;
enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses, provided that any space devoted
to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area.
Floor Area. (For the purposes of determining off-street parking and off-street loading
requirements and minimum area per dwelling unit). Floor area is the sum of the gross
horizontal area of several floors of the building excluding areas used for:
A. Accessory off-street parking.
B. Basement or cellar areas devoted exclusively to accessory uses.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.11)
All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of the walls or from the
center line of walls separating two dwelling units or two buildings.
Floor Area Ratio. Floor area ratio is the numerical value obtained through dividing the floor
area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building(s) are located.
Frontage. Frontage is the measure of lineal contiguity between a lot or portion thereof and
another lot, public street, alley or public way.
Garage, Private. A private garage is an accessory building or an accessory portion of a
principal building, including a carport, the principal use of which is the storage of one or
more motor vehicles of the person, family or families resident in the principal building to
which the garage is accessory and in which no business or commercial service or activity is
performed, provided however, if a private garage is of sufficient size to provide, within the
garage, all the off-street parking required by the Zoning Ordinance for the principal use,
then any extra or surplus space may be rented for a fee to persons not resident in the
principal building to which the garage is accessory, which such space may be used for the
principal purpose of storing boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and/or private passenger
motor vehicles.
Grade. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the
building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the referenced plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between
the building and the lot line; or, when the lot line is more than six (6) feet (1,829
millimeters) from the building, between the building and a point six feet (6) feet (1,829
millimeters) from the building.
Grandfamily. A family headed by at least one person age 55 or older together with one or
more persons, each related, to such person age 55 or older by blood, marriage, legal
adoption, or foster care relationship in a foster-family home as that term is defined in the
Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as amended, and such persons so related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, or foster care placement is aged 18 or younger or no more than 22
years of age and a full-time student. (Added 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5265)
Gross Public Floor Area. The total area of the building accessible or visible to the public,
including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas,
behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, rest rooms (whether or not
labeled “public”), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles,
hallways, and entryways serving such areas. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Guests, Permanent. A permanent guest is a person who occupies or has the right to occupy
a hotel, motel or apartment hotel accommodation as his place of permanent residence.
Hard-Core Material. Media characterized by sexual activity that includes one or more of the
following: erect male genitals; contact of the mouth of one person with the genitals of
another; penetration with a finger or male genital or other object into any genital or anal
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.12)
orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a sexually oriented toy or
novelty into any orifice in another person; or male ejaculation. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No.
4801)
Hard Surface. Hard Surface means any asphalt or concrete surface of an approved
thickness, or other approved surface, but excluding rock, gravel, grass or dirt. (Added
12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4760 – Effective 4/1/02)
Health Club. A health club is an establishment that provides equipment and facilities for
physical exercise or athletic activities on the premises; it shall not include, however,
facilities for indoor sports activities that require a hard surfaced type of court, a bowling
alley, a swimming pool, ice skating or roller skating rink facility.
Heliport. A heliport is an area of land, water and/or a structure or building which is used or
intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas
which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities or rightsof-
way, including all necessary pads, helicopter storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and
other necessary buildings and open spaces.
High Rise Building. A High Rise is a building which exceeds the maximum allowable
stories or height in the applicable zoning district and is permitted only by a Special Use
Permit. (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Historic Area. Historic area means an area containing buildings or places in which historic
events have occurred or which have special public value because of notable architectural or
other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community which warrant
conservation and preservation.
Historic District. Historic District means an area designed as a "S-4 Historic and Cultural
District" by ordinance of the Town Council and which may contain within definable
geographic boundaries one (1) or more landmarks and which may have within its
boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural
significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within such historic area.
Home Occupation. A home occupation is an occupation or profession practiced by a
member of the family residing in the dwelling unit and which occupation is clearly an
accessory use to the principal residential use of the dwelling unit.
Hospital. A hospital is an institution where the sick or injured are given medical or surgical
care.
Hotel (Motel). A hotel is an establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house, or apartment hotel, and is commonly
known as a hotel (motel) in the community in which it is located; and which provides
customary hotel services such as mail service, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.13)
telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture and bellhop
service.
Institution. An institution is an established society or corporation of a public character.
Junk Yard. A junk yard is an open area where junk, waste, scrap, used equipment and
vehicle parts, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled,
packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junk yard includes automobile wrecking yards, house
wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house
wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but does not include uses established
entirely within enclosed buildings.
Kennel. A kennel is any premises where three (3) or more dogs, three (3) or more cats, or
three (3) or more other household domestic animals are owned, boarded, bred or offered for
sale, provided such dogs, cats or other household domestic animals are over six (6) months
of age.
Landmark. Landmark means a property or structure designated as a "landmark" by
Ordinance of the President and Board of Trustees, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein,
that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or
architectural significance to the town.
Lawn and Garden Equipment Store Shed. A relatively small structure often purchased prebuilt
or as a kit in pre-fabricated sections. It is not designed to be served by heat, electricity
or plumbing and does not need to be placed on a permanent foundation. The structure is
intended to store lawn, garden and/or pool care equipment.
Liner Housing. A building designed to mask or screen an adjacent structure such as a
parking garage. (Added 9/19/2011 by Ord. No. 5397)
Lot. A lot is a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a
group of buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with
such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Chapter, or as may be provided
therewith. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. A lot
shall have frontage on one or more public streets.
Lot, Area. Lot area is the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side, and rear lot lines. Lot area shall not include land that has been, is proposed, or is
necessary to be dedicated as public right-of-way and shall only include land dedicated as an
easement if the utility for which the easement is necessary is located underground or
overhead.
Lot, Corner. A corner lot is a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.14)
Lot, Non-Conforming. (See Non-Conforming Lot.)
Lot, Out. A lot depicted on a Final Subdivision Plat which does not meet the requirements
of this Code for lots of record and which may not be used for building or parking lots.
(Amended 1/19/99 by Ord. No. 4576 (was Outlot)
Lot, Reversed Corner. A reversed corner lot is a corner lot the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
Lot, Through. A through lot is a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or
less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street lines
shall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot, Interior. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot Depth, Minimum. The lot depth is the mean horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot Width, Minimum. The minimum lot width is the mean horizontal distance between the
side lot lines of a lot, measured within the lot boundary. Lot width shall be measured at the
front lot line or at the required setback line or cul-de-sac within the lot boundary behind the
required front yard setback line.
Lot Line (Property Line). A lot line is a boundary line of a lot.
Lot Line, Front. The front lot line is that boundary line of any lot which is along a dedicated
public street or the occupation line on a non-dedicated public street. On corner lots the front
lot line shall be the boundary line along such street right-of-way line that is established at the
time of application for a building permit.
Lot Line, Rear. The rear lot line is that boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is,
or is approximately parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet
in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from, the front
lot line.
Lot of Record. A lot of record is a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the McLean County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds,
the description of which has been so recorded.
Lot Line, Side. The side lot line shall be any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.
Major Recreational Equipment. Major recreational equipment means travel trailers (a
vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreational or vacation uses, or one permanently identified as a Travel Trailer by
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.15)
the manufacturer of the trailer); Pick-up Coaches (a structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation); Motorhomes
(a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation,
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle); Camping trailer (a canvas,
material or metal folding structure, mounted on wheels, designed for travel, recreation and
vacation use); boats; snowmobiles; jet skis; all-terrain vehicles (ATV); dirt bikes; golf carts;
and trailers holding boats, snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), dirt bikes or
golf carts. (Amended 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4760 – Effective 4/1/02)(Amended 7/15/02 by
Ord. No. 4804)
Manufactured Housing. A building assembly or system of building sub-assemblies,
designed for habitation as a dwelling for one or more persons, including the necessary
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service systems which is of closed or
open construction and which is made or assembled by a manufacturer, on or off the building
site, for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site, with a permanent
foundation. (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Manufactured Housing Closed Construction. Any building, component, or assembly
fabricated in such a manner where all portions may be readily inspected at the site without
disassembly. (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Manufactured Housing Open Construction. Any building, component, or assembly
fabricated in such a manner that all portions may be readily inspected at the site without
disassembly. (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Massage Therapy Studio. An establishment offering massage therapy and/or body work by
a massage therapist, licensed by the State of Illinois, or Town of Normal or under the direct
supervision of a licensed physician. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture,
film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or
electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication.
Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines,
movies, videos, sound recordings, cd-roms, other magnetic media, and undeveloped
pictures. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Media Shop. A general term, identifying a category of business that may include sexually
oriented material but that is not subject to the special provisions applicable to adult media
shops. In that context, media shop means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for
consumption off the premises provided that any outlet meeting the definition of “adult
media shop” shall be treated as an adult media store. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Mobile Home. A movable or portable unit, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and is
forty (40) or more body feet in length and constructed on its own chassis. It is designed to
be used without a permanent foundation. (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.16)
Mobile Home Park. A mobile home park is a lot or lands upon which two (2) or more
independent mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for a fee, and shall include
any buildings, structure, tent vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the
equipment of such mobile home park.
Modular Unit. A factory fabricated, transportable building, designed to be used by itself or
to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure. The term is
intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses,
plumbing trees, and other prefabricated subelements, which are to be incorporated into a
structure at the site.
Motor Vehicle Every vehicle which is self-propelled. (Added 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4760 –
Effective 4/1/02)
Nameplate. A nameplate is a sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the
name of an occupant thereof and/or the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure. A non-conforming building or structure is any
building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance, or amendment thereto, which:
A. Does not comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance or any amendment hereto
governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located.
Non-Conforming Lot. A non-conforming lot is a lot of record which when recorded met the
minimum lot area and other dimension requirements of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, but which through subsequent amendments to such Code or other acts of a public
body has caused the lot of record to be in conflict with the minimum lot area or other
dimension requirements of the Codes.
Non-Conforming Use. A non-conforming use is any use of land, buildings, or structures
which use is not permitted in the zoning district in which such use is located, but which use
was permitted at the time such use was established.
Nursery (Greenhouse). A nursery is a space, building or structure, or combination thereof,
for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for wholesale or retail sale on the
premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery
within the meaning of this Chapter does not include any space, building or structure used
principally for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
Nursing Home. A nursing home is a home for the aged, chronically ill, incurable persons,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders in which three (3) or more persons, not
members of the immediate family residing on the premises, are received, kept or provided
with food and shelter or care, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions
devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity or mental
illness.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.17)
Official Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan). The Official Comprehensive Plan is
the composite of the functional and geographic elements of the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town of Normal, or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, textual
materials and the official map, as adopted by the Town Council.
Official Map. The Official Map is the map adopted by the Town Council as a part of the
Comprehensive Plan which is designated "Official Map" in that Plan.
Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map is the map adopted by the Town Council
showing all the zoning district boundaries within the Town of Normal, Illinois.
Open Sales Lot. An open sales lot is any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying
and selling merchandise, motor vehicles, any form of trailers, mobile homes, motorized
homes, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, aircraft and monuments, or for the sorting of
same prior to sale.
Parking Pad. A parking pad is an off-street parking area adjacent to a driveway which
provides parking for a single motor vehicle.
Planned Unit Development. A planned unit development is a lot or lots developed as a unit
under single ownership or unified control, which includes one (1) or more principal
buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned unit development procedure of this
Code. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Post-surgical Recovery Care Center. Post-surgical recovery care center is defined as "a
designated site which provides post-surgical recovery care for generally healthy patients
undergoing surgical procedures that require overnight nursing care, pain control, or
observation that would otherwise be provided in an in-patient setting. A post-surgical
recovery care center is either a freestanding or a defined unit in an ambulatory surgical
treatment center or hospital. A post-surgical recovery care shall comply with the
requirements of 210 ILCS 3/35(2)". The recovery period shall not exceed 24 hours after
surgery. (Added 6/19/2000 by Ord. No. 4657)
Preservation Commission (Historic Preservation Commission). The Preservation
Commission means the Historic Preservation Commission for the Town of Normal,
McLean County, Illinois.
Removal. Removal means any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
Repair. Repair is any change that is not construction, removal or alteration. This would
include simple and minor mending to bring an element of a structure back to its original
condition. It assumes that minimal expense and effort need be incurred to complete the
repair.
Riding Stables. A riding stable is the grounds and building where horses are bred, raised,
boarded or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.18)
Roadside Market. A roadside market is a structure for the display and sale of agricultural
products grown on the site only, with no space for customers within the structure itself.
Rooming House. A rooming house is any residential building, or any part thereof,
containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
five (5) or more persons who do not constitute a family.
Rooming Unit. A rooming unit is any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
Row House (Town House). A row house (town house) is a multiple-family dwelling
containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units, each on its own plot of ground and
joined to one (end unit) or two (interior units) dwelling units by firewalls. Each dwelling
unit shall occupy the internal space from the ground to the roof.
Sadomasochistic Practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked for
the purpose of sexual arousal, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one clothed or naked for the purpose of sexual arousal.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Setback. Setback is the horizontal distance between the lot line and any building or
structure located on such lot. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
Sex Shop. An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the
following tests:
A. The establishment offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories:
(a) adult media, (b) lingerie in a lingerie modeling studio, or (c) leather goods
marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices;
and the combination of such items constitutes more than fifty (50) percent its stock
in trade or occupies more than fifty (50) percents of its floor area.
B. More than fifty (50) percent of its stock in trade consists of sexually oriented toys or
novelties.
C. More than fifty (50) percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of
sexually oriented toys or novelties.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business. An inclusive term used to describe collectively:
adult cabaret; adult modeling studio; adult motion picture theater; video arcade located
within an adult media store; adult lingerie modeling studio; and/or sex shop. (Added
6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Sexually Oriented Toys or Novelties. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.19)
as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed
primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Sign. A sign is any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated or nonilluminated
which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and
exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated
merchandise; or any emblem, printing, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed
to advertise, identify or convey information, with the exception of window displays and
national, state, county, municipal and religious flags.
Special Use. A special use is a specific use of land or buildings, or both, described and
permitted herein, subject to special provisions and which because of its unique
characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.
Specified Anatomical Areas. (1) Less than completely and opaquely covered: Human
Genitals, human pubic region, human buttocks, and human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Specified Sexual Activities. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal or
acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching
of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast specified anatomical areas.
(Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
Story. A story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the floor
and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. A basement shall be counted as a Story,
and a cellar shall not be counted as a Story, unless it contains a dwelling unit.
Street, Public. A public street is a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or other
public way used and maintained by the Town of Normal which, in either case, affords the
principal means of access to adjacent lots or property.
Street, Private. A private street is a privately owned lane, road or street, which affords the
principal means of access to adjacent property.
Structural Alteration. A structural alteration is any change, other than incidental repairs,
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition,
removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
Structure. A structure is anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground including, but not limited to, buildings,
fences, gazebos, signs, billboards, supporting tower, and swimming pools.
Student Residence Hall. A dormitory, rooming house, or dwelling, the principal use and
occupancy of which is to provide housing for persons:
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.20)
A. attending college, university or other post secondary institutions,
B. employed by such college, university or other post secondary institution for the
purpose of supervising persons identified in subsection (A) above, and such housing
is owned or under the supervision and control of a college, university or other post
secondary educational institution. (Amended 9/16/96 by Ord. No. 4409)(Amended
9/21/98 by Ord. No. 4549)
Tourist Camp. A tourist camp is a residential facility designed, used, or intended to be used
to accommodate the overnight temporary location, hookup or use of its facilities for travel
trailers, camp trailers, and other major recreational equipment.
Unified Control. Unified control is the combination of two (2) or more tracts of land either
through unified ownership or other arrangement, wherein each owner has agreed to allow
use and develop their tracts as a single lot under the provisions of the ordinance applicable
to Planned Unit Developments.
Use. The use of property is the purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include
any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of
this Ordinance.
Use, Permitted. A permitted use is a use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements and regulations of such
district.
Use, Principal. A principal use is a primary use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be either permitted or special.
Variation. A variation is a deviation from the bulk requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
where such variation will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the direct result of the actions of the owner, a literal
enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may be,
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Added 12/17/01 by Ord. 4760 – Effective
4/1/02)
Video-Viewing Booth (Arcade Booth). Any both, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is
designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons and is used for presenting motion
pictures or view publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other
means or media (including, but not limited to film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cdrom,
books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein. A video-viewing
booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or a room or enclosure or portion
SEC. 15.3-2(Cont.21)
thereof that contains more than six hundred (600) square feet. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No.
4801)
Warehouse. A warehouse is a structure, part thereof, or area used principally for the storage
of goods and merchandise.
Welfare Agency. A welfare agency is an institution, public or private not-for-profit facility,
that provides care and/or services concerning the welfare and improvement for persons of all
ages.
Wholesale Establishment. A wholesale establishment is a business establishment engaged
in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
Yard. A yard is an open space, on the same lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in Section 15.4-
5 of this Code.
Yard, Front. A front yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length
of the front lot line between the side lot lines from the front line of the building or structure
to the front lot line.
Yard, Rear. A rear yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length
of the rear lot line between the side lot lines from the rear line of the building or structure to
the rear property line.
Yard, Side. A side yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the side yard
between the front yard and the rear yard from the side line of the building or structure to the
side property line.
Yard, Corner Side. A corner side yard is that area between the setback lines, the side lot
line, and rear lot line, which area faces the street.
Yard, Interior Side. An interior side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another
lot or to any alley separating such side yard from another lot.
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is the Building Commissioner for the
Town of Normal, Illinois, or such other person as designated by the Commissioner.
Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals for the Town of Normal, Illinois.
Zoning District. A zoning district is a section or sections of incorporated territory of the
Town of Normal for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk or
buildings and premises are uniform.
(Section 15.3-2 Amended 8/20/90 by Ordinance No. 3925)
SEC. 15.4-1
DIVISION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 15.4-1 INTERPRETATION.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held
to be the minimum requirements deemed necessary for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. This Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private
agreement; provided that where the requirements of this Code are more restrictive
than such easements, covenants or private agreements, the requirement of the Code
shall govern.
C. To the extent that a building, structure or use not lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this Code is in conflict with the requirements of the Code, said building,
structure or use shall remain unlawful hereunder.
D. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Code are either more or less
restrictive than conditions imposed by any other provisions of the Municipal Code or
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation applicable to property or to
the use of property within the Town of Normal, the regulation which is more
restrictive or which imposes the higher standard or requirement shall govern.
SEC. 15.4-2 APPLICATION OF CODE. The regulations and requirements for the
districts established by this Code are to apply uniformly to each class or kind of use, structure or
land. Whenever, in the course of applying and enforcing this Code, it is necessary or desirable to
make any administrative decisions, then, unless other standards are provided in this Code, the
decision is to be made so that the result will be neither contrary to the spirit, intent, and purpose of
this Code nor injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
A. No person shall hereafter use or occupy a building, structure or land or establish a
use or construct, erect, place, structurally alter or maintain any building, structure or
part thereof within the Town of Normal unless such use, building, structure or land
is in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located.
B. It shall be the duty, obligation and responsibility of the owner of property within the
Town of Normal to permit and maintain its use and occupancy only in strict
accordance with the requirements of this Code
C. Unless otherwise permitted, pursuant to a Special Use Permit or approved Final Plan
for a planned unit development, no person shall use any part of a lot, yard or other
open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection
with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with this code.
SEC. 15.4-3
SEC. 15.4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Building Under Construction. Where a building permit has been lawfully issued
prior to the effective date of this Code, and provided that construction is begun
within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date of this Code and is
diligently pursued, said building may be completed in accordance with approved
plans and may be occupied by the use originally intended. Such buildings and uses
shall be subject to the provisions of this Code pertaining to non-conforming
buildings and uses if the building or use is non-conforming.
B. Uses and Structures. The following uses are permitted in all districts: light poles,
traffic regulatory signs, directional signs, street name signs, utility poles, wires,
cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, railroad rights-of-way
containing railroad tracks, public rights-of-way, and temporary buildings at
construction sites, gas regulator stations with or without a structure to enclose
equipment, sewage lift stations, and water wells and pumping stations, when located
underground. If a structure is used to enclose a gas regulator station, the site will be
landscaped in a manner that screens the structure from public rights-of-way and
residential zoning. Telecommunication antennas and telecommunication antenna
facilities are not authorized unless placed on public rights-of-way pursuant to an
agreement with the Town of Normal. (Amended 6/16/97 by Ord. No.
4456)(Amended 6/21/2010 by Ord. No. 5343)
C. Height Regulations. The following uses and structures are exempted from the height
regulations in this Code: church spires, belfries, cupolas, water tanks, flag poles,
public monuments, farm buildings, ventilators, or other appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
Heights for signs shall be regulated by Division 13 of this Code. (Amended 6/16/97
by Ord. No. 4456)
D. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Antenna facilities shall be
permitted, subject to, and governed by Division 15 of this Code and to the extent not
inconsistent with Division 15 such antennas and facilities shall comply with all other
divisions of this code. (Amended 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
SEC. 15.4-4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES. On a lot devoted to a permitted
principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized as provided specifically, or by
necessary implication, in this or any Code, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the Town of
Normal. The following requirements are applicable to all accessory structures and uses, in addition
to the requirements for accessory off-street parking facilities. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No.
4356)
A. Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of a principal use, except as permitted
hereafter.
SEC. 15.4-4(Cont.1)
B. Accessory uses shall not include the raising or keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner as to violate Chapter 17 or Chapter 21 of the Town of Normal Municipal
Code.
C. Any accessory building or structure hereafter constructed, erected, placed,
structurally altered or enlarged, except as otherwise permitted in this Code, shall be
subject to the following bulk requirements:
1. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted within the required
front or side yards or a lot, as set forth in each district.
2. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted nearer than five (5) feet
to a building nor shall it be located nearer than five (5) feet from a side or
rear lot line. No principal or accessory structure shall be located or placed
on an easement. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
3. No accessory building or structure in a residential district shall exceed one
(1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height (whichever is less). Accessory
buildings or structures in all other districts may be constructed to equal the
maximum permitted height in that district. The foregoing height limits shall
not apply to telecommunication antennas and telecommunication antenna
facilities authorized pursuant to Division 15 of this Code. (Amended
6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
4. In the R-1, R-2 and R-4 zoning districts no detached garage or detached
carport shall occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required rear
yard, provided that in no instance shall the garage or carport exceed seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet in size. No other accessory building or
structure in a residential district shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet
in size, and in no instance shall there be more than two (2) accessory
structures, including garage or carport, in the R-1, R-2 and R-4 zoning
districts. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
5. No mobile home or other portable structure or building shall be used as an
accessory building or structure except when used incidentally to and
temporarily for construction operations of a principal use; said buildings
shall be removed prior to the occupancy of the principal use, provided,
however, lawn equipment storage buildings not exceeding one hundred
forty-four (144) square feet in area are permitted and having a height of no
more than twelve (12) feet to the highest point of the structure. (Amended
11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
6. Any accessory building which is attached to a principal building shall be
considered as a part of the principal building and shall be subject to all
regulations governing the location of principal buildings.
SEC. 15.4-4(Cont.2)
7. Antenna and antenna facilities shall be subject to and governed by Division
15 of the Code. (Amended 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
8. Temporary Construction Management and Sales Office. In the R-1AA, R-
1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, R-3B, and R-4 zoning classification, a dwelling unit
may be used as a temporary construction management and sales office as an
accessory use to the subdivision or planned development in which it is
located for a period not to exceed two (2) years. Use of a dwelling unit as a
temporary office on construction sites will be permitted provided no sleeping
or food facilities are established and/or used therein and provided said
dwelling is so located as not to be in violation of any of the other Codes and
Ordinances of the Town.
9. No incinerator shall be hereafter constructed, erected, placed, structurally
altered, or enlarged in or within two thousand (2,000) feet of property zoned
R-1AA, R-1A, R-2, R-3A, R-3B, or R-4. (Added 6/19/89)
D. Home Occupations as an Accessory Use. A home occupation or profession shall be
permitted as an accessory use in any dwelling unit, where:
1. Such home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit.
2. No special outside entrance shall be provided or used in connection with the
home occupation;
3. The total floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit and not more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the gross floor area of any story shall be devoted to such
use;
4. There is used no sign, other than a nameplate not more than one (1) square
foot in area, no other display and no activity that will indicate from the
exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose
other than residential purposes;
5. There are no commodities sold or services rendered that require receipt and
delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than ordinary mail;
6. There is no person other than members of the family residing in the dwelling
unit employed or otherwise engaged in such home occupations; and
7. There are no accessory buildings used in whole or in part.
A professional person may use his dwelling for consultation or performance of
religious rites, but not for the general practice of the profession and an instructor of
piano lessons in the home shall be permitted to instruct up to, but not more than five
SEC. 15.4-4(Cont.3)
(5) pupils at a time, using not more than two pianos, and instructors of other musical
instruments and dance shall be limited to one (1) pupil per lesson in the home.
Beauty shops, barbershops and other similar activities are not within the
classification of home occupations.
A person may use his dwelling for occasional sales to the public provided such sales
occur no more than twelve (12) days per calendar year. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord.
No. 4356)
Garage Sales may be conducted as a Home Occupation, provided no more than three
(3) sales are held per year at any one residence, and such sales last no more than
twelve days per year. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
SEC. 15.4-5 LOTS AND YARDS.
A. General Lot and Yard Requirements. The following lot and yard regulations shall
apply to all lots or tracts of land on which the structure is located.
1. The minimum yard space required for one structure or use shall not be
considered as the yard of any other, including an adjoining structure or use.
2. Required yards shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or
use.
3. No lot shall be divided, hereafter, into two or more lots and no part of a lot
shall be sold unless resultant lots conform to all yard requirements in the
district where the lots are located.
4. In the following situations, there shall be maintained in all residential zoning
districts, except the R-3B High Density Multiple-Family Residence District,
a front yard of the average setback (as hereinafter defined) or the setback
required in the district, whichever is greater.
a. Where the lot to be developed is a lot of record in a subdivision,
which subdivision plat was filed for record prior to January 1, 1975;
or
b. Where the lot to be developed is a lot of record in a subdivision,
which subdivision plat is a re-subdivision, consisting of three (3) lots
or less of a prior subdivision, which prior subdivision plat was filed
for record prior to January 1, 1975.
Average setback is the total lineal distance of front yard setbacks established
by buildings existing on lots having a frontage of fifty (50) percent or more
of the total frontage on one side of that portion of a street lying between any
of the following intersecting ways or lines: streets, railroad tracts, drainage
SEC. 15.4-5(Cont.1)
ways or zoning district boundary lines, divided by the number of developed
lots on the same side of that portion of a street, lying between said
intersecting ways or lines.
Structures built in violation of the average setback provision as it existed
prior to amendment on November 18, 1985, shall be deemed lawful in
respect to the average setback requirement.
5. On corner lots in all districts, except the B-2, General Business District,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in the following
described triangle area in such a manner as to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half (2 ½) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline
grade of the intersecting streets. The triangle area is measured as follows:
At the corner intersection property pin, measure back a distance of fifteen
(15) feet, parallel with both street rights of way to form the legs of a
restrictive triangle. Close the triangle with a line connecting the end point of
each leg. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4926)
B. Transitional Yard Requirements.
1. Front Yards. When the required front yard of a parcel of land, hereafter
rezoned to S-1, S-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, B-1, M-1, or M-2 is contiguous to or
across the street or alley from property zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-
3A and R-3B such a lot or a lot zoned R-3A or R-3B is contiguous to or
across a street or alley from property zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, or R-2, the
following transitional yards shall be provided:
a. The owner or developer of such S-1, S-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, B-1, M-1 or
M-2 zoned property shall provide along the entire width of such
property a front yard equal to or greater than the required front yard
for the adjoining R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A or R-3B zoned
property.
b. The owner or developer of property zoned R-3A or R-3B shall
provide along the entire width of such property a front yard equal to
or greater than the required front yard in the adjoining R-1AA, R-1A,
R-1B or R-2 zoning district.
c. Off-street parking in the front yard required by SEC. 15.4-5(B)(1)(a)
and (b) shall be prohibited. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
2. Side and Rear Yards. When any portion of any lot zoned S-1, S-2, C-1, C-2,
C-3, B-1, M-1, or M-2 is contiguous to or across a street or alley from a lot
zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, or R-3B or when any lot zoned for
SEC. 15.4-5(Cont.2)
R-3A or R-3B is contiguous to or across a street or alley from property
zoned R-1AA, R-1A, or R-1B, the following transitional yard requirements
shall apply:
a. If the contiguity is along a side yard, the owner or developer shall
provide ten (10) feet in addition to the side yard otherwise required
for the applicable zoning district.
b. If the contiguity is along the rear line, the owner or developer shall
provide fifteen (15) feet of additional rear yard beyond what is
otherwise required in the applicable zoning district.
c. Said transitional yard(s) required by SEC. 15.4-5(B)(2)(a) and (b) of
this Code shall be screened in accordance with the requirements
stated in SEC.15.4-7(C).
3. Building Height Restrictions. Where any lot zoned S-1, S-2, C-2, C-3, B-1,
B-2, M-1 or M-2 is contiguous to or across a street or alley from any lot
zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, R-3B or R-4, the height of buildings
on said lots shall not exceed the height permitted on such adjoining
residentially zoned lots.
C. Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards. No obstructions shall be allowed in any
yard required by this Code. However, the following shall not be considered to be
obstructions when located in required yards specified subject to the requirements to
maintain visibility at intersections contained in SEC. 15.4-5(A)(6) of this Code.
1. In All Required Yards. Sills, belt cornices, and other architectural features
extending eighteen (18) inches or less into the yard; free-standing night
lights of not more than one-half (1/2) foot candle power; awnings or
canopies projecting into a yard not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
required yard depth; steps, lamps, and fire escapes necessary for access to
buildings or lots; chimneys projecting two (2) feet or less into the yard;
arbors and trellises; flag poles; trees and shrubs; in the Agriculture District,
any agricultural use other than buildings or structures; fences (black vinyl
coated chain-link or other decorative fencing material) up to 8 feet in height
on properties utilized for gas well heads, electric power stations or substations,
telephone switching stations, and other similar utility uses.
(Amended 2/15/10 by Ord. No. 5327)
2. In Required Front Yards or Corner Side Yards. Bay windows projecting
three (3) feet or less into the yard; unroofed terraces, decks or balconies not
projecting over ten (10) feet into the yard; eaves and gutters; fuel, air and
water pumps in conjunction with automobile service stations, provided they
shall be set back at least thirteen (13) feet back from the front property line;
canopy over fuel pumps in accordance with SEC. 15.14-7(A)(7) and SEC.
SEC. 15.4-5(Cont.3)
15.14-7(H)(7) of this code; advertising signs, devices, and nameplates in
accordance with Division 13 of this Code; fences and walls not exceeding
four (4) feet in height in the required front yard and six (6) feet in the
required corner side yard, except that a maximum height of eight (8) feet is
allowed in the M-1 and M-2 districts and further except the maximum height
of a fence in the corner side yard of a non-manufacturing district shall
not exceed four (4) feet where the yard adjoining the corner side yard is a
front yard. The maximum fence height shall be measured from the
established grade of the fence owner’s property. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4926)(Amended 2/21/05 by Ord. No. 4997)
3. In Required Side Yards. Eaves and gutters projecting two (2) feet or less; off
street parking spaces in commercial districts; air conditioning equipment;
refuse storage areas (dumpsters); fences and walls not to exceed six (6) feet
in height in residential districts and eight (8) feet in height in all other
districts. The maximum fence height is measured from the established grade
of the fence owners property. (Amended 10/16/89)(Amended 11/20/95 by
Ord. No. 4356)
4. In Required Rear Yards. Off street parking spaces; detached residential
garages or carports; swimming pools, tennis courts, and other similar
recreational facilities; storage buildings containing three hundred (300)
square feet or less of floor area; covered decks, screened porches and
residential sunroom additions not exceeding three hundred twenty (320)
square feet, and extending no more than ten (10) feet into the required rear
yard; central air conditioning equipment; refuse storage areas (dumpsters);
terraces and decks; bay windows projecting three (3) feet or less into the
yard; eaves and gutters, provided that eaves and gutters of accessory
buildings are not closer than two (2) feet from a lot line; fences and walls not
exceeding six (6) feet in height in residential districts and eight (8) feet in
height in all other districts. The maximum fence height shall be measured
from the established grade of the fence owners’ property. As used herein,
sunroom means a structure in which the enclosing walls are composed of not
less than seventy-five (75) per cent glazing material. (Amended 11/20/95 by
Ord. No. 4356) (Amended 1/21/03 by Ord. No. 4853)
D. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lights shall comply with Division 14. Lighting shall
not cause any direct or reflected glare beyond the lot. Light fixtures shall be
recessed or shaded to prevent glare beyond the lot. All fixtures shall be shielded and
directed away from any residentially zoned lots or public right-of-way, so as to
prevent glare beyond the lot. (Amended 1/19/99 by Ord. No. 4576)(Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
E. Refuse Storage Areas. For all uses for which a dumpster is required, refuse storage
areas (dumpsters) shall be screened with a wood or masonry fence on all sides
SEC. 15.4-6(Cont.1)
except that area which must remain unobstructed in order to allow garbage pick-up.
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
SEC. 15.4-6 NON-CONFORMITIES. If within the districts established by this Code or
amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land or structures, and
characteristics of use which were lawful before this Code was passed or amended but which would
be prohibited, regulated, or restricted, it is the intent of this Code to permit these non-conformities
to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival under the terms of this Code.
It is further the intent of this Code that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district, except as provided in subsection G. (Amended 4/15/91)
Non-conforming uses are declared by this Code to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a nonconforming
use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage
of this Code by attachment on a building or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved, except as provided in subsection G. (Amended
4/15/91)
A. Non-Conforming Lots of Record. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on a lot of record which becomes non-conforming as to lot area or lot width
or both by the adoption or subsequent amendment of this Code or in any other
residential district a building and customary accessory buildings may be erected on a
lot of record which becomes non-conforming as to lot width by the adoption of
subsequent amendment of this Code, provided that the building, housing,
mechanical, electrical, plumbing and other construction standards and requirements
can be met and provided further that if such non-conforming lot of record is at the
time of adoption of this code or hereafter vacant and is contiguous with one or more
other vacant conforming or non-conforming lots of record which are in common
ownership or unified control, then such contiguous lots of record or at least such
portion thereof as is necessary to meet or exceed the minimum lot area and width
requirements of the district in which they are located shall be used and developed
only as a single lot. Any person who conveys property or terminates the unified
control of such contiguous lots of record so as to frustrate the purpose of the
foregoing proviso shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Non-Conforming Uses of Land. Where at the time of passage of this Code or
subsequent more restrictive amendment thereto, a lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed, the use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
1. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Code.
SEC. 15.4-6(Cont.2)
2. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code.
3. If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than thirty (30) consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this Code for the district in which
such land is located.
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Code shall
be erected in connection with such non-conforming use of land.
C. Non-Conforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Code that could not be built under the terms of this
Code by reasons of restrictions on the area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location
on the lot or other zoning requirements concerning the structure, such structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
1. No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may
be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
2. Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of its fair cash market value prior to the time of destruction, it shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
3. Should such non-conforming structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
D. Non-Conforming Uses of Structures. If a lawful use involving individual structures
with a fair cash market value cost of $1,000 or more, or of structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of amendment of this Code that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Code, the lawful use may
be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Code in the
district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of
the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
2. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time
SEC. 15.4-6(Cont.3)
of adoption or amendment of this Code, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
3. When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or
for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period (except when
government action impedes access to the premises) the structure, or structure
and premise in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
4. Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming
status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection
is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the fair
cash market value at the time of destruction.
E. Non-Conforming Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas.
1. In any district where off-street parking or loading areas of four (4) or more
spaces are provided, such areas and private drives or access ways from the
public right-of-way to or through these parking areas, shall be required to
fully comply with the design and construction requirements SEC. 15.7-2 of
this Code for off-street parking and loading by August 1, 1984. (Amended
9/19/88)
2. In any residential zoning district, all off-street parking areas of three (3) or
fewer spaces and private drives or access ways from the public right-of-way
to or through these parking areas, shall be required to fully comply with the
design, construction, and maintenance standards provided in SEC. 15.7-2 of
this Code, but only in the event a building permit is required for alteration of
an existing garage or construction of a new garage accessory to the
residential use. This subsection is subject to the common drive exception in
SEC. 15.7-2(G)(2)(b)(1) of this Code. (Added 9/19/88)
F. Repairs and Maintenance. On any non-conforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a non-conforming use, ordinary repairs, or repair or replacement
of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be made to an extent not
exceeding fifty (50) percent of the fair cash market value of the non-conforming
structure provided that the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming
shall not be expanded.
SEC. 15.4-7 MISCELLANEOUS.
A. Principal Building on a Lot. Except in the case of the planned developments, special
uses and developments that require site plan review, not more than one principal
building shall be located on a lot of record or other lot in a zoning district except in
SEC. 15.4-7(Cont.1)
the B-1, S-2, M-1, and M-2 districts. In these districts, more than one principal
building is permitted, provided that yards as measured from the closest building,
bulk and other requirements of this Code shall be met for each structure as though it
were on an individual lot.
B. Access for Buildings. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot
adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for
rescue and fire protection vehicles.
C. Landscaping Provisions.
1. Screening required in SEC. 15.4-5(B) of this Code shall conform to the
following requirements: (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
a. All fences shall be decorative solid wood; walls shall be masonry or
concrete. All fences and walls shall be six (6) feet in height and form
a solid screen.
b. All planting screens required by this Code shall consist of plants at
least thirty (30) inches in height when planted and shall be
maintained in a healthy condition and so pruned as to provide
maximum density from the ground to a height of at least six (6) feet
at maturity.
c. All berms shall be at least four (4) feet in height. Such berm shall be
landscaped with a variety of planting materials in such a manner so
as to be consistent with the intent of required screenings.
d. All plant materials used in required screens may be either evergreen
or deciduous varieties. Other materials may be used upon approval
of the Council either by specific reference thereto in a Special Use
Permit ordinance or resolution approving a planned unit development
or ordinance, resolution, motion or other corporate action approving
a site plan.
2. Whenever in this Code general landscaping is required, such landscaping
shall conform to the following provisions:
a. For all proposed developments, except for land zoned R-1AA, R-1A,
R-1B, R-2 and R-4, a landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time
an application for a Building Permit is made.
b. The following types of materials are deemed inappropriate for the
purposes of this Section and shall not be used in fulfilling this
landscaping requirement: permanent pavement surfacing materials
SEC. 15.4-7(Cont.2)
such as concrete and bituminous surfaces; artificial trees, shrubs,
grass or flora; and crushed limestone and comparable materials;
grass, absent of any other plant materials.
3. All landscaping and screening required by this Code shall conform to the
following requirements:
a. Materials used in fulfilling landscaping requirements shall conform
to the standards and requirements of all applicable Town Codes,
ordinances, and regulations, including but not limited to Chapter 8,
Division 7 of the Municipal Code.
b. Failure to properly maintain any required landscaping or screening in
a healthy condition, to replace dead plantings or maintain other
screening materials shall be deemed a violation of the requirements
of this Code and the owner of the property on which such
landscaping or screening is located shall be responsible for the
maintenance and replacement and may be punished in accordance
with the penalty provisions contained herein for failure to maintain or
replace same. In addition to these provisions, the Town, after written
notice to the owner responsible, may replace such landscaping or
screening materials in a manner and at a time to be specified in the
notice at the expense of the Town. The Town shall recover the cost
of replacement where the owner responsible fails to do so by
bringing suit, in the name of the Town, against the person neglecting
to maintain or replace the aforementioned landscaping materials
and/or screening.
SEC. 15.5-1
DIVISION 5 - ZONING DISTRICTS
SEC. 15.5-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. In order to carry out the intent,
purposes and provisions of this Code, the Town of Normal is hereby divided into the following
districts:
A. Agricultural District.
A Agriculture District
B. Residence Districts.
R-1AA Single-Family Residence District
R-1A Single-Family Residence District
R-1B Single-Family Residence District
R-2 Mixed Residence District
R-3A Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District
R-3B High Density Multiple-Family Residence District
R-4 Mobile Home Residence District
C. Special Public Interest Districts.
S-1 University District
S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District
S-3 Historic and Cultural District
D. Business Districts.
C-1 Office District
C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District
C-3 Community Regional Shopping District
B-1 General Business District
B-2 Central Business District
E. Manufacturing Districts.
M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District
M-2 General Manufacturing District
SEC. 15.5-2 ZONING MAP. The location and boundaries of the districts provided in this
Code as of the 28th day of December, 1978, the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Zoning
Code (Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended) are
hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map, Town of Normal, and such map and all notations,
references and other information shown thereon shall be the boundaries of the districts provided
herein. Amendments to such map shall be by ordinance duly adopted by the corporate authority.
SEC. 15.5-2(Cont.1)
Annually, not later than the 31st day of March of each year, the corporate authority shall, by
resolution, cause the publication in pamphlet form of a revised Zoning Map, Town of Normal,
indicating to the extent practicable all changes made during the preceding calendar year. The
original Zoning Map, Town of Normal, shall be the final authority on the zoning status of land,
buildings and other structure and land uses within the Town of Normal as of the effective date of the
ordinance adopting this Code. The original Zoning Map, Town of Normal, or after the publication
and effective date of an annual Revised Zoning Map, Town of Normal, the latest Revised Zoning
Map of the Town of Normal in effect on a specific date shall raise a rebuttable presumption as to the
zoning status of land, building or other land uses within the Town of Normal as of said date,
rebuttable solely and exclusively by the provision of an ordinance duly adopted by the corporate
authority after the effective date of this Code (or after the effective date of the Zoning Map, Town
of Normal or after the effective date of any revision thereto).
Two copies of the Zoning Map and thereafter, two copies of the current annual revision thereto are
to be kept available for public inspection, one in the office of the Town Clerk, the other in the office
of the Building Commissioner. Each such map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the Town Clerk and bearing the seal of the Town under the words: “This is to certify
that this Zoning Map supercedes and replaces the Zoning Map adopted on (day of adoption of the
map being replaced) and is part of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, l969, as amended.”
A. Rules for Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of
districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines;
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporation limits shall be
construed as following such corporate limits;
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to lie
midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines;
5. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams,
canals, creeks, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines;
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to an extension of features indicated in (1)
through (5) above shall be so construed.
7. Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the
passage of this Code, the Building Commissioner, upon request of such
SEC. 15.5-2(Cont.2)
property owner submitted within thirty (30) days of the adoption of this
Code, may extend the least restrictive portion to such lot to the entire lot.
8. Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, illegibility, or where physical features
existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Zoning Map
and there exists any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended
location of any boundary as shown thereon, the Building Commissioner shall
make an interpretation of said map upon request of any person and within a
reasonable period. Any person aggrieved by such interpretation may appeal
such interpretation to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Annexed Land and Reverted Public Lands. The following shall apply to all property
which is hereafter annexed by the Town of Normal, or any publicly owned land
which is transferred to private ownership.
1. All annexed property, without further action of the Town Council, shall
automatically assume the classification of A-Agriculture unless and until
otherwise classified by amendment.
2. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the Town of
Normal, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street shall
automatically, and without further action of the Town Council, be extended
to the centerline of such street, alley or other public way existing prior to
such vacation.
C. Replacement of the Zoning Map. In the event that the Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the Town Council may by resolution adopt a new Zoning
Map which shall supercede the prior map.
SEC. 15.6-1
DIVISION 6 - PRINCIPAL USES AND DISTRICT STANDARDS
SEC. 15.6-1 PREAMBLE. These Principal Uses and District Standards are intended to
govern the use of land, buildings, and structures and establish bulk and off-street parking and
loading requirements applicable thereto. It is essential that each new use of land, buildings, or
structures become an integral part of the overall function and pattern of community development.
All development subject to the provisions of this Code, except as provided hereinafter for Planned
Unit Developments, as provided in ordinances authorizing special use permits or pursuant to
variations granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or corporate authority shall conform to the
standards of the district in which it is located.
SEC. 15.6-2 A-AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of the A-Agriculture District is to govern the use of land,
buildings, and structures within areas of the Town where soil, topographic, and other
conditions are best suited for the pursuit of agriculture or where essential community
facilities or utilities do not yet or are not reasonably expected to serve the property.
These regulations are further intended to provide for the protection and conservation
of natural resources; to prevent or minimize conflicts between agriculture and nonagricultural
land uses; act as a holding zone for annexed land prior to timely
development; and to facilitate orderly and efficient urban development by preventing
a scattered and indiscriminate pattern of urban growth.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the A-Agriculture zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration:
1. The suitability of the property for agricultural uses.
2. The extent to which the property and adjoining properties exhibit indicators
of urbanization, such as land subdivision, change in land use, or substantial
increases in property values.
3. The impact of agricultural use upon the property and upon adjacent
properties.
4. Potential public benefit derived from preservation of natural resources on or
under the property.
5. The extent to which the property can be effectively served by existing or
proposed public facilities and utilities.
C. Permitted Uses. In the A-Agriculture District, no buildings or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
SEC. 15.6-2(Cont.1)
1. Agriculture
2. Farm
3. Roadside stands for sale of agricultural products
4. Telecommunication antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities. (Amended 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Agriculture & Horticultural Fairs, Displays & Shows & Exhibits
2. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
3. Cemeteries
4. Country Clubs & Private Golf Courses
5. Extraction, Loading, Storage, Washing & Hauling of Sand, Gravel &
Topsoil
6. Nurseries & Greenhouses
7. Riding Stables
8. Veterinary Hospitals
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres and shall
have a minimum lot width of three hundred (300) feet.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Fifty (50) feet minimum.
b. Side Yard. Fifty (50) feet minimum each.
c. Corner Side Yard. Fifty (50) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Fifty (50) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations, see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. All off-street parking and loading
shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-3
SEC. 15.6-3 R-1AA SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-1AA Residence District is to provide for the
establishment of areas characterized by large-lot single-family dwellings intended
for occupancy by families and related recreational, religious, and cultural facilities
that serve the immediately surrounding residents, as well as those living in the
district. The R-1AA district provides for up to approximately two dwelling units per
acre.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-1AA Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration:
1. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the uses which
might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
2. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection and
solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact permitted uses
would have upon these services.
3. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunities and a variety of housing types.
4. The existence of vacant properties in the vicinity that are developable for
uses compatible to those permitted in this district.
5. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon
permitted uses.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment including
noise, air, or water pollution.
7. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon uses authorized in the R-1AA District and the impact such uses, if
developed on the property would have upon existing uses in the vicinity.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-1AA Residence District, no building or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
SEC. 15.6-3(Cont.1)
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
3. Dwellings, Single Family
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Cemeteries
3. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
4. Country Clubs & Private Golf Courses
5. Day Care Centers in Churches
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall contain a minimum of twenty-two thousand
five hundred (22,500) square feet and shall have a minimum lot width of one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Forty (40) feet minimum or the average setback,
whichever is greater.
b. Side Yards. Twenty (20) feet minimum each.
c. Corner Side Yards. Thirty-five (35) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Sixty (60) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
f. With the exception of driveways leading to off-street parking, private
sidewalks, front stoops and porches, the remainder of the front and
corner side yards shall be landscaped. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No.
4926)
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations, see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7.
SEC. 15.6-4
SEC. 15.6-4 R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-1A Residence District is to provide primarily for the
establishment of areas characterized by moderate-sized lots and single-family
detached dwellings intended for occupancy by families. In addition to these
dwellings, related recreational, religious, and cultural facilities intended to serve the
immediately surrounding residents are allowed where such facilities are found to be
compatible with surrounding residential development. The R-1A district allows
densities of up to approximately four dwelling units per acre.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-1A Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration:
1. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the permitted
uses which might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
2. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection and
solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact permitted uses
would have upon these services.
3. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunities and a variety of housing types.
4. The existence of vacant properties in the vicinity that are developable for
uses compatible to those permitted in this district.
5. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon
permitted uses.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment including
noise, air, or water pollution.
7. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon uses authorized in the R-1A District and the impact such uses, if
developed on the property would have upon existing uses in the vicinity.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-1A Residence District, no building or land shall be used
SEC. 15.6-4(Cont.1)
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
3. Dwellings, Single Family
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Cemeteries
3. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
4. Country Clubs & Private Golf Courses
5. Day Care Centers in Churches
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted uses.
Bulk regulations relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall contain a minimum of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and shall have a minimum lot width of seventy (70) feet.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Thirty (30) feet minimum or the average setback,
whichever is greater.
b. Side Yards. Eight (8) feet minimum each.
c. Corner Side Yard. Thirty (30) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Forty (40) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable, see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
f. With the exception of driveways leading to off-street parking, private
sidewalks, front stoops and porches, the remainder of the front and
corner side yards shall be landscaped. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No.
4926)
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations, see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-5
SEC. 15.6-5 R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-1B Residence District is to provide primarily for the
establishment of areas of higher density single-family detached dwellings. Densities
of approximately six dwelling units per acre are allowed. This district may be
applied to newly developed areas, as well as the older residential areas of the Town.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-1B Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration:
1. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the permitted
uses which might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
2. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection and
solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact permitted uses
would have upon these services.
3. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunities and a variety of housing types.
4. The existence of vacant or redevelopable properties in the vicinity that are
developable for uses compatible to those permitted in this district.
5. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon
permitted uses.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment including
noise, air, or water pollution.
7. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon uses authorized in the R-1B District and the impact such uses, if
developed on the property would have upon existing uses in the vicinity.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-1B Residence District, no building or land shall be used
except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
SEC. 15.6-5(Cont.2)
3. Dwellings, Single Family
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Cemeteries
3. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
4. Country Clubs & Private Golf Courses
5. Day Care Centers in Churches
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted
residential uses. Bulk regulations relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4
of this Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall contain a minimum of six thousand six
hundred (6,600) square feet and shall have a minimum lot width of sixty (60)
feet.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum or the average setback,
whichever is greater.
b. Side Yards. Six (6) feet minimum each. (Amended 11/20/95 by
Ord. No. 4356)
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Thirty-five (35) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
f. With the exception of driveways leading to off-street parking, private
sidewalks, front stoops and porches, the remainder of the front and
corner side yards shall be landscaped. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No.
4926)
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations, see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
SEC. 15.6-6(Cont.1)
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. All off-street parking and loading
shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-6 R-2 MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-2 Residence District is to accommodate development
characterized by a mixture of housing types at a high single-family and low
multiple-family structural density. Densities of up to approximately 14 dwelling
units per acre are allowed. This district allows for the conversion of dwelling units
in older residential areas of mixed dwelling types in order to extend the economic
lift of these structures and allow owners to justify expenditures for repairs and
modernization and serves as a zone of transition between lower density residential
districts and residential districts that permit greater land use intensity and structural
density.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-2 Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration:
1. The availability of permanent open spaces, including public parks, golf
courses, schools, and similar such uses in proximity to the subject property.
2. The distance the subject property is from primary service facilities and
activity centers, including schools, commercial centers, cultural nodes and
places of employment.
3. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the permitted
uses which might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
4. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town's
transportation system including pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, major and
collector streets, and public transit.
5. The adequacy of public services including schools, police and fire protection
and solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact the permitted
uses would have upon these services.
6. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon land uses authorized in the R-2 District and the impact such uses, if
developed, would have upon existing uses in the vicinity.
7. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunity and a variety of housing types.
SEC. 15.6-6(Cont.2)
8. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding would have upon the
permitted uses.
9. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment including
noise, air, and water pollution.
10. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-2 Residence District, no building or land may be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
the Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
3. Dwelling, Two-Family
4. Dwellings, Single Family
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
3. Day Care Centers
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
residential uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-
4 of this Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall be sized as follows:
a. Dwellings, single-family. Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square
feet and sixty (60) feet in width.
b. Dwellings, two-family. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet and seventy-five (75) feet in width, except, however, where a lot
of record contains one (1) side yard of zero (0) feet, then the lot must
contain three thousand seven hundred and fifty (3,750) square feet
and thirty seven and one-half (37.5) feet in width. (Amended
9/16/91)(Amended 11/16/92 by Ord. 4091)
c. Day Care Centers. In accordance with Department of Children and
Family Service licensing standards.
2. Yards.
SEC. 15.6-6(Cont.3)
a. Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum or the average setback,
whichever is greater.
b. Side Yards. Six (6) feet minimum each except a lot of record
meeting or exceeding all bulk requirements of this district may
contain one (1) side yard of at least six (6) feet and one (1) sideyard
of zero (0) feet, provided that side yard of zero (0) feet abuts another
lot with a side yard of zero (0) feet and the two (2) lots share the
same side yard of zero (0) feet. (Amended 9/16/91)(Amended
11/16/92 by Ord. 4091)
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Thirty-five (35) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
f. With the exception of driveways leading to off-street parking, private
sidewalks, front stoops and porches, the remainder of the front and
corner side yards shall be landscaped. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No.
4926)
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-7 R-3A MEDIUM-DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-3A Residence District is to facilitate the development of
residential districts for primarily multiple-family residences, which may generally
serve as a zone of transition between non-residential districts and residential districts
of more moderate density. This district is further intended to provide for the needs
of persons desiring the apartment type of dwelling at densities from 12 to 18
dwelling units per acre.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-3A Residence zoning classification, the Planning
SEC. 15.6-7(Cont.1)
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration.
1. The availability of permanent open spaces, including public parks, golf
courses, schools, and similar such uses in proximity to the subject property.
2. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town's
transportation system including pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, major and
collector streets, and public transit.
3. The distance the subject property is from primary service facilities and
activity centers, including schools, commercial centers, cultural nodes and
places of employment.
4. The adequacy of public services including schools, police and fire
protection, and solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact
the permitted uses would have upon these services.
5. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
6. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon this residential use and the impact uses authorized in the district would
have upon these surrounding areas.
7. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunity and a variety of housing types.
8. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
9. Impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
10. The conformance of the proposal with the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-3A Residence District, no building or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
3. Dwelling, Multiple-Family
SEC. 15.6-7(Cont.2)
4. Dwelling, Two-Family
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
3. Commercial Parking Lot (Added 1/16/01 by Ord. No. 4707)
4. Country Clubs & Private Golf Courses
5. Day Care Centers
6. Nursing & Retirement Homes
7. Rooming Houses
8. Therapeutic Care Homes
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall be sized as follows:
a. Dwellings, two family. Eight thousand (8,000) square feet and
eighty (80) feet in width; however, when one side yard of zero (0)
feet is proposed, then the lot must contain four thousand (4,000)
square feet and forty (40) feet in width. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord.
No. 4356)
b. Dwellings, multiple-family. Seventy (70) feet in width and
(i) Efficiency unit. One thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet per dwelling unit.
(ii) One-bedroom unit. Two thousand (2,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(iii) Two or more bedroom units. Two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet per dwelling unit.
c. Day Care Centers. In accordance with Department of Children and
Family Service licensing standards.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum or the average setback,
whichever is greater, or as otherwise provided in the Parking Impact
Zone. (Added 10/15/01 by Ord. No. 4751).
b. Side Yards. Side yards ten (10) feet minimum each except for a two
(2) family lot that contains one (1) side yard of ten (10) feet and one
(1) side yard of zero (0) feet provided that the side yard of zero (0)
SEC. 15.6-7(Cont.3)
feet and abutting or adjoining lot share the same side yard of zero (0)
feet. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Thirty (30) feet minimum, except as otherwise provided
in the Parking Impact Zone. (Added 10/15/01 by Ord. No. 4751).
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
H. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any
proposal for development in the R-3A District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-8 R-3B HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-3B Residential District is to allow for areas of highly
concentrated multiple-family residential development. This district provides for
more intense land usage in areas where lower density development is deemed
neither appropriate nor economical. It is further intended for this district to provide
apartment type dwellings in mid-rise structures for those persons desiring to live in
such an environment. Allowing densities of up to 72 dwelling units per acre, this
district may be applied to areas best suited for such intense residential usage,
principally on the fringes of the central business district and Illinois State University.
It may also be applied to other areas in the Town where comparable physical
arrangements of land uses are present.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property in the R-3B Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration.
1. The availability of permanent open spaces, including public parks, golf
courses, schools, and similar such uses in proximity to the subject property.
2. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town's
SEC. 15.6-8(Cont.1)
transportation system including pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, major and
collector streets, and public transit.
3. The distance the subject property is from primary service facilities and
activity centers, including schools, commercial centers, cultural nodes and
places of employment.
4. The adequacy of public services including schools, police and fire
protection, and solid waste collection, serving the property and the impact
the permitted uses would have upon these services.
5. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
6. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon this residential use and the impact uses permitted in this district would
have upon such surrounding uses.
7. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunity and a variety of housing types.
8. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
9. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
10. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-3B Residence District, no building or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Centers
3. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
4. Dwelling, Multiple-Family
5. Rooming Houses
6. Therapeutic Care Homes
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-8(Cont.2)
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
3. College, University Classroom (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4289)
4. Commercial Parking Lot (Added 1/16/01 by Ord. No. 4707)
5. Convenience Established in Multiple-Family Buildings
6. High-Rise Building
7. Office Building
E. Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the Town Council, after a
legislative public hearing and recommendation by the Normal Planning
Commission, in accordance with SEC. 15.8-3 of this Code shall be required for all
development which fulfills one or more on the following criteria:
1. The development of land on a tract one (1) acre or larger. (Amended
11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall be sized as follows:
a. Dwellings, multiple-family. Six thousand (6,000) square feet and
sixty (60) feet in width.
b. Therapeutic Care Homes. Four hundred (400) square feet per
occupant. Minimum Width: Sixty (60) feet. Day Care Centers: In
accordance with Department of Children and Family Services
licensing standards.
c. Other. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty (20) feet minimum, except as otherwise
provided in the Parking Impact Zone. (Added 10/15/01 by Ord. No.
4751)
b. Side Yards. Nine (9) feet minimum.
c. Corner Side Yards. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum, except as otherwise
provided in the Parking Impact Zone. (Added 10/15/01 by Ord. No.
4751)
SEC. 15.6-8(Cont.3)
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Maximum heights permitted are as follows. For
exemptions from these height regulations see SEC. 15.4-3(C) of this Code.
a. Day Care centers, rooming houses, therapeutic care homes,
fraternities and sororities. Thirty-five (35) feet or three (3) stories,
whichever is lower.
b. Dwellings, multiple-family. Sixty-five (65) feet or six (6) stories,
whichever is lower.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
I. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any
proposal for development in the R-3B District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-9 R-4 MOBILE HOME RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this R-4 Residence District is to provide for the establishment
of mobile home subdivisions, wherein individual lots are provided for ownership in
a manner and at a density deemed appropriate, safe and compatible to surrounding
land uses and densities and in conformance with the Subdivision Code, Chapter 16
of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the R-4 Residence zoning classification, the Planning
Commission and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal
under consideration.
1. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the permitted
uses which might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
2. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town's
transportation system, including pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, major and
collector streets and public transit.
3. The adequacy of public services including police and fire protection, solid
waste collection, and public schools that would serve the property and the
impact the permitted uses would have upon these.
SEC. 15.6-9(Cont.1)
4. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community and will be consistent with the Town's goals for equal housing
opportunities and a variety of housing types.
5. The compatibility of uses authorized in the district with existing and
permitted uses on surrounding properties.
6. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, will have upon the
permitted uses.
7. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the natural environment
including noise, air, and water pollution.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the R-4 Residence District, no building or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Day Care Home (Added 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4290, Effective 7/1/95)
3. Dwellings, Mobile Home
4. Single-Family Manufactured Unit (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Cemeteries
3. Day Care Centers in Churches
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. Lots shall contain six thousand six hundred (6,600)
square feet and shall have a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum.
b. Side Yards. Two side yards having a combined width of not less
than twelve (12) feet with neither less than five (5) feet in width.
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum.
d. Rear Yard. Thirty-five (35) feet minimum.
SEC. 15.6-9(Cont.2)
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from these height regulations, see SEC.
15.4-3(C) of this Code.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-10 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST DISTRICTS.
A. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to permit the creation of SPECIAL
PUBLIC INTEREST(S) districts:
1. In general areas officially designated as having special and substantial public
interest in protection of existing or proposed character, or of principal views
of, from, or through such areas;
2. Surrounding individual buildings or grounds where there is special and
substantial public interest in protecting such buildings and their visual
environment; or
3. In other cases where special and substantial public interest requires
modification of existing zoning regulations or repeal and replacement of
such regulations for the accomplishment of special public purposes for
which the district was established.
It is further intended that such SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST (S) districts and the
regulations established therein shall be in accord with and promote the purposes set
forth in the Town's Comprehensive Plan and other officially adopted plans of the
Town and shall encourage land use and development in substantial accord with the
physical design set forth therein.
B. Effect of S District Designation. Such S districts designated by amendment of the
Zoning Map supplant district or districts existing at the time of creation of a
particular S district.
C. Preparation of Recommendations for Specific S Zoning. Recommendations for
specific S district zoning classification shall be prepared by the Planning
Commission on its own initiative or at the direction of the Council. Each
recommendation shall identify the proposed zoning classification by the S prefix and
a number identifying the particular district and shall contain information and
SEC. 15.6-10(Cont.1)
recommendations as indicated below concerning the regulations proposed for such
district classification:
1. Statement of Intent. The recommendation shall include a statement of intent,
specifying the nature of the special and substantial public interest involved
and the objectives to be promoted by special regulations and/or procedures,
within the district as a whole, or within subareas of the district, if division
into such subareas is reasonably necessary for achievement of regulatory
purposes.
2. Proposed Regulations. The recommendation shall include regulations
designed to promote the special purposes of the district, as set forth in the
statement of intent. In particular, such regulations may require submission
of detailed site plans, building plans and elevations, and maps indicating the
relation of proposed development to surrounding or otherwise affected
property in terms of location, amount, character, and continuity of open
space; protection of desirable principal views; convenience of access through
and between buildings or in other locations where appropriate for public
purposes and where such access will reduce pedestrian congestion on public
streets; separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; signs; lighting;
mixtures of proposed uses and other matters as appropriate to determinations
related to special public interest of the district and the objectives to be
promoted.
The regulations may require special approval of such plans by the Planning
Commission, Town Council, or other officials or agencies of the Town.
SEC. 15.6-11 S-1 UNIVERSITY DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this S-1 University District is to allow for the establishment and
expansion of colleges, universities, or theological schools. It shall be applied to
property owned, or leased, and used by a college, university, or theological school
for educational or education related activities. While providing for flexibility in land
usage, this district recognizes the multi-building, multi-acre, traffic-generating
character of universities and the profound influence such a school may have upon
surrounding neighborhoods and public facilities and utilities. This district is not to
serve as a substitute for comprehensive, cooperative, campus-community planning
but rather it is intended to foster better relations and mutual problem solving
between the two.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the S-1 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration.
1. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town's
SEC. 15.6-11(Cont.1)
transportation system including pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, major and
collector streets, parking facilities, and public transit and the probable impact
the permitted uses will have upon this system.
2. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
3. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon this proposed university use and the impact uses authorized in the
district would have upon the surrounding permitted or existing uses.
4. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth in the
community.
5. The impact uses authorized in the district would have upon the environment,
including noise, air, and water pollution.
6. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon uses
authorized in the district.
7. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the S-1 University District, no building or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in
this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Arena, Stadium
3. Art Gallery, Museum
4. Auditorium
5. Book, Stationery Store
6. Bowling, Billiard Center
7. Business School
8. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
9. College, University Classroom
10. Computer Data-Processing Center
11. Dance Studio
12. Day Care Centers
13. Dormitory Residence Hall
14. Exhibition Hall, Exposition Hall
15. Farm
16. Fieldhouse
17. Golf Course, Public
18. Greenhouse
SEC. 15.6-11(Cont.2)
19. Heating, Physical Plant
20. Ice Rink
21. Junior College Classroom Building
22. Laboratory
23. Library
24. Office Building, Office
25. Park
26. Parking Lot
27. Planetarium
28. Police Station
29. Radio, T.V. Station
30. Recreation Center
31. Rooming Houses
32. School, Elementary
33. School, High
34. School, Junior High
35. Specialty School
36. Swimming Facility
37. Telecommunication Antenna and Related Telecommunication Antenna
Facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4445)
38. Theater
39. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
D. Special Uses. No special uses are permitted in this district.
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards. No minimum, although the General Yard Regulations contained in
SEC. 15.4-5 of this Code shall apply.
3. Building Height. No maximum height requirement.
4. Day Care Centers. In accordance with Department of Children and Family
Service licensing standards.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.6-12
SEC. 15.6-12 S-2 PUBLIC LANDS AND INSTITUTIONS DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District is to allow for the
establishment and maintenance of public uses, publicly regulated uses, and private
uses that display an inherent relationship to the public interest. The creation of such
a district shall be provided for parcels of substantial size where such community
serving uses are necessary in order that adequate community services may be
rendered and where, through proper site selection and planning, such uses are
compatible with the surrounding area.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the S-2 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration.
1. The extent to which the uses authorized in the district are necessary for the
proper provision of community services.
2. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon the public uses and impact the permitted uses would have upon these
surrounding uses.
3. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems, to serve the uses
authorized in the district.
4. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
5. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
6. The conformance of the proposal to the Town's Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District, no building or
land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless
otherwise provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Airport, Heliport
3. Arena, Stadium
4. Art Gallery, Museum
5. Auditorium
6. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
SEC. 15.6-12(Cont.2)
7. College, University Classroom
8. Community Center
9. Convention Center
10. Correctional Institutions, Detention Centers & Rehabilitation Centers
11. Dormitory
12. Dwelling, Multi-family provided such dwelling unit is restricted to residents
55 years of age and older with no more than 20 percent of the dwelling units
occupied by a grandfamily (Added 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5265)
13. Electric Power Plants & Substations
14. Fieldhouse
15. Fire Station
16. Gas Company Plants and Facilities
17. Golf Course, Public
18. Gymnasium
19. Hospital
20. Ice Rink
21. Junior College Classroom Building
22. Legislative Hall
23. Library
24. Nursing & Retirement Homes
25. Office Building, Office
26. Park
27. Parking Lot
28. Police Station
29. Radio, T.V. Station
30. Recreation Center
31. Sanitary landfill
32. School Administrative Offices
33. School Bus Garages and/or repair shops, Public Transit Garages
34. School System Warehouses; Governmental Warehouses and Storage Areas
35. School, Elementary
36. School, High
37. School, Junior High
38. Student Residence Hall
39. Swimming Facility
40. Telecommunication Antenna and Related Telecommunication Antenna
Facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
41. Telephone Exchange
42. Water Filtration/Treatment Plants & Elevated & Underground storage Tanks
43. Welfare Agency
44. Zoo
45. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
(Amended 6/17/96 by Ord. No. 4395)
D. Special Uses. No special uses are permitted in this district.
SEC. 15.6-12(Cont.3)
E. Site Plan Review and Approval by the Town Council. After a legislative public
hearing and recommendation by the Normal Planning Commission, in accordance
with SEC. 15.8-3 of this Code shall be required for all developments in the District.
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards. No minimum, although the General Yard Regulations contained in
Section 15.4-5 of this Code shall apply.
3. Building Height. No maximum.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
I. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any
proposal for development in the S-2 District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-13 S-3 HISTORIC AND CULTURAL DISTRICT.
A. Intent. In addition to those general purposes set forth in Division 2 of this Code, it is
hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or special historical
interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health,
prosperity, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town. This S-3 Historic and
Cultural District shall be applied as an overlay or a combined district. This
technique retains the list of uses allowed in the present zoning classification that the
S-3 District overlays. The purpose of the S-3 Historic and Cultural District is to:
1. effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such
improvements and of such districts that represent or reflect elements of the
Town’s cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;
2. safeguard the Town’s historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and
reflected in such landmarks and historic districts;
3. stabilize and improve property values;
4. foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past;
SEC. 15.6-13(Cont.1)
5. protect and enhance the Town’s attractions to residents, home buyers,
tourists, and visitors and shoppers, thereby supporting and promoting
business, commerce and industry;
6. strengthen the economy of the Town; and
7. promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for education, pleasure,
and welfare of the people of the Town.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines
1. Any portion of the Town classified in a S-3 Historic and Cultural District
shall also be classified in one (1) or more of other districts established in
Division 6 of this Code. The official zoning map shall designate any land
classified in a S-3 District by a combination of symbols, e.g. S-3/R-1AA, S-
3/R-1A, S-3/R-1B, S-3/R-2, S-3/R-3A, S-3/R-3B, etc.
2. In a S-3 Historic and Cultural District, all the regulations of the underlying
Agriculture District, Residential District, Special Public Interest District,
Business/Commercial District or Manufacturing District established by
Division 6 of this Code shall apply, except insofar as such regulations are in
conflict with the special regulations applicable to the S-3 Historic and
Cultural District, and in the event of such a conflict, the regulations
governing such S-3 District shall apply. All permitted uses or special uses
otherwise allowable in the underlying Agriculture District, Residence
District, Special Public Interest District, Business District or Manufacturing
District shall continue to be allowable uses except as provided in Division
12, SEC. 15.12-1(E) of this Code.
C. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted uses.
1. Lot Regulations. To the extent that existing patterns of platting or lotting
contribute to the character of the S-3 Historic and Cultural District, it is the
intent of this Section to encourage continuations of such patterns and prevent
future fragmentation of land ownership likely to have adverse effects on such
character. Therefore, lots or portions of lots existing at the time such lots or
portions thereof are classified into the S-3 Historic and Cultural District may
be combined but, subject to the general provisions cited in SEC. 15.4-3 of
this Code, it shall be unlawful for any such existing lot or combinations of
lots of portions thereof in single ownership at the time of such zoning to the
S-3 District to be reduced in width, depth, or area without the approval by
the Preservation Commission of either a Certificate of Appropriateness in
accordance with SEC. 12-1(E)(20) through SEC. 15.12-1(E)(24)(k) of this
Code or Certificate of Economic Hardship in accordance with SEC. 15.12-
1(E)(25) through SEC. 15.12-1(E)(26) of this code.
SEC. 15.6-13(Cont.2)
2. Yard Regulations. Subject to the general provisions cited in SEC. 15.4-3 of
this Code, it shall be unlawful for front yards, side yards, rear yards or
portions thereof existing at the time that such yards are classified into the S-3
Historic and Cultural District to be reduced in width, depth, or area without
the approval by the Preservation Commission of either a Certificate of
Appropriateness in accordance with SEC. 15.12-1(E)(25) through SEC.
15.12-1(E)(26) of this Code.
3. Height Regulations.
a. Existing Buildings or Structures. Subject to the general provisions
cited in SEC. 15.4-3 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for the height
of buildings or structures or portions thereof existing at the time that
such buildings or structures or portions thereof are classified into the
S-3 Historic and Cultural District to be altered without the approval
by the Preservation Commission of either a Certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with SEC. 15.12-1(E)(24)(k) of this
Code or a Certificate of Economic Hardship in accordance with SEC.
15.12-1(E)(25) through SEC. 15.12-1(E)(26) of this Code.
b. New Buildings or Structures. Subject to the general provisions cited
in SEC. 15.4-3 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any building or
structure to be constructed or erected in the S-3 Historic and Cultural
District to any height above grade without the approval by the
Preservation Commission of either a Certificate of Appropriateness
in accordance with SEC. 15.12-1(E)(20) through SEC. 15.12-
1(E)(24)(k) of this Code or a Certificate of Economic Hardship in
accordance with SEC. 15.12-1(E)(25) through SEC. 15.12-1(E)(26)
of this Code.
D. Site Plan Review. No building permit for any building or structure or for any
exterior improvement or addition to any building or structure in the S-3 Historic and
Cultural District shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator unless and until:
1. The construction plans and specifications for such building or structure or
addition thereto have been reviewed by the Preservation Commission and
until a Certificate of Appropriateness has been approved by the Preservation
Commission as provided by SEC. 15.12-1(E)(20) through SEC. 15.12-
1(E)(24)(k) of this Code, or
2. A Certificate of Economic Hardship has been approved by the Preservation
Commission in accordance with SEC. 15.12-1(E)(25) through SEC. 15.12-
1(E)(26) of this Code.
(SEC. 15.6-13 Amended 8/20/1990 by Ord. No. 3925)
SEC. 15.6-14
SEC. 15.6-14 C-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this C-1 Office District is to accommodate office buildings
primarily. Related retail, service, institution and multiple family uses commonly
associated with office use are allowed to a limited extent. This district may be
applied as a transitional-use buffer between residential uses and uses which would
be incompatible with residential districts. The prime characteristics of this district
are the low intensity of land coverage and the absence of such nuisance factors as
noise, air pollutant emission, and glare.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the C-1 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration.
1. The degree to which the permitted uses serve as a buffer between uses of
lower and higher intensity that if adjacent could prove incompatible.
2. The potential impact existing or permitted uses in the vicinity would have
upon the uses authorized in the district and the impact the permitted uses
would have upon these uses.
3. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection, serving
the property and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these
services.
4. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water, sewer, and transportation systems to serve the permitted
uses which might lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
5. The extent to which the permitted uses will promote balanced growth and
sound economic development in the community.
6. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
7. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment; including
noise, air, and water pollution.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Comprehensive Plan and Official
Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the C-1 Office District, no building or land may be used except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
SEC. 15.6-14(Cont.1)
2. Ambulatory Surgical Treatment Center or Surgi-Center (Added 5/15/00 by
Ord. No. 4653)
3. Art Gallery, Museum
4. Bank
5. Barber, Beauty Shop when located in an Office Building
6. Birthing Center (Added 6/19/00 by Ord. No. 4657)
7. Book Stationery Store
8. Business School
9. Computer Data-Processing Center
10. Dairy Store when located in an Office Building
11. Day Care Centers
12. Delicatessen when located in an Office Building
13. Diagnostic Imaging Center (Added 6/19/00 by Ord. No. 4657)
14. Diagnostic Laboratory Testing Center (Added 6/19/00 by Ord. No. 4657)
15. Drug Store when located in an Office Building
16. Dry Cleaning pick-up store when located in an Office Building
17. Dwelling Units when located above the first story
18. Health Club
19. Market, Grocery Store when located in an Office Building
20. News Stand when located in an Office Building
21. Nursery School
22. Office Building, Office
23. Post-surgical Recovery Care Center (Added 6/19/00 by Ord. No. 4657)
24. Radio, T.V. Station
25. Restaurant, when located in an Office Building
26. Shoe Repair Shop when located in an Office Building
27. Specialty Food Store when located in an Office Building
28. Specialty School
29. Tobacco Shop, when located in an Office Building
30. Travel Bureau
31. Vocational School
32. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of the district.
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. High-rise buildings.
2. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities. (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted uses.
Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
SEC. 15.6-14(Cont.2)
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
b. Side Yards. Two side yards having a combined width of fifteen (15)
feet with neither side yard less than five (5) feet in width. In addition
to this minimum, one (1) additional foot of side yard must be
maintained for each two (2) feet of building height over thirty (30)
feet.
c. Corner Side Yard. A side yard abutting a street shall be a minimum
of twenty (20) feet.
d. Rear Yard. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed sixty-five (65) feet or six stories, whichever
is lower.
4. Floor Area. The total floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed
forty (40) percent of the net lot area.
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
H. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any
proposal for development in the C-1 District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-15 C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District is to provide
establishments, including retail stores and personal service facilities, which serve the
frequently recurring needs of a surrounding residential neighborhood. While
intended to provide for convenience shopping, certain business types that might tend
to be a nuisance to surrounding residential development are excluded. To these
ends, the C-2 regulations are designed to further protect adjacent property by: (1)
applying specific size standards to permitted uses, and (2) establishing bulk and
placement requirements that are comparable to residential district standards.
Neighborhood shopping centers should be located at the intersection of two major
streets or at the intersection of a major and a collector and designed to serve
approximately one square mile of residential development; a neighborhood shopping
center is ordinarily built around a supermarket as the principal tenant. The minimum
area to be zoned C-2 (1.5 acres) is sufficient in size to prevent spot zoning and still
meet the anticipated needs for convenience shopping. The maximum area to be
SEC. 15.6-15(Cont.1)
zoned C-2 (7 acres) is intended to prevent the development of a shopping center that
serves an area much larger than a neighborhood.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the C-2 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration.
1. A C-2 District at any one location shall not be less than one and one-half
(1.5) acres or more than seven (7) acres in size.
2. The relationship of the subject property to the various aspects of the Town’s
transportation system, including major and collector streets, pedestrian ways,
and bicycle paths and the impact the permitted uses would have upon this
system.
3. The extent to which surrounding zoning and land usage provides a transition
from this more intense use to lower density residential development.
4. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
5. The availability of other convenience shopping and service facilities in the
anticipated service area and the extent to which the uses authorized in the
district fulfill unmet needs for convenience shopping.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the existing or permitted
uses in the vicinity and the effect these uses would have upon the uses
authorized in the district.
7. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
8. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
9. The conformance of the proposal to the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District, no building or land
shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless
otherwise provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Art & School Supply Store
SEC. 15.6-15(Cont.2)
3. Bakery & Donut Shops (Retail Sales Only)
4. Bank
5. Barber, Beauty Shop
6. Book, Stationery Store
7. Candy & Ice Cream Shops
8. Car Wash (Added by Ord. No. 4141, 5/17/93)
9. Dairy Store
10. Dance Studio
11. Delicatessen
12. Drug Store
13. Dry Cleaners
14. Florist Shop
15. Gift Shop
16. Hardware Store
17. Health Club
18. Hobby, Toy Shop
19. Household Goods, Sales & Repair
20. Laundry
21. Liquor Store
22. Market, Grocery Store
23. News Stand
24. Office Building, Office
25. Pet Store
26. Photographic Studios
27. Restaurants
28. Shoe Repair Shop
29. Specialty Food Store
30. Tailor, Dress Making Shop
31. Tobacco Shop
32. Travel Bureau
33. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purposes of this district.
D. Special Use. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities. (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
E. Site Plan Review and Approval by the Town Council. After a legislative public
hearing and recommendation by the Normal Planning Commission, in accordance
with SEC. 15.8-3 of this Code shall be required for all developments in the district.
(Amended by Ord. No. 4142, 5/17/93)(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses.
SEC. 15.6-15(Cont.3)
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front and Corner Side Yards. Fifty (50) feet except that off-street
parking may be permitted to within twenty-five (25) feet of a front or
corner side yard lot line.
b. Side and Rear Yards. Fifty (50) feet except that off-street parking
may be permitted to within ten (10) feet of a side or rear lot line.
c. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet,
whichever is lower.
4. Floor Area. The total floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed
thirty (30) percent of the net lot area.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading
must comply with the provisions set forth in Division 14 of this Code. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
I. Development Standards. The following general development standards and the
provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any proposal for development in the
C-2 District. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
1. One of the following types of screening along the side and rear lot lines
abutting areas zoned or developed for residential use shall be provided:
a. Solid fence or masonry wall with no apertures, running parallel and
adjacent to applicable side and rear lot lines, and not less than six (6)
feet in height, nor more than ten (10) feet.
b. Dense evergreen hedge running parallel and adjacent to applicable
side and rear lot lines; said hedge shall be at least three (3) feet in
height when planted and not less than six (6) feet at mature height.
2. Hours of business shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. and stated in all
rental agreements.
(Subsection I Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-16
SEC. 15.6-16 C-3 COMMUNITY/REGIONAL SHOPPING DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this C-3 Community/Regional Shopping District is to facilitate
the development of community and region serving retail trade centers. The
development contemplated in this district has such distinguishing characteristics as:
(1) unified site planning and development which promotes a safe and conducive
atmosphere for large volumes of shoppers, (2) site accessibility such that the high
volumes of traffic generated create a minimal congestion and adverse impact upon
surrounding land use, (3) unified architectural treatment of buildings rather than an
assemblage of separate, conflicting store and structural types, and (4) a trade area
that includes the entire community at a minimum and may include the entire county
and surrounding areas outside the county. While recognizing the potential monetary
benefits accruing from the development of a large shopping center within the Town
and the flexibility necessary for such a development, these regulations are intended
to insure that a proper location be selected and site planning be performed to better
accomplish the purposes of zoning.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property in the C-3 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and the Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration.
1. A C-3 District at any one location shall not be less than ten (10) acres in size.
2. The relationship of the subject property to the Town’s transportation system
and the impact the permitted uses would have upon this system. The
volumes of traffic generated by development in this district necessitates its
location near or adjacent to the intersection of two major streets or a
collector street and a major street.
3. The compatibility of uses authorized in the district with existing or permitted
uses in the area and the impact the permitted uses would have upon such
uses.
4. The extent of which surrounding zoning and land usage provides adequate
transition from this intense use to uses of lesser intensity.
5. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
7. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
SEC. 15.6-16(Cont.1)
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the C-3 Community/Regional Shopping District, no building or
land shall be used except for one of the following specified uses, unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Amusement Center
3. Appliance Repair Shop
4. Appliance Store
5. Art & School Supply Store
6. Art Gallery, Museum
7. Bakery & Donut Shops (Retail Sales Only)
8. Bank
9. Barber, Beauty Shop
10. Book, Stationery Store
11. Bowling, Billiard Center
12. Candy & Ice Cream Shops
13. Clothing Store
14. Dairy Store
15. Dance Studio
16. Delicatessen
17. Department Store
18. Drug Store
19. Dry Cleaners
20. Dry Good Store
21. Florist Shop
22. Fur Store
23. Furniture Repair Store
24. Furniture Store
25. Garden Supply Store
26. Gift Shop
27. Hardware Store
28. Health Club
29. Hobby, Toy Shop
30. Household Goods, Sales & Repair
31. Ice Rink
32. Jewelry Store
33. Laundry
34. Leather Goods Shop
35. Liquor Store
36. Mail Order Store
37. Market, Grocery Store
38. Motel, Hotel
39. Motion Picture Theater
SEC. 15.6-16(Cont.2)
40. Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessory Sales
41. Music Store
42. News Stand
43. Office Building, Office
44. Optical Goods Sales
45. Pet Store
46. Photographic Studios
47. Photographic Supply Sales
48. Restaurants
49. Roller Rink
50. Rug, Floor-Covering Store
51. Shoe Repair Shop
52. Shoe Store
53. Specialty Food Store
54. Sporting Goods Sales
55. Tailor, Dress Making Shop
56. Theater
57. Tobacco Shop
58. Travel Bureau
59. Variety Store
60. Vocational School
61. Wallpaper, Paint Store
62. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
D. Special Use. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. High-Rise Building
2. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
E. Site Plan Review. In accordance with the requirements and procedures stated in
SEC. 15.8-3, public site plan review and approval by the Town Council, after a
public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be required
for all new or expanded development in the C-3 District.
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front and Corner Side Yards. Fifty (50) feet except that off-street
parking is permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of a front lot line.
SEC. 15.6-16(Cont.3)
b. Side and Rear. Twenty-five (25) feet except that parking may be
permitted to within ten (10) feet of a side or rear lot line.
c. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed four (4) stories or forty-five (45) feet,
whichever is lower.
4. Floor Area. The total floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed
thirty (30) percent of the lot area.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading
must comply with the provisions set forth in Division 14 of this Code. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
I. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 of this Code shall
apply to any proposal for development in the C-3 District. (Amended 1/20/04 by
Ord. No. 4926)
J. The Town Council may waive any portion of the standards, requirements or
procedures for this Section of the Code, provided that such waivers are not contrary
to the spirit, purpose and intent of this Code and in accordance with all applicable
Federal and State Laws.
SEC. 15.6-17 B-1 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of the General Business District is to provide for certain types of
commercial activities that have a functional relationship to the major street system,
and in some instances, an economic relationship to the central business district or to
commercial and regional shopping areas. Such activities will include retail, service,
amusement establishments and wholesale suppliers. Customers in this district will
generally use an automobile or a form of public transit to reach a desired
establishment. Since there is little essential interdependence of activities, each
establishment must accommodate customers within its own parking area. The
automobile and truck traffic this district generates and the adverse effects from this
traffic combine to make these business areas incompatible with residential
development; this district should only be used along the fringe of a neighborhood
and not within it. The avoidance of undue traffic congestion, the promotion of safe
traffic flow, and the protection of surrounding properties from adverse impacts are
major considerations in the application of the district.
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.1)
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property in the B-1 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration:
1. The relationship of the subject property to the Town’s transportation system
and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these systems; traffic
congestion and safety are of primary concern.
2. The potential impact the uses authorized in the district would have upon any
existing or permitted uses in the surrounding area.
3. The extent to which the permitted uses contribute to an undesirable pattern
of strip commercial development; including the resultant numerous curb cuts
and piecemeal development on small lots.
4. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which
lawfully occur on the property to zoned.
5. The adequacy of public service, including police and fire protection, serving
the property and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these
services.
6. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
7. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
8. The conformance of the proposal to the Comprehensive Plan and Official
Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the B-1 General Business District, no building or land may be
used except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise
provided in this Code:
1. Adult Hotels/Motels (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
2. Adult Lingerie Modeling Studios (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
3. Adult Media Stores (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
4. Adult Modeling Shops (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
5. Adult Motion Picture Theater (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
6. Agriculture
7. Agricultural Implement, Sales & Repair
8. Agricultural Supply Store
9. Ambulance Service
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.2)
10. Amusement Center
11. Appliance Repair Shop
12. Appliance Store
13. Arena, Stadium
14. Art & School Supply Store
15. Art Gallery, Museum
16. Athletic Club, Indoor
17. Auction House
18. Automobile Service Station
19. Automobile, Truck Sales
20. Bakery
21. Bakery & Donut Shops (Retail Sales Only)
22. Ballroom, Dance Hall
23. Bank
24. Barber, Beauty Shop
25. Boat Sales
26. Book, Stationery Store
27. Bowling, Billiard Center
28. Bus Passenger Terminal
29. Business School
30. Candy & Ice Cream Shops
31. Car Wash
32. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
33. Clothing Store
34. Clubs, Private
35. Computer Data-Processing Center
36. Contractor's Shop except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
37. Dairy Store
38. Dance Studio
39. Day Care Centers
40. Delicatessen
41. Department Store
42. Drug Store
43. Dry Cleaners
44. Dry Good Store
45. Dwelling Units when located above the first story
46. Exhibition Hall, Exposition Hall
47. Florist Shop
48. Food Locker Plants
49. Funeral Parlor
50. Fur Store
51. Furniture Repair Store
52. Furniture Store
53. Garden Supply Store
54. Gift Shop
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.3)
55. Gymnasium
56. Hardware Store
57. Health Club
58. Hobby, Toy Shop
59. Household Goods, Sales & Repair
60. Ice Rink
61. Indoor Tennis Club
62. Jewelry Store
63. Laundry
64. Leather Goods Shop
65. Liquor Store
66. Lumberyard, Building Materials Storage
67. Mail Order Store
68. Market, Grocery Store
69. Media Shops (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
70. Miniature Golf Course
71. Mini-warehouse (with or without dwelling unit for superintendent) except
such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor (Deleted 9/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4967, to be reinstated 5/1/05 unless further action taken prior to
5/1/05)(Date extended to 8/1/05 by Ord. No. 5005)(Amended 6/20/05 by
Ord. No. 5013(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
72. Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle Rental and Sales
73. Motel, Hotel
74. Motion Picture Theater
75. Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessory Sales
76. Motor Vehicle Repairs, Paint Shop
77. Motor Vehicle Sales
78. Motor Vehicle Storage
79. Music Store
80. News Stand
81. Newspaper, Magazine Printing & Publishing
82. Night Club
83. Nurseries & Greenhouses
84. Nursery School
85. Office Building, Office
86. Optical Goods Sales
87. Parking Lot
88. Pet Store
89. Photographic Studios
90. Photographic Supply Sales
91. Print Shop
92. Radio, T.V. Station
93. Recreation Center
94. Recreational Vehicle Sales
95. Restaurant Supplies & Services
96. Restaurants
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.4)
97. Retail Lumber Sales
98. Roller Rink
99. Rug, Floor-Covering Store
100. Sex Shops (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
101. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No.
4801)
102. Shoe Repair Shop
103. Shoe Store
104. Specialty Food Store
105. Specialty School
106. Sporting Goods Sales
107. Supper Club
108. Swimming Facility
109. Tailor, Dress Making Shop
110. Taxidermist Shop (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
111. Theater
112. Tobacco Shop
113. Trailer Rental and Sales
114. Travel Bureau
115. Truck Freight Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1
Corridor (Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
116. Truck Stop
117. Truck Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
118. Variety Store
119. Veterinary Hospitals
120. Video Rental Stores (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
121. Vocational School
122. Wallpaper, Paint Store
123. Warehouse; Mini (with or without dwelling unit for Superintendent)
124. Wholesale Distributors
125. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
(Renumbered 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
D. Special Use. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Dwelling, Multiple Family (Added 7/21/03 by Ord. No. 4881)
3. Gun Range, Indoor (Added 6/17/13 by Ord. No. 5495)
4. High-Rise Building
5. Kennels (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4805)
6. Mobile Home Parks
7. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.5)
8. Remote Controlled Racetracks (Added 1/17/06 by Ord. No. 5047)
9. Tourist Cabins, Recreational Vehicle & Tourist Camps
E. Site Plan Review.
1. In accordance with the requirements and procedures stated in SEC. 15.8-3,
public site plan review and approval by the Town Council after legislative
public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be
required for all development which fulfills one (1) or more of the following
criteria.
a. The development of land consisting of five (5) acres or more.
b. The development of land which is an expansion of an existing
structure or use and which, if a new development, would be
permitted only when processed under the site plan review procedures
contained herein.
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.l0-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended 1/20/04 by
Ord. No. 4926)
b. Side Yards. Two (2) side yards having a combined width of fifteen
(15) feet with neither side yard less than five (5) feet.
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
d. Rear Yard. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable, see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed sixty-five (65) feet or six stories, whichever
is lower.
4. Day Care Centers. In accordance with Department of Children and Family
Service licensing standards.
SEC. 15.6-17(Cont.6)
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. All off-street parking and loading
shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
I. Separation Requirements for Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business. No lot line
of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to the lot line of
any other lot occupied by a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment, and no lot line of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be located closer than thirteen hundred
and twenty (1320) feet to the lot line of any other lot used for an amusement center,
an amusement park, a day care center, children’s home, children’s museum,
orphanage, agency operated family home, agency operated group home, child care
facility, foster care home, hobby shop or toy store, institutional home for the care of
children, nursery school or preschool, elementary school, junior high school, senior
high school, park, playground, gymnasium, recreation center, a miniature golf
course, a place of worship, a religious education facility, a residential dwelling, a
hospital, a skating rink or a zoo. (Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
J. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 of this Code shall
apply to any proposal for development in the B-1 District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-18 B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this B-2 Central Business District is to provide for a variety of
retail stores and shops, offices and services in the central business area of the Town.
This area has historically served the major retail marketing function of the
community and at the time of adoption of this Code displays the highest
concentration of commercial development. In this district each establishment
contributes to the whole shopping area by adding to the variety of goods available
and to comparison shopping opportunities. This essential inter-dependence of
activities is given precedence over any desire to require automobile parking spaces
adjacent to each building although provisions are made for the cooperative
development of off-street parking facilities by public and private interests.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property in the B-2 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration:
1. The relationship of the subject property to the Town’s transportation systems
and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these systems. Potential
conflicts between pedestrians and motorized traffic are of major concern.
SEC. 15.6-18(Cont.1)
2. The extent to which surrounding zoning and land usage provides adequate
transition from this intense business use to uses of lesser intensity.
3. The potential impact the uses authorized in the district would have upon any
existing or permitted uses, especially residential, in the surrounding area.
4. The extent to which the subject property is a logical extension of the central
business area.
5. The capacity of existing and proposed community facilities and utilities,
including water and sewer systems, to serve the permitted uses which might
lawfully occur on the property so zoned.
6. The adequacy of public services including police and fire protection, serving
the property and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these
services.
7. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
8. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
9. The conformance of the proposal to the Comprehensive Plan and Official
Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the B-2 Central Business District, no building or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
1. Appliance Repair Shop
2. Appliance Store
3. Art & School Supply Store
4. Art Gallery, Museum
5. Athletic Club, Indoor
6. Bakery
7. Bakery & Donut Shops (Retail Sales Only)
8. Ballroom, Dance Hall
9. Bank
10. Barber, Beauty Shop
11. Bicycle Shop
12. Book, Stationery Store
13. Bowling, Billiard Center
14. Candy & Ice Cream Shops
15. Churches & Other Places of Public Worship
16. Clothing Store
SEC. 15.6-18(Cont.2)
17. Clubs, Private
18. Computer Data-Processing Center
19. Dance Studio
20. Day Care Center
21. Delicatessen
22. Department Store
23. Drug Store
24. Dry Cleaners
25. Dwelling Units when located above the first story
26. Educational Facilities
27. Electronic Equipment Sales & Service
28. Exhibition Hall, Exposition Hall
29. Florist Shop
30. Funeral Parlor
31. Fur Store
32. Furniture Repair Store
33. Furniture Store
34. Garden Supply Store
35. Gift Shop
36. Hardware Store
37. Health Club
38. Hobby, Toy Shop
39. Hotel-Motel/Conference Center
40. Household Goods, Sales & Repair
41. Jewelry Store
42. Laundry
43. Leather Goods Shop
44. Library
45. Linen Supply House
46. Liner Housing, including first floor dwelling units or a combination of
dwelling units and other permitted uses. (Added 9/19/2011 by Ord. No.
5397)
47. Liquor Store
48. Mail Order Store
49. Market, Grocery Store
50. Motion Picture Theater
51. Music Store
52. News Stand
53. Newspaper, Magazine Printing & Publishing
54. Night Club
55. Nursery School
56. Office Building, Office
57. Optical Goods Sales
58. Parking Lot
59. Pet Store
60. Photographic Studios
SEC. 15.6-18(Cont.3)
61. Photographic Supply Sales
62. Post Office
63. Print Shop
64. Professional Service Office
65. Radio, T.V. Station
66. Recreation Center
67. Restaurants
68. Rug, Floor-Covering Store
69. Salon, Spa
70. Shoe Repair Shop
71. Shoe Store
72. Specialty Food Store
73. Sporting Goods Sales
74. Supper Club
75. Tailor, Dress Making Shop
76. Theater
77. Tobacco Shop
78. Transportation Terminal
79. Travel Bureau
80. Variety Store
81. Video Rental Store
82. Wallpaper, Paint Store
83. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
(Entire Subsection C Amended 2/18/02 by Ord. No. 4772)
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Bed and Breakfast (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
2. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
3. Vehicle Fueling Station (Added 2/18/02 by Ord. No. 4772)
E. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements for special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards. None required.
3. Building Height. Building height must conform to the requirements
contained in Division 17 of this Code, except liner housing which may be
constructed at a height equivalent to the adjoining structure. (Amended
4/17/89)(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)(Amended 9/19/2011 by Ord.
No. 5397)
SEC. 15.6-18(Cont.4)
F. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
G. Off-Street Parking and Loading. All off-street parking and loading shall conform to
the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
H. Development Standards. All development in the B-2 District must conform to the
requirements contained in Division 17 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No.
4926)
SEC. 15.6-19 M-1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
A. Intent. The intent of this M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District is to provide for
industrial uses with an absence of objectionable external effects in areas that are
suitable for this type of development by reason of topography, relative location, and
adequate utility and transportation systems. Compatibility with surrounding districts
is further assured by limiting development by reason of topography, relative
location, and adequate utility and transportation systems. Compatibility with
surrounding districts is further assured by limiting development to low industrial
densities. Just as industrial uses are excluded from residential areas to promote
public health, safety and welfare, so are residential developments excluded from this
district.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property to the M-1 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposed under
consideration:
1. The relationship of the subject property to various aspects of the
transportation system, including rail, air, highway and street, and pedestrian,
and the impact the permitted uses would have upon these systems. Truck
traffic and its impact is of major concern generally, as well as the affect on
vehicular travel times.
2. The extent to which surrounding zoning and land usage provide an adequate
transition from these industrial uses to uses of lesser intensity and the degree
to which the uses authorized in the district serve as a buffer between other
districts which exhibit more objectionable effects and uses of lower intensity.
3. The capacity of existing and proposed public utilities to the site, including
water and sewer systems to serve the permitted uses which might lawfully
occur on the property so zoned.
4. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection, serving
the property in question and the impact the permitted uses would have upon
these services.
SEC. 15.6-19(Cont.1)
5. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment including
noise, air, and water pollution.
6. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
7. The conformance of the proposal to the Comprehensive Plan and the Official
Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District, no building or land
shall be used except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Agricultural Implement, Sales & Repair
3. Agricultural Supply Store
4. Ambulance Service
5. Auction House
6. Automobile, Truck Sales
7. Bagged Mineral Products
8. Bakery
9. Bicycle Manufacture
10. Boat Manufacture
11. Boat Sales
12. Car Wash
13. Churches and Other Places of Public Worship
14. Clubs, Private
15. Contractor’s Shop except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
16. Cordate, Rope, Twine & Net Manufacture
17. Electrical & Electronic Machinery Manufacture
18. Electrical Appliance Manufacture
19. Fleet Fueling Depot (Added 4/17/95 by Ord. No. 4309)
20. Food Locker Plants
21. Footwear Manufacture
22. Furniture, Fixture, Bedding Manufacture
23. Indoor Tennis Club
24. Instrument Manufacture
25. Jewelry Manufacture
26. Kennels, with or without dwelling unit for superintendent (Added 7/15/02
by Ord. No. 4805)(Amended 8/18/03 by Ord. No. 4884)
27. Knitting Mills, all fabrics absent of any dye process
28. Linen Supply House
29. Lumberyard, Building Materials Storage
30. Manufacture of Products from Cork or Wood
31. Manufacture of Products from Plastic
SEC. 15.6-19(Cont.2)
32. Manufacture of Products from Processed Fur
33. Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle Rental and Sales
34. Motor Vehicle Repairs, Paint Shop
35. Motor Vehicle Sales
36. Motor Vehicle Storage
37. Musical Instrument Manufacture
38. Newspaper, Magazine Printing & Publishing
39. Nurseries & Greenhouses
40. Office Use (Added by Ord. 4099, 12/21/92)
41. Photographic, Optical Goods Manufacture
42. Pottery, China, Earthenware Manufacture
43. Print Shop
44. Radio, Radar Site
45. Recreational Vehicle Sales
46. Retail Lumber Sales
47. Snack Food Manufacture
48. Soft Drink, Carbonated Water Industry
49. Sporting Goods Manufacture
50. Storage, Canned or Bottled Food & Soft Drinks
51. Storage; Fibre Products
52. Storage; Flour, Starch & Sugar
53. Storage; Heavy Machinery & Equipment
54. Storage; Ice
55. Storage; Loose or Bagged Processed Food
56. Storage; Non-Hazardous Chemicals or Plastic Products
57. Storage; Packaged Foodstuff
58. Storage; Packaged Mineral Products
59. Storage; Packaged Tobacco Products
60. Storage; Paper, Paper Products
61. Storage; Rolled Paper
62. Storage; Wood Products, Furniture
63. Taproom in Brewery holding a Class P Liquor License (Added 1/17/2017 by
Ord. No. 5677)
64. Taxidermist Shop (Added 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
65. Textile Manufacture; absent of any dye process
66. Toys, Sporting Goods Manufacture
67. Trailer Rental and Sales
68. Truck Freight Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1
Corridor (Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
69. Truck Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
70. Veterinary Clinics (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4805)
71. Warehouse; General
72. Warehouse; Mini (with or without dwelling unit for Superintendent) except
such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor (Amended 6/20/05 by
Ord. No. 5013)
SEC. 15.6-19(Cont.3)
73. Watch, Clock Manufacture
74. Wearing Apparel Manufacture
75. Wholesale Distributors
76. Wooden, Cone Containers Manufacture
77. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
(Items 37 through 71 renumbered 12/21/92 by Ord. 4099)(Items 19 through 72 renumbered 4/17/95
by Ord. No. 4309)(Items 25 through 75 renumbered by Ord. No. 4805)(Items 62 through 76
renumbered 1/17/17 by Ord. No. 5677)
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Coal Storage
2. Concrete Batch Plant
3. Extraction, Loading, Storage, Washing & Hauling of Sand, Gravel &
Topsoil
4. Gun Range, Indoor (Added 6/17/13 by Ord. No. 5495)
5. Remote Controlled Racetracks (Added 1/17/06 by Ord. No. 5047)
6. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
E. Site Plan Review. Site Plan Review and approval by the Town Council, after a
legislative public hearing and recommendation by the Normal Planning
Commission, in accordance with SEC. 15.8-3 of this Code shall be required for all
development which fulfills one or more of the following criteria:
1. The development of land to be used for a permitted use, any part of which is
within five hundred (500) feet of an R-1AA, R-1A, or R-1B residence
district boundary line.
2. The development of land which is an expansion of an existing structure or
use and which, if new development, would be permitted only when
processed under the site plan review procedures contained herein.
(Subsection (E) Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)(Amended 4/15/96 by Ord. No. 4385)
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4926)
b. Side Yards. Two (2) side yards with a combined width of fifteen
(15) feet with neither side yard less than five (5) feet.
SEC. 15.6-19(Cont.4)
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
d. Rear. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed forty-five (45) feet or four (4) stories,
whichever is lower. For exemptions from height regulations see SEC.15.4-
3(C) of this Code.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. All off-street parking and loading
shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
I. If outside accessory storage exists on a lot in an M-1 district which coincides with
the lot line of an adjacent residence district or is adjacent to an alley or street which
separates such M-1 district and residential district, screening shall be provided with
planting of trees and shrubs or a densely planted compact hedge maturing to not less
than five (5) feet of such lot line.
J. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division14 shall apply to any
proposal for development in the M-1 District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-20 M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING.
A. Intent. The intent of this M-2 General Manufacturing District is to provide for the
more intense types of industrial and manufacturing uses which generally exhibit
higher levels of objectionable external effects. This district should not be located
adjacent to residential districts, and its contiguity to commercial and business areas
should, wherever possible, be avoided. Uses permitted in this district will provide
for those basic industries needed to expand employment opportunities within the
Town.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines. In making its legislative determination to
zone or rezone property in the M-2 zoning classification, the Planning Commission
and Town Council may apply the following guidelines to the proposal under
consideration:
1. The relationship of the subject property to various aspects of the
transportation system, including rail, air, highway, and street, and pedestrian,
and the impact the proposal would have upon these systems. Truck traffic
and its impact is of major concern generally, as well as the affect on
vehicular travel times.
2. The extent to which surrounding zoning and land usage provides an adequate
SEC. 15.6-20(Cont.1)
transition from these industrial uses to uses of lesser intensity and the degree
to which the uses authorized in the district serve as a buffer between other
districts which exhibit more objectionable effects and uses of lower intensity.
3. The capacity of existing and proposed public utilities to the site, including
water and sewer systems to serve the permitted uses which might lawfully
occur on the property so zoned.
4. The adequacy of public services, including police and fire protection, serving
the property in question and the impact the permitted uses would have upon
these services.
5. The impact the permitted uses would have upon the environment, including
noise, air, and water pollution.
6. The impact any natural disasters, including flooding, would have upon the
permitted uses.
7. The conformance of the proposal to the Comprehensive Plan and the Official
Map.
C. Permitted Uses. In the M-2 General Manufacturing District, no building or land
may be used except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
1. Agriculture
2. Agricultural Products & Storage
3. Aircraft Manufacture & Assembly
4. Bagged Mineral Products
5. Bakery
6. Bicycle Manufacture
7. Boat Manufacture
8. Concrete Batch Plant
9. Contractor's Shop except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Added 5/17/99 by Ord. No. 4593) (Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
10. Cordage, Rope, Twine & Net Manufacture
11. Cotton: Spinning & Weaving
12. Dairy Products Manufacture
13. Distilling, Rectifying, Blending Spirits
14. Drugs, Pharmaceutical Manufacture
15. Electrical & Electronic Machinery Manufacture
16. Electrical Appliance Manufacture
17. Food Locker Plants
18. Footwear Manufacture
19. Furniture, Fixture, Bedding Manufacture
20. Glass Manufacture
SEC. 15.6-20(Cont.2)
21. Grain Elevator
22. Health Clubs and Private Recreation (Added 10/20/2014 by Ord. No. 5562)
23. Instrument Manufacture
24. Jewelry Manufacture
25. Kennel, With or Without Dwelling Unit for Superintendent
26. Knitting Mills, all Fibers
27. Lumberyard, Building Materials Storage
28. Machinery Manufacture
29. Manufacture of Grain Mill Products
30. Manufacture of Products from Cork or Wood
31. Manufacture of Products from Processed Fur
32. Manufacture of Products from Processed Leather
33. Manufacture of Transport Equipment, Component Parts Only
34. Metal Products Manufacture
35. Motor Powered Equipment Repair and Sales and Services Shop (Added
2/21/2000 by Ord No. 4640)
36. Motor Vehicle Manufacture & Assembly
37. Motor Vehicle Storage
38. Newspaper, Magazine Printing & Publishing
39. Photographic, Optical Goods Manufacture
40. Plastic & Plastic Products Manufacture
41. Pottery, China, Earthenware Manufacture
42. Radio, Radar Site
43. Rail Terminal
44. Retail Lumber Sales
45. Rubber, Rubber Products Manufacture
46. Snack Food Manufacture
47. Soft Drink, Carbonated Water Industry
48. Sporting Goods Manufacture
49. Storage, Canned of Bottled Food & Soft Drinks
50. Storage; Fibre Products
51. Storage; Flour, Starch & Sugar
52. Storage; Heavy Machinery & Equipment
53. Storage; Ice
54. Storage; Loose or Bagged Agricultural Products
55. Storage; Metal, Metal Products
56. Storage; Non-Hazardous Chemicals or Plastic Products
57. Storage; Packaged Foodstuff
58. Storage; Packaged Mineral Products
59. Storage; Packaged Tobacco Products
60. Storage; Paper, Paper Products
61. Storage; Petroleum Products
62. Storage; Seeds, Beans, Nuts & Silage
63. Storage; Wood, Paper, Products
64. Textile Manufacture; absent of any dye process
65. Toys, Sporting Goods Manufacture
SEC.15.6-20(Cont.3)
66. Truck Freight Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1
Corridor (Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
67. Truck Terminal except such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor
(Amended 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)
68. Warehouse; General
69. Warehouse; Mini (with or without Dwelling Unit for Superintendent) except
such use shall not be permitted in the P1 Corridor (Amended 6/20/05 by
Ord. No. 5013)
70. Watch, Clock Manufacture
71. Wearing Apparel Manufacture
72. Wholesale Distributors
73. Wooden, Cone Containers Manufacture
74. Wool, Worsted; Spinning & Weaving
74. Other uses similar to the above, provided such uses are consistent with the
purpose of this district.
D. Special Uses. The following special uses may be permitted subject to the conditions
and standards stated in Division 10 of this Code.
1. Asphalt Batch Plant
2. Coal Storage
3. Extraction, Loading, Storage, Washing & Hauling of Sand, Gravel &
Topsoil
4. Remote Controlled Racetracks (Added 1/17/06 by Ord. No. 5047)
5. Telecommunication Antenna and related telecommunication antenna
facilities (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
E. Site Plan Review.
1. In accordance with the requirements and procedures stated in SEC. 15.8-3
public site plan review and approval by the Town Council after legislative
public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be
required for all development which fulfills one (1) or more of the following
criteria.
a. The development of land for a manufacturing or industrial use where
such use involves noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious
matter, odors, fire, and explosive hazards, or vibration, or glare or
heat.
b. The development of land consisting of twenty (20) acres or more, net
site area.
c. The development of land which is an expansion of an existing
structure or use and which, if new development, would be permitted
SEC.15.6-20(Cont.4)
only when processed under the site plan review procedures contained
herein.
F. Bulk Regulations. The following bulk requirements shall apply to all permitted
uses. Bulk requirements relating to special uses are listed in SEC. 15.10-4 of this
Code.
1. Lot Size and Width. No minimum.
2. Yards.
a. Front. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord.
No. 4926)
b. Side Yards. Five (5) feet minimum.
c. Corner Side Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet minimum. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
d. Rear. Twenty (20) feet minimum.
e. For General Yard Regulations that are applicable see SEC. 15.4-5 of
this Code.
3. Building Height. Not to exceed forty-five (45) feet or four stories,
whichever is lower.
G. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division 13 of this
Code.
H. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. All off-street parking and loading shall
conform to the requirements contained in Division 7 of this Code.
I. If outside accessory storage exists on a lot in an M-2 district which coincides with
the lot line of an adjacent residence district or is adjacent to an alley or street which
separates such M-2 district and residential district, screening shall be provided with
planting of trees and shrubs or a densely planted compact hedge maturing to not less
than five (5) feet in two (2) years, parallel to and within three (3) feet of such lot
line.
J. Development Standards. The provisions set forth in Division 14 shall apply to any proposal
for development in the M-2 District. (Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.6-21 FORM BASED OVERLAY DISTRICT.
A. Intent. In addition to those general purposes set forth in Division 2 of this Code, it is
the purpose and design of the Form Based Overlay District to foster land
development that sets careful and clear controls on building form, public spaces,
streetscapes, building architecture, and the relationship of the building on the lot.
This Form Based Overlay District shall be applied as an overlay or a combined
district. This technique retains the list of uses allowed in the present zoning
SEC. 15.6-21(Cont.1)
classification that the Form Based Overlay District overlays unless such uses are
modified by the adopting ordinance. The purpose of the Form Based Overlay
District is to:
1. regulate how lots and buildings relate to public spaces and the surrounding
neighborhood;
2. govern building form and placement of the building in relation to the lot and
street;
3. stabilize and improve property values;
4. require certain building elements to enhance public places;
5. encourage architectural character that incorporates the best urban practices;
6. protect and enhance the Town’s attractions to residents, home buyers,
tourists, and visitors and shoppers, thereby supporting and promoting
business, commerce and industry; and
7. strengthen the economy of the Town.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Guidelines
1. Any portion of the Town classified in a FB Form Based Overlay District
shall also be classified in one (1) or more of other districts established in
Division 6 of this Code. The official zoning map shall designate any land
classified in a FB District by a combination of symbols, e.g. FB/R-1AA,
FB/R-1A, FB/R-1B, FB/R-2, FB/R-3A, FB/R-3B, etc.
2. In a FB Form Based Overlay District, all the regulations of the underlying
Agriculture District, Residential District, Special Public Interest District,
Business/Commercial District or Manufacturing District established by
Division 6 of this Code shall apply, except insofar as such regulations are in
conflict with the special regulations applicable to the FB Form Based
Overlay District, and in the event of such a conflict, the regulations
governing such FB Form Based Overlay District shall control. All permitted
uses or special uses otherwise allowable in the underlying Agriculture
District, Residence District, Special Public Interest District, Business District
or Manufacturing District shall continue to be allowable uses except as
provided in the Form Based Code developed for the particular FB Overlay
District.
C. Form Based Code. Designation of an area as a FB Form Based Overlay District
shall include the establishment of a Form Based Code for that district. Such Code
shall be incorporated into the designating ordinance by reference and shall be kept
SEC. 15.6-22(Cont.1)
on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. Such Code shall include the following
elements:
1. A regulating plan which provides specific information on permitted
development for each building site and how each lot relates to public spaces
and the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Building envelope standards which establish basic parameters governing
building form, building placement (in three dimensions) and required or
permitted building elements.
3. Architectural standards which govern a building’s architectural elements and
sets parameters for allowable materials, configurations and construction
techniques.
4. Streetscape standards which establish the relationship between public space
and buildings and set the parameters for landscaping and other amenities on
or near each building site.
D. Site Plan Review. No building permit for any building or structure or for any
exterior improvement or addition to any building or structure in the FB Form Based
Overlay District shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator unless and until the
construction plans and specifications for such building or structure or addition
thereto have been reviewed by the Community Design Review Committee in the
process set forth in Division 14 of this Code, and found to be in compliance with the
Form Based Code applicable to such site.
(Entire SEC. 15.6-21 Added 3/15/04 by Ord. No. 4937)
SEC. 15.6-22 P-1 OVERLAY CORRIDOR.
A. Intent. In addition to those general purposes set forth in Division 2 of this Code, it is
the purpose and design of the P-1 Corridor to enhance the visual character and
economic value of the Town’s major commercial corridors by prohibiting uses that
have an industrial appearance. This P-1 Corridor shall be applied as an overlay
district. This technique retains the list of uses allowed in the present zoning
classification that the P-1 Corridor overlays with the exceptions listed in B below.
B. P-1 Corridor. The P-1 Corridor is a zoning overlay district as depicted on the Town
of Normal Zoning Map and pertains to all lots immediately adjacent to the identified
roadways. In this corridor, the following uses are prohibited regardless of the
underlying zoning classification: Adult Hotels/Motels, Adult Lingerie Modeling
Studios, Adult Media Stores, Adult Modeling Shops, Adult Motion Picture Theater,
Contractor’s Shop, Remote Controlled Racetracks, Sex Shops, Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business, Truck Freight Terminal, Truck Stop, Truck Terminal, and
Mini Warehouse. The P-1 Corridor designation does not otherwise affect the
regulations of the underlying zoning classification.
SEC. 15.6-22(Cont.1)
(SEC. 15.6-22 Added 6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5013)(Amended 9/19/05 by Ord. No. 5027)(Amended
1/17/06 by Ord. No. 5047)
SEC. 15.6-23 SOUTH UPTOWN DISTRICT OVERLAY. The South Uptown District
Overlay is a zoning overlay district as depicted on the Town of Normal Zoning Map and subject to
the Form Based Code for the District as set forth in the designating Ordinance No. 4940, passed and
approved on the 15th day of March, 2004. A copy of the regulating Form Based Code is on file in
the Office of the Town Clerk. (Added 6/20/11 by Ord. No. 5388)
SEC. 15.6-24 OPTIONAL MAIN STREET FORM BASED OVERLAY DISTRICT.
The Main Street Form Based Overlay District is a zoning overlay district as depicted on the Town
Zoning Map. The property within the District may be, but is not required to be used and developed
in accordance with the regulating Form Based Code for the District as set forth in the Designating
Ordinance No. 5388 passed and approved on the 20th day of June, 2011. A copy of the Regulating
Form Based Code is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. Each property owner may elect to use
and develop property within the District subject to the Code. If an owner makes such election the
property within the District shall be subject to the Form Based Code regulations rather than zoning
regulations of the underlying zoning district, except the sign regulations set forth in Chapter 15 shall
continue to apply to property subject to the Form Based Code. By making such election an owner
also agrees, for all new construction with more than 7,500 square feet on the ground floor, to
achieve enough LEED points to attain at least LEED “Certified” status. As used herein, LEED
means the most current version of the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating
systems published by the United States Green Building Council. A copy of the most current
versions of such publication shall be kept on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. An election
pursuant to this Section shall be made by execution of the following form or a form in substantially
the following format:
ELECTION TO SUBJECT PROPERTY TO THE NORMAL MAIN
STREET FORM BASED ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT AND OBTAIN
LEED CERTIFIED STATUS FOR ANY NEW CONSTRUCTION WITH MORE
THAN 7,500 SQUARE FEET ON THE GROUND FLOOR
As Owner(s) of the following described property, I (we) elect to subject such
Property to the Normal Main Street Form Based Zoning Overlay District and
Obtain LEED certified status for any new construction with more than 7,500
square feet on the ground floor:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
PARCEL NO. ____________________.
SEC. 15.6-24(Cont.1)
Done this ______ day of ____________________________, _____
______________________
Owner
______________________
Owner
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)ss
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, _______________________________________________, a Notary Public in
And for said County, in the State aforesaid, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that
________________________________ and ____________________________
personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to
the foregoing instrument as their free and voluntary act, for the uses and purposes
therein set forth, including the release and waiver of the right of homestead.
Given under my hand and seal this __________ day of ___________________,
_______.
_____________________________
Notary Public
(SEC. 15.6-24 Added 6/20/11 by Ord. No. 5388)
SEC. 15.6-25 PARKING IMPACT ZONE. The Parking Impact Zone is an overlay
zoning regulation district as depicted on the Town of Normal Zoning Map and is subject to the
regulations provided in SEC. 15.7-4 if this Code. (Added 6/20/11 by Ord. No. 5388)
SEC. 15.7-1
DIVISION 7 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
The following regulations are established to increase safety and lessen congestion in the
public streets, to provide adequate but not excessive off-street parking facilities for commercial and
residential properties, to set standards for the requirement of off-street parking and loading unique
to the particular needs of the district in which the use is located according to the anticipated amount
of traffic generated by such uses, and to reduce the on-street storage of vehicles in targeted areas of
the community. In connection with any building hereafter erected or substantially altered or
enlarged, or any parking lot hereafter installed, there shall be provided off-street parking and
loading areas meeting all the minimum requirements of this Section and the landscaping provisions
of Division 14 (Community Design Standards). (Amended 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
SEC. 15.7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities. Nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking and loading facilities
beyond those required by this Code to serve any new or existing uses of land or
buildings, provided that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the
location, design and operation of such facilities.
B. Damage or Destruction. When any building, structure or use which is in existence
on the effective date of this ordinance is restored and continued in operation after
being damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, to the extent
that the cost of restoration does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fair cash
market value, there shall be required only off-street parking and loading facilities
equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction. However, in
no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain off-street parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this Code.
C. Existing Uses. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure erected prior to
the effective date of this Code shall hereafter be changed to a new use, additional
off-street parking or loading facilities shall be required for such use only in the event
the floor area, seating capacity, number of dwelling units or some other factor
affecting off-street parking requirements is increased and then only to the extent
required by the additional floor area, seating capacity, number of dwelling units, or
other factor affecting the parking requirements.
D. Parking and Loading Area Plan. No application for a building permit for a new,
enlarged, or altered structure or improvement shall be issued, unless there is
included within the application a plan showing the location, layout, and critical
dimensions of all off-street parking and loading facilities. Such plan shall be drawn
to scale and show vehicular access and circulation patterns.
SEC. 15.7-2
SEC. 15.7-2 OFF-STREET PARKING.
A. Use. Required off-street parking spaces accessory to uses listed in this Section shall
be solely for the parking of motor vehicles. Each required space shall be kept
available at all times for the parking of one motor vehicle.
B. Storage of Major Recreational Equipment. Any owner of major recreational
equipment or domestic utility trailer may park or store such equipment in a residence
district subject to the following conditions:
1. At no time shall such parked or stored equipment be occupied or used for
dining, sleeping or housekeeping purposes while parked or stored in a
residence district except for a period of not to exceed fourteen (14) days in
one calendar year, provided, however, that such mobile home, travel trailer,
pick-up coach, motor-home or camping trailer may be used only for sleeping
purposes during such fourteen (14) day period.
2. During the period from November 1 through April 1, if the major
recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it shall be
parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the principal structure
on the lot. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
3. Major recreational equipment or domestic utility trailer must be parked a
minimum of five (5) feet from a side or rear yard lot line.
4. No major recreational equipment or domestic utility trailer may be parked or
stored in a corner side yard at anytime.
5. If parked to the front of the front building line of the principal structure on
the property, major recreational equipment must be on a hard surface.
6. If the major recreational equipment is a self-propelled vehicle, not stored on
a trailer, (such as a motor-home), it must be parked on a hard-surface
whether it is parked to the front or rear of the front line of the principal
structure on the property. Camping trailers, domestic utility trailers, boats on
trailers, and other items of major recreational equipment stored on trailers do
not need to be on a hard-surface if such major recreational equipment is
stored or parked to the rear of the front building line of the principle structure
on the property.
7. Domestic utility trailers may be parked in a rear yard or side yard in a
location not visible from the street. Domestic utility trailers may not be
parked in a front yard or corner side yard.
(SEC. 15.7-2(A) & (B) Amended 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4760 – Effective 4/1/02)(SEC. 15.7-2(B)
Amended 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.1)
C. Location.
1. Except as provided in Subsection 2 below, required off-street parking spaces
in residence districts shall be located on the same lot as the use served.
2. Parking spaces required in the R-3A and R-3B Zoning Districts and in all
non-residential districts shall be located on the same lot or on an adjoining
lot, provided however that where ten (10) or more parking spaces are
required:
a. Such parking spaces may be provided on a lot located not more than
five hundred (500) feet as one walks from the lot requiring said
parking.
b. Such lot shall be owned by the owner of the use requiring the parking
or in the case of Non-Residential Districts controlled by a five (5)
year lease on such lot.
c. No parking spaces permitted by (a) above, shall be located in a
residence district, except when such spaces are located in an R-3A or
R-3B Residence District and are required for uses in the R-3A and R-
3B Zoning Districts.
(SEC. 15.7-2(C)(1) and SEC. 15.7-2(C)(2) were amended 1/16/01 by Ord.
No. 4707)
3. Accessory off-street parking spaces shall not be located in the following
locations:
a. In Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Zoning Districts,
accessory offstreet parking spaces shall not be located in the front
yard, side yard, or corner side yard, except on a driveway or a
parking pad constructed of a hard surface, such as asphalt or
concrete, and in compliance with the following:
(1) A turnaround pad may be constructed on properties taking
access from roadways designated as minor arterial or arterial
by the Town Engineer, provided the turnaround pad is:
(i) A minimum of 5 feet from the property lines;
(ii) A maximum length of 16 feet measured from the
existing driveway edge to the far end of the
turnaround pad;
(iii) Constructed perpendicular to the existing driveway;
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.2)
(iv) Constructed to maintain at least 50 percent
greenspace in the required yard in which the
turnaround is located; and
(v) Used only for the vehicular turning, not storage.
(Subsection (a) Amended 11/17/08 by Ord. No. 5221)
(2) A parking pad may be located adjacent to a single-car
driveway in the side yard or corner side yard, provided the
parking pad is (a) at least 3 feet from the property line; and
(b) not within a drainage easement.
(3) Where a parking pad adjacent to a single-car driveway will
encroach into a drainage easement or encroach into the
minimum side yard setback of 3 feet, the parking pad may be
located adjacent to the single-car driveway in the front yard.
b. In all other districts in the required front yard or corner side yard
unless otherwise authorized in this Code;
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or for the
owner of a lot to permit such vehicle to remain parked at a location
where off-street parking spaces would be prohibited by this section.
When any vehicle shall be parked in violation of any provision of
this section, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall
be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the
penalties therefore. Defenses to the prima facie case shall be limited
to a showing that the vehicle was not parked illegally or that the
individual was not the registered owner at the time of the alleged
violation.
D. Exemptions. Permitted business and office uses in the B-2 Central Business District
need not provide off-street parking spaces. In no instance shall this exemption apply
to residential dwelling uses.
E. Computation. When computation of the required number of off-street parking
spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, a fraction of less than one-half
(l/2) shall be disregarded and a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted as
one space.
F. Collective Provision. Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide
the required off-street parking, in which case the number of parking spaces provided
shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such building or
use.
G. Design, Construction and Maintenance Standards.
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.3)
1. Open and Enclosed Spaces. Accessory off-street parking spaces may be
open to the sky or enclosed or partially in a structure.
2. Surfacing.
a. Prior to surfacing any open, off-street parking area, private drive, or
access way from the public right-of-way to or through such parking
area, the owner, developer, or contractor shall obtain a permit from
the Town. A permit shall not be required for resurfacing or repairing
existing hard surfaced parking areas, private drives, or access ways.
A permit shall not be required for the surfacing of any open off-street
parking area, private drive, or access way from the public right-ofway
to or through such parking area in connection with any singlefamily
residential use or two-family residential use. A permit shall
be issued upon compliance with the following:
(1) Submission and Town approval of three (3) sets of
construction plans and specification showing compliance
with construction standards imposed by the Town. Duplicate
plans and specifications are not required where the Town has
on file previously submitted plans and specifications meeting
this requirement.
(2) Payment of a permit fee in the amount of $25.00 plus $l.00
per proposed parking space.
b. All off-street parking areas and private drives or access ways from
the public right-of-way to or through these parking areas, which
parking areas, private drives, or accessways are accessory to singlefamily
residential or two-family residential use, shall be improved
with a minimum of six (6) inches of crushed aggregate base and two
(2) inches of bituminous concrete surface or four (4) inches of P.C.
concrete surface. (Amended 9/19/88)
(1) Exception. Where a garage exists utilizing a common
driveway and the garage is replaced with a new garage, the
gravel driveway may continue if the adjoining property
owner will not contribute to the cost of the hard surfaced
driveway. (Added by Ord. 3784, 6/20/88)
c. All off-street parking areas and private drives or accessways from the
public right-of-way to or through these parking areas, which parking
areas, private drives, or accessways are necessary to non-singlefamily
residential use or non-two-family use, shall be improved with
a minimum of eight (8) inches of crushed aggregate base and three
(3) inches of bituminous concrete surface or five (5) inches of P.C.
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.4)
concrete surface, except off-street parking areas in the M-1 and M-2
Manufacturing Zoning Districts used or designated for the parking of
equipment and multi-unit trucks may be improved with a minimum
of eight (8) inches of crushed aggregate CA6 gradation or equal. The
limited exception for certain parking areas in the M-1 and M-2
Zoning Districts shall not apply to customer or employer parking
areas in said Districts. (Amended 9/19/88)
d. All construction of parking areas, private drives, or accessways from
the public right-of-way to or through these parking areas shall be in
accordance with the State of Illinois Department of Transportation’s
latest Standards for Road and Bridge Construction, which includes,
but is not limited to, trench backfill for utility cuts crossing any
parking area, driveway, or accessway. Such Standards or Road and
Bridge Construction are adopted by reference. Three (3) copies of
such standards are on file in the office of the Town Clerk and are
available for public use, inspection, and examination. Where the
word “engineer” is used in such standards, it shall mean a designated
agent or employee of the Town. The Town shall have the right to
approve any of the following waivers or impose any of the additional
conditions in connection with the surfacing of any parking area,
driveway, or accessway:
(1) Variations in the state road and bridge standards for asphalt
plant equipment, operation, mix, and recycled material, if
approved in writing prior to construction;
(2) The Permittee shall be responsible for setting stakes for line
and grade;
(3) The subgrade and any base course shall be test rolled and
approved in accordance with the following procedure.
Trucks shall be loaded as follows: 27,000 lbs. on two (2)
axles and 45,000 lbs. on three (3) axles with the tolerance not
to exceed ten percent (10%). The truck shall make a pass
over the entire length of the parking lot, a distance of
approximately ten (10) feet apart. Any areas which show
rutting, cracking, or rolling of the compacted subgrade upon
test rolling will not be accepted. The areas that fail shall be
reconstructed and test rolled again prior to acceptance.
e. Material used for surfacing shall be from a source approved by the
Illinois Department of Transportation, and the Contractor shall
furnish proctors and marshall values as approved by the State.
f. Each operation in the construction of a parking lot, driveway, or
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.5)
accessway shall be inspected and approved, including, but not
limited to, subgrade, aggregate base, and surface construction, before
the next operation starts. Contractor shall notify the Town at least 24
hours before each of the operations is to be checked. The Town may
impose a $15.00 reinspection fee where Town reinspection is caused
by substantial failure to meet construction standards.
3. Drainage. All parking areas shall be pitched and drained so as to prevent the
flow of water from such areas directly onto adjoining property. All off-street
parking areas or more than four (4) spaces shall provide storm water storage
facilities as required by Chapter 7 of this Code.
4. Screening and Landscaping.
a. All lots with off-street parking areas containing more than four (4)
parking spaces that adjoin a lot zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B or R-4
shall be screened the entire length of the property line where such
contiguity exists with either a solid fence, wall or landscaping in
accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C).
b. All off-street parking areas must comply with Division 14 of this
Code.
c. Plantings of trees and shrubs in containers shall not be considered as
meeting the requirements of this Section of the Code.
(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
5. Size and Access.
a. All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements. Each required parking space
shall open directly upon an aisle, a driveway, or a public-way of such
width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular
access and egress to such parking space at all times. Each off-street
space shall be marked on the ground to delineate its exact location.
In no case shall the dimensions of such parking space or means of
access be less than the following:
Parking Space & Aisle Design Standards – Fifty percent (50%) of
the required spaces may be eighteen (18) feet in length where
adjacent to a drive aisle of at least twenty-three (23) feet. (Added
6/16/2014 by Ord. No. 5548)
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.6)
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.7)
Angle parking other than the above shall be sized according to
specifications required by the Building Commissioner.
b. Common driveways in residential districts are prohibited.
c. No driveway shall be less than ten (10) feet in width.
d. No part of a driveway shall be located within three (3) feet of a side
property line unless:
(1) Where there existed prior to May 1, l980, a driveway which
was not hardsurfaced, the driveway may be hardsurfaced
over the same area as existed, provided all of the other
requirements of this Code are met; or
(2) Where there existed prior to May 1, l980, a lot with a
structure on it without a driveway, then the three (3) foot
minimum distance from a side property line may be reduced
to one (1) foot it, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, there is no other place for a driveway to be
installed.
6. Wheel Stops. All open off-street parking areas that have parking spaces
abutting a property line, a building, required landscaping or screening
materials or some other structure shall be required to have wheel stops of
masonry, steel, or heavy timber placed so as to prevent the protrusion of
vehicles over property lines or into buildings, fences or required screens.
Where B-6.18 Curb and Gutter, as detailed in Illinois Department of
Transportation Highway Standards, Standard A-7.5 is utilized as the wheel
stop, the gross depth of the parking stall may be reduced by two (2) feet as
measured from the back of the curb. This reduction may only be utilized
when there is an additional two (2) feet beyond the curb to allow for the
overhang of the vehicle.
7. Lighting. Any off-street parking area with four (4) or more spaces and
accessory to a business or commercial use that is located within forty (40)
feet of a residence district, shall extinguish such lighting within one-half
hour after the close of business. Other lot lighting shall comply with
Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)(Amended
1/19/99 by Ord. No. 4576)(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
8. Best Management Practices. All new parking lots with 300 or more parking
spaces are required to employ Best Management Practices to improve the
quality of stormwater runoff in a manner approved by the Public Works
Director. (Added 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.8)
H. Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. There shall be provided for each
building, structure, and use hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following:
1. Public Assembly Property.
a. Auction house. One (1) space for each one hundred fifty (l50) square
feet of gross floor area.
b. Auditorium; Radio, TV station. One (1) space for each one hundred
sixty (l60) square feet of gross floor area.
c. Bowling, billiard center; amusement Center; Ice Rink; Roller Rink;
Swimming Facility; Ballroom, dance hall, gymnasium; Exhibition
hall, exposition hall; Arena, stadium; Funeral parlor; Indoor athletic
club; Clubs, not elsewhere classified; Legislation hall, Heliport; Bus
passenger terminal. One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area.
d. Churches and other places of public worship. One (1) space for
every three (3) seats in the sanctuary. (Amended 9/21/09 by Ord.
No. 5293)
e. Restaurant (specializing in food primarily for consumption on the
premises). Restaurant, drive-in (specializing in quick food service for
both consumption on the premises and carry-out). One (1) space for
each seventy-five (75) square feet of gross floor area.
f. Country Club. Sixty (60) spaces for every nine (9) holes of golf; five
(5) spaces for every tennis court.
g. Library; Museum, art gallery. One (1) space for each four hundred
(400) square feet of gross floor area.
h. Motion picture theatre. One (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet
of gross floor area.
i. Nightclub, supper club; Eating, drinking places not elsewhere
classified; Theater. One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square
feet of gross floor area.
j. In buildings containing a mixture of commercial uses such as office,
retail, and restaurant, the parking requirement shall be at least one (1)
space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. (Added
9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.9)
(Entire Subsection 15.7-2(H)(1) amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
2. Educational Property.
a. Nursing School. One (1) space for each six hundred (600) square
feet of gross floor area.
b. Elementary School. One (1) space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of gross floor area.
c. Junior High School; High School; Vocational School; Business
School; Specialty School; Schools not elsewhere classified; Junior
College classroom building; College, university classroom building.
One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor
area.
3. Institutional Property.
a. Nursing Home; Hospital; Institutional property not elsewhere
classified. One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet
of gross floor area.
b. Day Care Center. One (1) space for each six hundred (600) square
feet of gross floor area.
c. Correctional institutions, detention centers and rehabilitation centers.
One (1) space for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
of gross floor area.
d. Therapeutic Group Care Home. Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space
for each four (4) residents.
4. Residential Property.
a. Single-family and two-family dwellings. One (1) space per dwelling
unit, except that no more than four (4) spaces shall be provided for
each single-family dwelling or four (4) spaces for each two-family
dwelling.
b. Multiple-family dwellings. One and one half (1.5) parking spaces
for each efficiency/one bedroom dwelling unit; two (2) parking
spaces for each dwelling unit with more than one bedroom, except in
the Parking Impact Zone as set forth in SEC. 15.7-4; .75 parking
spaces for each bedroom for each dwelling unit with more than two
(2) bedrooms. (Amended 1/19/99 by Ord. No. 4576)(Amended
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.10)
8/21/00 by Ord. No. 4666)(Amended 8/20/01 by Ord. No.
4742)(Amended 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
c. Hotels, motels, tourist homes and tourist courts. One (1) space per
dwelling and/or lodging unit.
d. Rooming Houses, fraternities and sororities. Two (2) spaces plus
one (1) space for each two (2) roomers.
e. Bed and Breakfast Establishments. Two (2) spaces plus one space
for each lodging room. (Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
5. Store Property.
a. Market, grocery store; Specialty food store; Liquor store; Dairy
Store; Delicatessen; Clothing store; Shoe store; Shoe repair store;
Tailor; Dress making shop; Fur store; Dry goods store; Furniture
store; Appliance store; Hardware store; Music store; Wallpaper, paint
store; Rug, floor covering store; Furniture repair shop; Appliance
repair shop; Book, stationery store; Newsstand, tobacco shop; Drug
store; Jewelry store; Gift shop; Leather Goods shop; Florist shop;
Optical Goods sales; Hobby, toy shop; Sporting Goods sales;
Photographic supply sales; Garden supply store; Retail lumber
sales; Pet store; Barber, beauty shop; Art supply, school supply store;
Laundry, dry cleaners; Linen supply house; Restaurant supplies and
services; Automobile service station; Motor vehicle repairs, paint
shop; Motor vehicle sales; Motor vehicle parts and accessory sales;
Boat sales; Car wash; Department store; Variety store; Mail order
store; Trailer rental and sales. One (1) space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area.
6. Office Property.
a. General business Office. One (1) space per three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of five (5) spaces.
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
b. Bank. One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross
floor area, plus extra (reservoir) parking spaces equal in number to
fifteen percent (15%) of the number of vehicle spaces used for
service customers.
7. Basic Industry, Utility, Defense Property.
a. Laboratories; Radio, radar site; Fire, police station; Telephone
exchange; Computer, data-processing center. One (1) space for each
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.11)
three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
b. Utilities – Electric power plant and substation; Gas company plant
and facilities; Water filtration and treatment plant. One (1) space for
each one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of gross floor
area but no less than two (2) spaces shall be provided.
8. Manufacturing Property.
a. Nonmetallic minerals, mineral products manufacture – glass
manufacture; Pottery, china, earthenware manufacture; Food – dairy
products manufacture; manufacture of grain mill products; Bakery;
Snack foods manufacture; Food industries not elsewhere classified;
Beverages, Tobacco, essential oils – distilling, rectifying, blending
spirits; Soft drinks, carbonated water industry; Textiles – cotton,
spinning, weaving; Textile manufacture; Knitting mills, all fibers;
Cordage, rope, twine and net manufacture; Footwear, wearing
apparel, leather, rubber – footwear manufacture; Wearing apparel
manufacture; Rubber, rubber products manufacture; Wood, furniture,
paper, printing – wooden, cane containers, cane manufacture; Wood,
cork products manufacture; Furniture, fixture, bedding manufacture;
Newspaper, magazine printing and publishing; Chemical, plastic,
petroleum – plastic, plastic products manufacture; Pharmaceuticals
manufacture; Asphalt products manufacture; Metal, metal products –
metal products manufacture; Machinery manufacture; Electrical and
electronic machinery manufacture; Electrical appliance manufacture;
Vehicle assembly or manufacture –boat manufacture; Motor vehicle
manufacture, assembly and repair; Aircraft manufacture and
assembly; Manufacture of transport equipment; Other manufacturing
– instrument manufacture; Photographic, optical goods manufacture;
Watch, clock manufacture; Jewelry manufacture; Musical
instruments manufacture; Toys, sporting goods manufacture; Other
manufacturing not elsewhere classified. One (1) space for each six
hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area.
9. Storage Property.
a. Agricultural products storage – seeds, beans, nuts, silage storage in
bulk; Loose or bagged agricultural products storage; Riding stables
(including commercial riding stables); Grain elevators; Agricultural
products storage; Processed food, tobacco storage, packaged
foodstuff storage – canned or bottled food or soft drink storage;
Loose or bagged processed food storage; Food locker plants; Bulk
sugar storage; Bulk flour or starch storage; Packaged tobacco product
storage; Petroleum products and alcoholic beverage storage; Wood
and paper products storage – lumberyard, building materials storage;
SEC. 15.7-2(Cont.12)
Wood products, furniture storage; Fiber products storage; Rolled
paper storage; Paper, paper products storage; Chemical or plastic
product storage – non-hazardous chemical or plastic product storage;
Plastic, plastic product storage; Metal, metal products storage – metal
parts storage; Heavy machinery and equipment storage; Electrical
appliance and supply storage; Finished metal products storage;
Vehicle storage – automobile dealer storage; Heavy machinery and
equipment storage; Bagged mineral product storage; Packaged
mineral product storage; Freight terminal; Ice storage. One (1) space
for each two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of gross floor
area. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
b. General Item Storage.
(1) General Compartmentalized Warehouse Storage. One (1)
space for each compartment when compartmentalized or
multi-occupied, and one (1) space for each two thousand four
hundred (2,400) feet of gross floor area when under one user,
whichever is greater.
(2) Mini-Warehouse Storage. No parking spaces are required,
however, a minimum 25’ aisle shall be provided that serves
all storage spaces. (Subsection (b) amended 11/20/95 by
Ord. No. 4356)
SEC. 15.7-3 OFF-STREET LOADING.
A. Location. All loading berths shall be off-street and shall be located on the same lot
as the building to be served. No permitted loading berth shall be located within 25
feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two street lot lines, nor shall it be
located in a required front, corner or side yards. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No.
4356)
B. Size. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance or amendment thereto, a loading
berth shall be at least ten feet in width by at least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
C. Access. Each loading berth shall be served by appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements as
determined by the Traffic Engineer. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
D. Surfacing. All open loading berths shall be improved with a minimum of eight (8)
inches of crushed aggregate base and two (2) inches of bituminous concrete surface
or six (6) inches of P.C. concrete surfaces provided, however, areas in the M-1 and
M-2 Manufacturing Districts used or designated for the parking of equipment and
SEC. 15.7-3(Cont.1)
multi-unit trucks may have an eight (8) inch crushed aggregate base and bituminous
surface treatment class A-3.
E. Off-Street Loading Berths. Loading spaces accessory to designated uses shall be
provided in off-street locations. Each off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movement. Space allocated to any off-street loading space
shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements of any offstreet
parking facilities or portions thereof. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
SEC. 15.7-4 PARKING IMPACT ZONE.
A. Purpose. The Parking Impact Zone is an area of the Town of Normal in which, due
to density and use, there exist greater parking needs than are customary in other
areas of the Town. Restrictions regarding location, size and construction of parking
in these areas are eased to facilitate a greater number of parking spaces.
Additionally, it is the purpose and design of the Parking Impact Zone to relax certain
lot density restrictions so density is controlled by required green space, building
height, and off-street parking requirements.
B. Designation. Property in the following area is designated as a Parking Impact Zone:
Beginning at North Fell Avenue at Cypress Alley – West extended to University
Court – North to Bowles – West to Main Street – South to College Avenue – West
to Adelaide Street – South to Hovey – East to Kingsley – South to Woodrow
Avenue – East to Main Street – South to Cullom Street – East to Alley (between
Main and University) North to Church Street – East to Franklin Avenue –North to
Vernon Avenue – East to Linden Street – South to the Constitution Trail – East to
the West Edge of the Vernon Stables PUD – North to Lindell – East to Hillview –
North to Vernon Avenue – West to Flora Way – North extended to Maple Street –
North to Locust Street – East to Beech Street – North to Willow – West to Linden
Street – North to Cypress – West to Fell Avenue – North to Cypress Alley.
(Amended 11/15/2010 by Ord. No. 5352)(Amended 4/18/2016 by Ord. No. 5636)
C. Conformance With Other Code Sections. Except as specifically set forth in this
Section, all other Zoning Code and Municipal Code Sections remain in full force
and effect in the Parking Impact Zone. In the event of conflict or ambiguity in
application of the Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator is directed to give priority
to code provisions that require a greater number of off-street parking spaces and
allow greater lot density for residential use within the Parking Impact Zone.
D. Side Yard Parking. In the Parking Impact Zone, off-street parking spaces may be
constructed in the side yard and corner side yard in derivation of SEC. 15.4-5(C) and
SEC. 15.7-2(C)(3). All corner side yard parking areas shall be surrounded by
vegetation to minimize visual impact of the parking area from the street.
SEC. 15.7-4(Cont.1)
E. Below Grade Parking. In the Parking Impact Zone, off-street parking spaces may be
constructed below grade in the front yard in derivation of SEC. 15.4-5(C) and SEC.
15.7-2(C)(3) provided that the required front yard be provided above grade and
landscaped with vegetation.
F. Dimension of Parking Spaces and Driving Aisles. In the Parking Impact Zone,
parking spaces are permitted to have a minimum width of eight feet (8’), minimum
depth of seventeen feet (17’), and a minimum aisle dimension of no less than
twenty-one feet (21’) in derivation of SEC. 15.7-2(G)(5). Stacked spaces shall have
a minimum length of thirty-four feet (34’). The foregoing shall not apply to parking
spaces required for persons with disabilities.
G. Through Lots. In the Parking Impact Zone, off-street parking areas may be
constructed in one of the front yards of through-lots, in derivation of SEC. 15.7-
2(C)(3) and SEC. 15.4-5(C). Any front yard parking shall be screened by vegetation
to minimize the visual impact of the parking area from the street.
H. Front Yard Parking. In the Parking Impact Zone, in areas zoned R-3B, off-street
parking may be constructed in the front yard, outside of the required front yard
setback as measured from the property line, in derivation of SEC. 15.7-2(C)(3) and
SEC. 15.4-5(C). Any front yard parking shall comply with Division 14 in regard to
screening space and number of plantings. This subsection shall apply only to
multiple family dwelling units constructed prior to October 2001. (Added 10/15/01
by Ord. No. 4751)(Amended 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
I. Parking Pads in the Front Yard. In the Parking Impact Zone, in areas zoned R-1A,
R-1AA, R-1B, or R-2, parking pads may be constructed in the front yard in front of
the building, and may have a minimum width of eight feet (8’) in derivation of SEC.
15.7-2(C)(3), and provided that one-half (1/2) of the required front or corner side
yard is maintained in a landscaped condition.
J. Shared Parking Areas. In the Parking Impact Zone, adjoining property owners may
agree to join parking lots and/or waive the requirements of parking blocks placed to
prevent the protrusion of vehicles over property lines.
K. Special Uses. In the Parking Impact Zone, the following shall be permitted as
Special Uses with the issuance of a Special Use Permit pursuant to SEC. 15.10 of
this Code:
1. Temporary Parking Lots. A special use may be granted for a period of not to
exceed five years for temporary parking lots which do not comply with
Town requirements regarding surfacing or drainage in derivation of SEC.
15.7-2(G)(2) and SEC. 15.7-2(G)(3). Any such special use permit shall be
conditioned upon the lot being constructed to meet all off-street parking
requirements or the area returned to vegetation at the end of the five-year
SEC. 15.7-4(Cont.2)
period. In determining whether to grant a special use permit under this
Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider whether the proposed
parking area will create drainage problems for the street or neighboring
properties, and whether the surface proposed is likely to have significant
potholes and ruts when used in its expected manner. The temporary lot shall
be constructed with a non-porous or semi-porous surface not consisting of
gravel. The Zoning Board of Appeals is encouraged to maximize parking
opportunities in this area in preference to other considerations listed in SEC.
15.10-5(A)(2).
2. Expanded Parking Lots. A special use may be granted for an expansion of a
currently existing off-street parking area for an area not to exceed one-third
the size of the existing parking area, which said expanded area does not
comply with Town requirements regarding drainage in derivation of SEC.
15.7-2(G)(3). In determining whether to grant a special use permit under
this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider whether the
proposed expanded parking area will create drainage problems for the street
or neighboring properties. The Zoning Board of Appeals is encouraged to
maximize parking opportunities in this area in preference to other
considerations listed in SEC. 15.10-5(A)(2).
L. Stacking of Vehicles. In the Parking Impact Zone, off-street parking areas may
provide for stacking of vehicles in which one parked vehicle may block another
parked vehicle in derivation of SEC. 15.7-2(G)(5). However, no more than two
vehicles may be stacked in one space.
M. Multiple Curb Cuts. In the Parking Impact Zone, multiple curb cuts on residential
properties will be permitted in derivation of SEC. 8.3-3(B)(7) of the Municipal Code
of the Town of Normal.
N. First Floor Parking. In the Parking Impact Zone, in the B-1 Zoning District, parking
is permitted as a commercial use on the first floor of a building in derivation of SEC.
15.6-17 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal. Such parking must be
screened by a combination of masonry or decorative fencing and dense planting
material. (Amended 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5293)
O. Building Height. Except for properties zoned R-1A, R-1B, or R-2 in the Parking
Impact Zone, the greater of the height allowed in the underlying zoning district or
four stories or forty-five feet (45’) will be permitted in derivation of other applicable
code sections.
P. In the Parking Impact Zone in areas zoned R-3A Medium Density Multiple Family
Residence District and District R-3B High Density Multiple Family Residence
District, the required front yard may be reduced from the required minimum setback
to the greater of ten (10) feet minimum or the width of a public utility easement
located in said front yard, provided that the rear yard set back is increased a distance
SEC. 15.7-4(Cont.3)
equal to the distance that the front yard set back is reduced. The purpose of this
section is to permit the construction of High Density Multiple Family Residence
District dwelling units closer to the street and use the distance gained for additional
rear yard motor vehicle parking or rear yard open space.
Q. Density. Except for properties zoned R-1A, R-1B, or R-2 within the Parking Impact
Zone, lot density shall be controlled by building height allowed within the Parking
Impact Zone, required number of off-street parking spaces and required yards within
the underlying zoning district. The following code sections shall not apply within
the Parking Impact Zone:
1. Transitional yard requirements set forth in SEC. 15.4-5(B);
2. Minimum lot size per dwelling unit as required in the underlying zoning
district regulations;
3. Maximum net density, maximum floor area, minimum open space, and
minimum common recreational space required in R-3A and R-3B Planned
Unit Developments as set forth in SEC. 15.9-14.
(Entire Division 15.7-4 Parking Impact Zone Added 8/20/01 by Ord. No. 4742)(Entire Division
15.7-4 Amended 9/15/08 by Ord. No. 5216)(Entire Division 15.7-4 Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No.
5349)
SEC. 15.8-1
DIVISION 8 - SITE PLAN REVIEW
SEC. 15.8-1 PURPOSE. It is the intent of the Site Plan Review provisions to facilitate the
coherent development of the community through the review of specific and detailed plans for
parcels of land which either, because of their location or because of the anticipated impact of the
proposed uses thereon, may create land use conflicts with adjacent land uses or zoning
classifications.
SEC. 15.8-2 PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLANS REQUIRING A LEGISLATIVE
PUBLIC HEARING. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for property for which a site plan
review requiring legislative public hearing is required, an owner or developer shall complete the
following review procedure:
A. The owner or developer of a lot or tract of land that qualifies for public site plan
review shall file an application for approval of the site plan with the Town Clerk.
Twenty (20) copies of the site plan and the filing fee provided in SEC. 15.12-6 shall
accompany the application.
The Town Clerk shall refer seven (7) copies of the site plan to the Planning
Commission prior to the consideration of said plan by the Commission. The Clerk
shall refer seven (7) copies of said plan to the President and Board of Trustees of the
Town of Normal prior to the consideration of said plan by said Board.
B. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a legislative public hearing on
the site plan, in the manner provided in SEC. 15.12-1(D)(3)(b).
If variations to the bulk, sign and off-street parking and loading regulations of this
Code would otherwise be necessary for the development proposal, such proposal
shall be exempt for the administrative public hearing on the variation request and
such review procedure shall be deemed to occur simultaneously with the Planning
Commission's review of the plan. Land uses proposed to be included in a
development requiring a legislative public hearing site plan review which would
otherwise be allowed by special use permit only are exempted from the
administrative public hearing normally required for such special use permit
applications and the Planning Commission shall consider the standards for granting
a special use and make a recommendation to the Council on the granting of such site
plan approval, special use and variation and the legislative public hearing.
C. The President and Board of Trustees, upon receiving the report and recommendation
of the Planning Commission, as an exercise of the legislative discretion vested in the
Corporate Authority of the Town of Normal, may approve or deny the site plan. If
an application for a site plan is not acted upon finally by the President and Board of
Trustees within three (3) months of the date upon which such application is received
by the President and Board of Trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied
unless extended by agreement of the applicant and President and Board of Trustees.
SEC. 15.8-2(Cont.1)
D. No application for site plan review which has been denied wholly or in part by the
President and Board of Trustees shall be re-submitted for a period of one year from
the date of such denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of
conditions found to be valid by the President and Board of Trustees.
SEC. 15.8-3 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
A. Approval of a site plan by the Town Council is required before a building permit is
issued. Construction and use of the premises must be in strict accordance with the
approved site plan and no occupancy permit shall be issued for any building or
structure that is not in conformance with an approved site plan.
B. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of structures may be authorized by
the Building Commissioner; however, no such change may involve a change in the
character of the development, or a substantial increase in the intensity of use,
reductions of parking spaces or landscaping requirements.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner of property to which an approved site plan applies
to use or permit the use or occupancy of such property in any way except as
proposed on the site plan.
D. Non-minor changes in the location, siting, and height of structures and changes in
the character of the development or a substantial increase in the intensity of use,
reduction of parking spaces, or landscaping shall be made by the Town Council.
The Council may require the Planning Commission to conduct an additional
legislative public hearing and submit a recommendation on such proposed changes
or deviations. (Added by Ord. 3783, 6/20/88)
SEC. 15.8-4 CONTENT OF SITE PLANS. All requests for site plan review, other than
those initiated by the Town Council or by the Town Staff shall only be accepted when filed on the
proper application forms. Such application shall conform to the submission requirements listed in
SEC. 15.14-5 and shall generally require submission of a sketch plan of the proposed development,
drawn to scale, showing the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, driveways and curb-cuts, parking areas with spaces marked and numbered, refuse storage
areas, light poles or fixtures, and location of landscaping and/or screening. The information
requested with such application is deemed to be a minimum and applicants may be requested to
supply additional information for staff review prior to hearings on their requests. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.8-5 RECOMMENDATION AND DECISION ON SITE PLAN. In making its
recommendation, the Town staff, the Planning Commission and, in making its legislative
determination, the Town Council shall be guided by those purposes for which this Code was
adopted and shall endeavor to accomplish those standards and objectives for which this Code is
designed and may consider:
A. The extent to which potential incompatibilities between the proposed development
SEC. 15.8-5(Cont.1)
and surrounding existing development and/or zoning is minimized by such design
features as placement of buildings, parking areas, access driveways and existing or
proposed topography.
B. The extent to which the proposal minimizes any adverse impact of the development
upon adjoining land, including the hours of use and operation and the type and
intensity of activities which may be conducted.
C. The extent to which adequately improved streets connected to the improved arterial
street system are available or can be reasonably supplied to serve the uses proposed
in the development.
D. The extent to which the proposed development is essential or especially appropriate
in view of the available alternatives within the Town.
E. The extent to which the proposed development will favorably or adversely affect
other persons or property and, if so, whether because of circumstances peculiar to
the location the effect is likely to be greater than is ordinarily associated with the
development of the type proposed.
SEC. 15.9-1
DIVISION 9 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SEC. 15.9-1 INTENT. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development Regulations is to
encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design for land development than is possible
under the more conventional zoning regulations. The Planned Unit Development also provides for
more efficient use of the land and thus may result in more economical land development.
Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open spaces, and a higher quality
project are also intended results of the Planned Unit Development process.
The process is intended to be an alternative to the conventional subdivision of land and lot
by lot development contemplated by the subdivision regulations of Chapter 16 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal and the district regulations of this Chapter. The following objectives
may be attained through the use of the Planned Unit Development process:
A. A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a
development that would not be possible under the strict application of the other
sections of this and the Subdivision Code.
B. Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and facilities.
C. A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geologic
features.
D. The prevention and/or control of soil erosion and surface flooding.
E. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in
better development and design and the construction of aesthetic amenities.
F. An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets,
schools, public grounds and buildings and other facilities.
G. A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare.
H. A combination and coordination of architectural styles, building forms, and building
relationships with a possible mixing of different urban uses in an innovative overall
design.
I. Innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development so that growing
demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout
of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary
to said buildings.
J. The combination of a number of review and approval procedures into a single plan
review and approval process.
SEC. .9-1(Cont.1)
K. The use of public input and participation in the design and development of
innovative and creative land use proposals.
The Planned Unit Development is intended to provide for projects incorporating a single
type of a variety of related uses which are planned, developed and maintained as a unit. The
Planned Unit Development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law and often
establishes facilities and open space greater than the minimum required by law. Such development
may consist of conventionally subdivided lots, provided that the requirements of the Town’s
subdivision ordinance are met with respect to each lot included and provided further that the platted
lots are maintained in unified control, unsubdivided property maintained in separate ownership but
unified control.
The Planned Unit Development may permit the transfer of dwelling units from one portion
of the tract to another and will permit the clustering of dwelling units in one or more locations upon
the tract. The uses permitted within the Planned Unit Development shall be the same as those
authorized in the zoning district in which it is located unless otherwise provided by the allowable
exceptions with provisions of this Code.
The unique and substantially different character of Planned Unit Developments requires that
they be processed under a special plan review procedure. Planned Unit Developments are of a
different character than conventional subdivisions or other projects requiring site plan review,
requiring the establishment herein of specific and additional procedures, standards and exceptions to
govern the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the action by the Town Council.
A person, by choosing to develop property as a planned unit development, elects to submit a
contemplated development proposal to a legislative and discretionary review by the Planning
Commission and Town Council.
SEC. 15.9-2 DESIGNATION. It is the intent of this Code that the Planned Unit
Development review procedure be conducted as a substitute for subdivision review as under
Chapter 16, Subdivision Regulation of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, and as a
substitute for administrative staff site plan review, legislative public hearing site plan review, site
plan review required under the Special Use Permit procedure, or procedure for obtaining a zoning
variation.
SEC. 15.9-3 CONFORMANCE WITH TOWN PLANS. All planned unit developments
shall be designed in such a manner as to conform to the provisions of the Town of Normal major
street plans, trunk sewer extension plans, water distribution system plans, and storm drainage plans.
SEC. 15.9-4 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS.
A. Procedure. Before developing a tract of land within the corporate limits of the Town
as a planned unit development, the owner or developer shall comply with the
following Planned Unit Development Review Process consisting of: the Pre-
Application Conference, the Preliminary Development Plan, and the Final
Development Plan.
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.1)
B. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the submission of a Preliminary Development
Plan, the owner or developer of a Planned Unit Development shall request and
participate in a Pre-Application Conference with representatives of the Town
Council, Planning Commission and Town staff. At or before the Pre-Application
Conference, the owner shall prepare and submit to the Town staff a sketch plan
drawn to scale of the proposed planned development.
The general outline of the proposed Planned Unit Development, as evidenced
schematically by the sketch plan, is to be considered at this meeting. Thereafter, the
Zoning Administrator shall furnish the applicant with written comments regarding
the proposed development including recommendations to inform or assist the
applicant prior to the preparation and submission of an application for approval of a
Preliminary Development Plan. Additional Pre-Application Conferences may be
held with the mutual consent of the applicant and the Zoning Administrator. It is
intended that the proposal submitted will be in preliminary conceptual form and that
following the anticipated review and comments, the developer will proceed with
preparing detailed plans for all or a portion of the site for submission as a
Preliminary Development Plan.
There are not particular requirements for submission of materials, other than the
sketch plan at a pre-application conference. However, the more information - sketch
plans, site information, adjacent land uses, proposed density - the developer has, the
more feedback he may get from the conference. In addition, the more formalized
the nature of the information the Town staff has available to them at such a
conference, the further both parties can proceed at this stage.
C. Preliminary Development Plan.
1. Submission. The owner or developer shall submit to the Town Clerk, 25
copies of a Preliminary Development Plan in the form and content required
in SEC. 15.9-9. The filing fee established in SEC. 15.12-6 shall accompany
the application.
2. Scheduling and Notification of Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a
Preliminary Development Plan and required filing fee, the Town Clerk shall
schedule and give notice of a legislative public hearing before the Planning
Commission in the manner prescribed by SEC. 15.13-1. The legislative
public hearing shall be scheduled not later than at the first regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring more than 24 days after
the filing date of the Preliminary Development Plan.
3. Distribution of Preliminary Development Plan for Review and Comment.
The Town Clerk shall route one or more copies of the Preliminary
Development Plan to various Town staff members for review and comment.
One copy of the plan shall be provided to each member of the Planning
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.2)
Commission and each member of the Town Council prior to their respective
consideration and review of the plan.
4. Legislative Public Hearing and Recommendation. The Planning
Commission shall conduct a legislative public hearing on the Preliminary
Development Plan during which it shall determine the extent to which the
plan conforms or fails to conform with the standards of this Division and
shall, not later than ninety (90) days after the adjournment of the legislative
public hearing, transmit its recommendation on the plan to the Town
Council. The Planning Commission may recommend approval of a
Preliminary Development Plan with an approval recommendation
conditioned upon the making of one or more changes in the proposal, which
such changes shall be enumerated in the Commission's transmittal to the
Town Council or may transmit the plan to the Council without
recommendation. Should the Planning Commission fail to act within ninety
(90) days from the adjournment of the public hearing or fail to adjourn the
public hearing within 120 days of its commencement, the plan shall be
submitted to the Council without recommendation.
5. Council Approval or Rejection of a Proposed Preliminary Development
Plan. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation or within 180 days from the filing date of the Preliminary
Development Plan, whichever occurs first, the Town Council shall approve
or reject the proposed Preliminary Development Plan. Failure of the Council
to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the
Preliminary Plan.
6. Extension of Time Period by Mutual Consent. Time periods for review by
the Planning Commission or Council may be extended by mutual consent of
the owner or developer and the Planning Commission or Council. Any such
extension shall stay the running of all subsequent time periods.
7. Extension of Preliminary Development Plans. Approved Preliminary
Development Plans or portions thereof on which no Final Development Plan
has been submitted for review and approval shall expire and be of no force
or effect two (2) years after this approval, except:
a. The filing of a Final Development Plan and necessary supporting
documents pursuant to SEC. 15.9-11 shall extend the life of a
remaining valid preliminary development plan for one year; or
b. If the life of a Preliminary Development Plan is extended by action
of the Corporate authorities.
D. Utility Plat - Submission and Review Procedure. Before developing any land
subject to the planned unit development regulations of this Code, an owner or
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.3)
developer shall comply with the following utility plat submission, review and
approval procedures:
1. Pre-requisites. Approval and continuing validity of a Preliminary
Development Plan;
2. Submission. Within two (2) years from the approval of a Preliminary
Development Plan, or within one (1) year after the extension of a
Preliminary Development Plan pursuant to SEC. 15.9-4(C)(7)(a) or (b), the
owner or developer shall submit three (3) sets utility plans containing
engineering plans and specifications for all public improvements proposed in
or necessary to serve lots and structures depicted in an approved preliminary
development plan or portion thereof, which plans and specifications shall be
in the form and include the content required by Sec. 1.05 of A Manual Of
Practice For The Design Of Public Improvements In The Town Of Normal.
3. Review and Approval.
a. The utility plat shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the
Town Engineer.
b. The Town Engineer may require the owner or developer to submit
such additional data, plans, specifications or materials as may be
necessary to completely and accurately determine the extent of
compliance or non-compliance with the Town's public improvement
design standards and accepted engineering practice and to
demonstrate that the proposed manner of construction and
installation will meet or exceed all Town Public Improvement
Construction standards.
c. The utility plat shall be approved by the Town Engineer if it meets or
exceeds the Town's subdivision, public improvement design
standards and otherwise demonstrates good and accepted engineering
design and practice.
d. Approval or disapproval by the Town Engineer shall be in writing
and shall make reference to the utility plat.
E. Utility Installation and Inspection Procedures. The owner or developer of property
desiring to install public utilities in an area depicted on a proposed or approved
preliminary development plan or approved or proposed final development plan shall
perform such installation in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Pre-requisites to Installation.
a. For Installations Before Final Development Plan Approval:
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.4)
(1) Approval and continuing validity of an approved preliminary
development plan;
(2) Approval of a utility plan for any and all public utilities
which are to be installed or the installation of which is to be
commenced prior to the approval of a final development
plan;
b. For Installations After Final Development Plan Approval:
(1) Approval of a final development plan;
(2) Posting of a Final Development Plan, Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond and security
therefor, in the amount and form specified in SEC. 16.3-4 of
the Subdivision Code for all public improvements depicted
in, adjacent to or necessary to serve lots, out-lots or structures
depicted in an area for which the final development plan
approval has been obtained.
2. Inspection. During installations of utilities, either before or after final
development plan approval, the owner or developer shall comply with the
requirements of Sec. 1.15 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of
Public Improvements In The Town Of Normal by which the Town Engineer
or his Designate shall make periodic inspections. Failure to make such
requests and install or maintain such installations in a manner that permits
inspection shall constitute grounds for rejecting or revoking preliminary or
final development plan approval, forfeiting pledged security and, in addition,
shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
3. Plan Review, Inspection, and Testing Fee. The cost incurred by the Town
for review of utility plans and specifications as required by SEC. 16.2-3 of
the Subdivision Code and the inspection and testing of utilities as required
by Sec. 1.15 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of Public
Improvements In The Town Of Normal, shall be paid by the owner or
developer. Such costs shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the Public
Works Department in labor, materials, transportation and overhead for such
reviews, inspection and testing as calculated by the Town Engineer. At the
time such plans and specifications are filed with the Town Engineer, the
owner or developer shall pay to the Town a fee of Two Percent (2%) of the
costs as estimated by the Town Engineer of such required land
improvements. Said fee shall be applied as credit against the actual costs
incurred by the Public Works Department for review of such plans and the
inspection and testing of such utilities. The balance of the actual costs shall
be paid to the Town by the owner or developer at the time such review and
inspection has been completed by the Public Works Department. All utilities
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.5)
to be installed under the provisions of this Code and shall be inspected by the
Public Works Department during the course of construction.
F. Final Development Plan.
1. Submission. Within two (2) years from the approval of a Preliminary
Development Plan or one (1) year from the most recent Council action
extending the life of an approved Preliminary Development Plan, the owner
or developer shall submit to the Town Clerk twenty-five (25) copies of a
Final Development Plan, in a form and providing all the information, data,
and supporting material required by SEC. 16.3-3 of the Subdivision Code
and retaining the design characteristics of the approved Preliminary
Development Plan.
2. Distribution of Final Development Plan for Review and Comment. The
Town Clerk shall route one or more copies of the Final Development Plan to
Town staff members for review and comment. One copy of the Final
Development Plan shall be provided to each member of the Town Council
prior to their consideration of the plan.
3. Town Council Review, Referral and Approval or Disapproval. Within thirty
(30) days from the submission of a Final Development Plan and supporting
materials, the Town Council shall review the final development plan to
determine the extent to which it conforms with the approved Preliminary
Plan and approved public improvement plans and specifications and shall
further review the supporting material to determine its conformance with the
requirements of this Code. If the final development plan substantially
conforms with the approved preliminary development plan and public
improvement plans and specifications and if the supporting material meets
all Code requirements, then the Council shall approve the Final
Development Plan by Resolution within thirty (30) days from the date of its
review. If the Final Development Plan does not in some way substantially
conform with the approved preliminary development plan or if the
supporting material does not conform with all Code requirements, then the
Council, within thirty (30) days from the date of its review, shall take one of
the following actions:
a. By Resolution, approve the Final Development Plan;
b. By Resolution, approve the Final Development Plan, with
conditions;
c. By Resolution, disapprove the Final Development Plan;
d. Refer the Final Development Plan to the Planning Commission for
legislative public hearing, at which time and place the Planning
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.6)
Commission shall determine the extent to which the revised final
development plan conforms or fails to conform with the standards of
this Code. The Planning Commission shall, not later than ninety
(90) days after the adjournment of the legislative public hearing,
transmit its recommendation on the revised Final Development Plan
to the Town Council. Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the
Planning Commission's recommendation with respect to the revised
final development plan, the Town Council shall, by Resolution,
approve or disapprove the plan.
4. Recording. Within seven (7) days from the date of adoption of a Resolution
approving the Final Development Plan, or within seven (7) days from the
date on which the last event referred to in this Code or characterized in the
Resolution as a pre-requisite to recording of the Final Development Plan
occurs, whichever is later, the Town Clerk shall record a Notice of Approval
of the Final Plan together with the legal description of the property subject to
the Final Plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County,
Illinois. (Amended 4/15/96 by Ord. No. 4385)
5. Changes in the Final Development Plan.
a. Minor changes in the location, setting, height or character of the
buildings and structures may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator, if required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time of adoption of the Resolution approving the
Final Development Plan.
b. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of the
following:
(1) A change in the use or character of the development;
(2) An increase in overall coverage of structures;
(3) An increase in the intensity of use of over ten (10%) percent;
(4) An increase in any dimension of a building or structure by
more than five (5%) percent in any direction;
(5) A reduction in approved open space of five (5%) percent or
more;
(6) A reduction in off-street parking and loading space of five
(5%) percent or more; or
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.7)
(7) A reduction in required pavement widths of five (5%) percent
or more.
c. Non-minor changes. Decisions concerning approval or disapproval
or modifications of proposed non-minor changes in a Final
Development Plan shall be by the Town Council after the Planning
Commission has conducted an additional legislative public hearing
and submitted a recommendation on such proposed change.
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
G. Revocation of Approved Planned Unit Development.
1. The President and Board of Trustees may consider an approved final planned
unit development plan subject to revocation if construction falls more than
two (2) years behind the schedule filed with the final development plan or if
development exceeds five (5) years.
2. The owner of property in a planned unit development plan or the owner of
any portion thereof may petition for revocation of such planned unit
development plan in whole or in part.
3. Upon initiation by the President and Board of Trustees or the owner of
property in an approved planned unit development requesting vacation of
such planned unit development in whole or in part, the Town Council shall
refer such item to the Town Planning Commission for public hearing and
recommendation. Notice of such hearing shall be provided by the Planning
Commission in the manner set fort for legislative public hearings by the
Planning Commission. Additionally, the Planning Commission shall
provide personal notice to all persons having an ownership interest in such
planned unit development. Such personal notice shall be provided based on
ownership recorded with the Recorder of Deeds’ of McLean County.
Personal notice shall be by regular U.S. mail or personal delivery at least five
(5) days prior to the public hearing on revocation.
4. The Planning Commission shall conduct a legislative public hearing and
make a recommendation to the Town Council regarding revocation of the
planned unit development.
5. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the Town
Council shall take up and consider the petition to revoke in whole or in part
the subject planned unit development. The Town Council may approve,
deny, in whole or in part, revocation of the subject planned unit
development. The Town Council may impose reasonable conditions on such
revocation in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens.
SEC. 15.9-4(Cont.8)
6. In the event the Town Council revokes an approved planned unit
development plan, in whole or in part, then the Town Clerk shall file a notice
of such revocation with the McLean County Recorder of Deeds.
7. Revocation of an approved planned unit development plan shall preclude
any additional construction pursuant to such revoked plan, except
construction determined necessary by the Town to wind up the development
and put the same in a safe and sanitary condition. Any security posted to
guarantee installation of required public improvements shall continue in
effect until all approved public improvements are completed, all wind up
construction is completed, and all claims against such security are resolved.
8. Upon revocation of an approved planned unit development plan, the property
for which such plan is revoked shall retain its zoning district classification
absent such plan.
(Subsection G Added 12/17/90 by Ordinance No. 3944)
SEC. 15.9-5 PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP
GUARANTEES. Either prior to the approval of the final development plan or prior to its recording
and within the time framework, if any, specified in the Resolution of approval, the owner or
developer shall post, secure and file with the Town Clerk a Final Development Plan Utility
Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond with appropriate evidence of security
and file and establish an Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee and security in
the manner, amount and form described respectively in SEC. 16.3-4(A) and SEC. 16.3-4(B) of the
Subdivision Code. Such bond and security shall guarantee not only completion of public
improvements but also common area improvements, whether public or private, including but not
limited to the following: sanitary sewers, storm sewers, watermains, streets, bridges, culverts,
railroad crossings, lighting, pedestrian ways, parking, drainage ways, utility poles, landscaping, and
recreational facilities. (Amended 12/17/90 by Ord. 3943)
SEC. 15.9-6 SUBMISSION OF RECORD DRAWINGS. After installation, and within
nine (9) months of the Town’s acceptance for maintenance but prior to final release of the bond, the
owner or developer shall submit record drawings of the public improvement plans in the form and
with the content required by Sec. 1.16 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of Public
Improvements In The Town Of Normal.
SEC. 15.9-7 ACCEPTANCE FOR MAINTENANCE. After the developer has complied
with the requirements of Sec. 1.16 and 1.17 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of Public
Improvements In The Town Of Normal and within 30 days after the Town Engineer’s written
recommendation for acceptance, the Town Council shall, by resolution, accept for maintenance all
public improvements within, adjacent to or serving lots or outlots depicted on a final development
plan for a planned unit development.
SEC. 15.9-8 FINAL SECURITY RELEASE.
A. Final Development Plan Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
SEC. 15.9-8(Cont.1)
Workmanship Bond. One year after the date on which a Resolution accepting a final
development plan for maintenance is adopted, unless a material or workmanship
claim is submitted to the surety company or escrow agent, the security for Final
Development Plan Public Improvement, Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Bonds shall expire and may be released upon certification of satisfactory condition
by the Town Engineer.
B. Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantees and Security. The
adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee and security shall expire
pursuant to SEC. 16.3-4(B) of the Subdivision Code unless the Town Engineer has
earlier certified completion of improvements to adjacent substandard roadways, and
the security, plus interest at 7 percent per annum may be released without further
action by the Town Council.
SEC. 15.9-9 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SUPPORTING
MATERIAL.
A. General. The owner or developer submitting a Preliminary Development Plan shall
submit all information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of an
owner or developer to provide this information in the form required shall be
sufficient grounds for the Town to refuse to accept the filing of a Preliminary
Development Plan or to reject the Preliminary Development Plan at any stage in the
review and approval process and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of this
Code.
B. Required Form and Content of a Preliminary Development Plan and Supporting
Material. Plans, drawings, surveys, maps, schematics, and comparable material shall
be submitted in the form as specified in Sec. 1.05 of A Manual Of Practice For The
Design Of Public Improvements In The Town Of Normal.
1. Identification and Description.
a. Name of the planned unit development, not duplicating the name of
any other planned unit development or subdivision, the final plan or
plat of which has been recorded in McLean County, Illinois.
b. Legal description of all property included in the Preliminary
Development Plan, including a reference to the Section, Township
and Range.
c. Name, address and phone number of the owner or owners of record
of all property within the Preliminary Development Plan.
d. Name, address and phone number of the developer of the proposed
planned unit development.
SEC. 15.9-9(Cont.1)
e. Name, address and phone number of the engineering firm preparing
the boundary survey.
f. Name, address and phone number of the Registered Professional
Engineer and/or Landscape Architect preparing any part of the
Preliminary Development Plan or supporting material.
g. Name, address and phone number of attorney(s) representing the
owner(s) and/or developer(s).
h. Total acreage in the Preliminary Development Plan.
2. Survey Maps and Drawings Indicating Existing Conditions. A Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer shall prepare
graphic presentations of the following:
a. Boundary lines of the Planned Unit Development with accurate
distances and angles with a permissible error of closure of 1 in 5000
prepared and certified accurate by a Registered Illinois Land
Surveyor.
b. Location and perimeter of any area designated as a special flood
hazard area as defined in Chapter 28. If the property included in the
preliminary development plan is not in a special flood hazard area,
the engineer shall so certify on the preliminary development plan.
c. The existing zoning and zoning district lines within the area
encompassed by the Preliminary Development Plan and within 50
feet thereof.
d. Specific identification, location and dimensions, if applicable, of the
following located within or within 50 feet of the area included in the
Preliminary Plan:
(1) Rights-of-way;
(2) Lots of Record;
(3) Street;
(4) Roadways;
(5) Drainageways (whether improved or unimproved);
(6) Walkways;
(7) Sidewalks;
(8) Public Easements;
(9) Private Easements;
(10) Railroad rights-of-way;
(11) Section Lines;
SEC. 15.9-9(Cont.2)
(12) Corporate Limit Lines;
(13) Parks, Schools and Other Public Lands;
(14) Buildings and Structures to Remain;
(15) Buildings and Structures to be Removed.
(16) All other submission materials required in SEC. 15.14-5.
(Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
3. Surveys, Maps, Plans and Drawings of Proposed Conditions. A Registered
Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer shall prepare graphic
presentations of the following:
a. Rights-of-Way;
b. Interior and Exterior Streets;
c. Interior and Exterior Roadways;
d. Street and Roadway Names;
e. Alleys;
f. Walkways;
g. Sidewalks;
h. Public Easements;
i. Private Easements;
j. Lots;
k. Outlots;
l. Setback lines along the perimeter of the Planned Unit Development;
m. Public Parks or areas to be designated as Common Recreation Space;
n. Other areas proposed for dedication or reservation to the public;
o. Railroad Crossings and rights-of-way;
p. Bridges;
q. Size, location, type of construction and proposed use of all proposed
buildings and structures (if known);
r. Location and composition of all screening material;
s. General landscaping plan;
t. Parking plan and direction of traffic flow;
u. Location and dimensions of curb cuts;
v. Sign and lighting plan;
w. Location and dimension of any other physical improvements.
x. All other submission materials required in SEC. 15.14-5. (Added
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
4. The Preliminary Development Plan shall contain the name and seal or seals
of the professional engineer or engineers preparing all or any portion of the
Preliminary Development Plan. All waivers requested of the Town’s codes
and ordinances shall be listed on the Preliminary Development Plan.
Approval of the Preliminary Development Plan shall not constitute waiver of
any applicable Town codes and ordinances unless the waiver is specifically
approved by the President and Board of Trustees.
SEC. 15.9-10
SEC. 15.9-10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ENGINEERING PLANS AND
SPECIFICATIONS.
A. General. The owner or developer submitting public improvement engineering plans
and specifications shall submit all the information required by this Section in the
form specified. Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information in the
form required shall be sufficient grounds for the Town to refuse to accept the filing
of public improvement engineering plans and specifications, to reject the plans and
specifications at any stage in the review and approval process, to reject a Final
Development Plan depicting lots or outlots served by such public improvements.
B. Minimum Material to be Submitted. Engineering plans and specifications shall be
submitted for all public improvements proposed in or necessary to serve lots
depicted in an approved Preliminary Development Plan or portion thereof. Such
materials shall include, without limitation, plans, profiles, standard details, and
special details drawn in sufficient detail and supported with sufficient data to make
possible a complete and accurate determination of the extent of compliance or noncompliance
with the Town’s subdivision public improvement design standards and
sufficient to permit construction and installation of the proposed improvements
without additional or supporting engineering data.
C. Required Form and Content of Public Improvement Engineering Plans and
Specifications. Public improvement engineering plans, specifications, drawings,
schematics and comparable material shall be submitted in the form and content as
specified in Sec. 1.05 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of Public
Improvements In The Town Of Normal.
SEC. 15.9-11 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SUPPORTING MATERIAL.
A. General. The owner or developer submitting a final development plan shall submit
all information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of an owner or
developer to provide this information in the form required shall be sufficient grounds
for the Town to refuse to accept the filing of a Final Development Plan or to reject
the final development plan in any stage of the review and approval process.
B. Area Included in a Final Development Plan.
1. A final development plan shall not include any area not included in an
approved and then valid preliminary development plan.
2. A final development plan shall not depict any public or private
improvements or lots served by, which are to be served by, or which under
this Code require service by public or private improvements unless the utility
plat for such public and private improvements has been submitted, reviewed
and approved.
SEC. 15.9-11(Cont.1)
C. Required Form of Final Development Plans and Supporting Documents. Final
development plans, certificates, and comparable material shall be submitted in the
form as specified in Sec. 1.05 of A Manual Of Practice For The Design Of Public
Improvements In The Town Of Normal.
D. Required Content of Final Development Plans.
1. Identification and Description.
a. The name of the planned unit development, not duplicating the name
of any subdivision or planned unit development, a Final Plat or Final
Development Plan of which has been recorded in McLean County,
Illinois.
b. The legal description of all property included within the Final
Development Plan, including a reference to the Section, Township
and Range.
c. Name and address of the owner or owners of record of all property
within the Final Development Plan.
d. Name and address of the developer of the proposed planned unit
development.
e. Name and address of the Registered Land Surveyor, Registered
Professional Engineer and Landscape Architect preparing the final
development plan.
f. Total acreage in the Final Development Plan.
2. Lots, Outlots, Public and Private Improvements. A Registered Land
Surveyor, Registered Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect or
Contractor shall prepare graphic representations of the following:
a. Rights-of-way, including the names of any streets or roadways
depicted.
b. Private streets, designating pavement width and street names.
c. Public easements.
d. Proposed lots of record consecutively numbered and keyed (on a
supplemental sheet) to the lot numbering system used on the
approved Preliminary Development Plan.
e. Outlots, numbered consecutively and keyed (on a supplemental
SEC. 15.9-11(Cont.2)
sheet) to the numbering system used on the approved Preliminary
Development Plan.
f. Minimum front yard setback lines and setback lines along the
perimeter of the planned unit development.
g. Boundaries of the Planned Unit Development; all of which shall be
drawn to meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) Error of closure of boundary lines survey shall not exceed
5,000 (1 foot for each 5,000 feet of perimeter survey);
(2) Angular error shall not exceed plus or minus 20 seconds;
(3) Lot line dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths;
and
(4) Angles occurring in any lot line between corners shall be
shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
h. Field references to:
(1) The nearest established street lines and official monuments
which shall be accurately described in the plat by location,
size and elevation;
(2) Township and section lines if the same are within the
boundary of the final development plan or within 100 feet
therefrom, referenced accurately to the lines of the
subdivision by distances and angles; and
(3) All monuments placed at block corners, angle points and at
intermediate points installed in such a manner that they may
be located by a registered surveyor.
i. Railroad rights-of-way.
j. Public parks or areas to be designated as Common Recreation Space
and depiction of improvements to be made to the park or Common
Recreation Space.
k. Railroad crossings and rights-of-way.
l. Bridges.
m. Other areas dedicated or reserved to the public.
SEC. 15.9-11(Cont.3)
n. Location, width and type of surface material of all proposed
sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveways, parking areas and service
areas.
o. Size, location, height, number of stories and type of construction and
proposed use of permanent buildings and structures.
p. Size and location of proposed parking areas with arrangement of
bays and aisles and with indication of the total number of spaces and
direction of traffic flow.
q. Location and dimensions of curb cuts.
r. Detailed lighting plan with location, height and type of fixture of all
street lights and parking area illumination sources.
s. Detailed screening plan indicating size, location and composition of
all proposed screening materials.
t. Detailed landscaping plan indicating size, location and species of
plant and landscaping materials.
u. Detailed sign plan.
v. All other submission materials required in SEC. 15.14-5. (Added
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
3. Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence and all
specific restrictive covenants and association standards applicable to the
Planned Unit Development must be submitted with the Final Development
Plan and must be filed with the Town Clerk and Recorder of Deeds. A
certified copy of any subsequent changes to the covenants or restrictions or
any additional by-laws or rules promulgated must also be filed with the
Town Clerk.
4. Certificates. The Final Development Plan shall be accompanied by the
following certificates duly and appropriately executed:
a. Owner's, with Notary - (Exhibits A1, A2, and A3);
b. Surveyor's - (Exhibit B);
c. Drainage - (Exhibit C); and
d. County Clerk's - (Exhibit D).
SEC. 15.9-12 PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP
GUARANTEES.
SEC. 15.9-12(Cont.1)
A. Final Development Plan Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
Workmanship Bond.
1. Nature of the Obligation. Any owner or developer of a planned unit
development shall submit a Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond obligating the signer(s) to
do each of the following:
a. Install all public improvements depicted on or in an approved
preliminary development plan, engineering plans and specifications
or final development plan in accordance with the approved Utility
Plat.
b. Pay all plan review and inspection fees.
c. Prepare and submit to the Town one complete set of plans and
specifications showing such required utilities as actually installed in
the manner described in SEC. 16.3-5 of the Subdivision Code.
In each case within two (2) years following the approval of the final
development plan by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town and
prior to acceptance of the improvements for maintenance. In addition, the
execution of the developer’s Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond shall obligate the signer(s)
to guarantee the improvements against faulty materials and workmanship for
a period of one year following acceptance of the improvements for
maintenance by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town.
2. Penal Amount of Bond and Security.
a. Penal Amount. The penal amount of the Final Development Plan
Public Improvement Payment and Performance and Workmanship
Bond shall be the higher of the following:
(1) If some or all of the improvements have been installed,
inspected, and approved, then one hundred and five percent
(105%) of the Town Engineer’s written estimate of the cost
of installing all public improvements not then installed and
inspected, and five percent (5%) of the Town Engineer’s
estimate for all the improvements installed as a retainage
until acceptance of the improvements by the Town plus five
percent (5%) of the Town Engineer’s estimate for all
improvements installed as a one (1) year guarantee for the
materials and workmanship of all improvements. Also, the
developer must pay all plan review and inspection fees not
SEC. 15.9-12(Cont.2)
paid, prepare all as-built plans and specifications not then
submitted.
(2) If none of the improvements have been installed, then one
hundred and five percent (105%) of the Town Engineer’s
written estimate of the cost of installing all public
improvements, guaranteeing the materials and workmanship
of all the improvements. Also, the developer must pay all
plan review and inspection fees not paid and prepare as-built
plans and specifications not then submitted.
b. Security. The Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond shall be secured in
one of the following ways:
(1) By posting a corporate surety bond with the owner or
developer as Principal and an insurance company duly
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as surety in a
penal amount not less than that specified in SEC. 16.3-
4(A)(2)(a) of the Subdivision Code. The owner or developer
shall keep such corporate surety bond in full force and effect
until one (1) year after official action by the President and
Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal accepting the
Planned Unit Development for maintenance or until such
later date as any written claim against the surety by the Town
is finally resolved.
(2) By posting a cash escrow account in a local bank or savings
and loan association in the amount specified in SEC. 16.3-
4(A)(2)(a) as adjusted by any releases authorized pursuant to
SEC. 16.3-4(A)(4) of the Subdivision Code.
(3) By posting an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount
specified in SEC. 16.3-4(A)(2)(a) of the Subdivision Code
from a local bank or savings and loan association naming the
Town as a beneficiary thereof.
(4) By posting a corporate surety bond with the contractor for the
owner or developer as principal and an insurance company
duly authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as
surety in a penal amount equal to the owner’s or developer’s
obligations as specified in SEC. 16.3-4(A)(2)(a) of the
Subdivision Code. The contractor for the owner or developer
shall keep such corporate surety bond in full force and effect
until one (1) year after official action by the President and
Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal accepting the
SEC. 15.9-12(Cont.3)
planned unit development for maintenance or until such later
date as any written claim against the surety by the Town is
finally resolved.
3. Form of Bond and Security Documents.
a. The form of the Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond secured by corporate
surety is as provided in Exhibit F or F-1.
b. The form of the Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond secured by cash escrow is
provided in Exhibit G.
c. The form of the Final Development Plan Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond secured by an
irrevocable letter of credit is as provided in Exhibit H.
4. Releases From Escrow Accounts Posted as Security. As installation of
public improvements progresses, and is inspected and approved by the Town
Engineer, releases from such escrow accounts, including interest
accumulated thereon may be authorized by the Town Engineer in writing,
based upon his estimate of the cost for work completed, inspected and
approved, provided however, no release shall be made which would reduce
the escrow account to an amount less than 10 percent of the Town
Engineer’s original estimate of the cost of installing all public improvements,
paying all plan review and inspection fees and preparing as-built plans until
all public improvements in the Planned Unit Development have been
accepted for maintenance by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Town, at which time the escrow account shall be released to an amount of
not less than 5 percent of the Town Engineer’s original estimate of cost.
Funds then remaining in the escrow account may be released one year after
official action by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal
accepted the Planned Unit Development for maintenance or on such later
date as any written claim against the escrow account by the Town is finally
resolved.
B. Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement and Security.
1. Nature of the Obligation. Any owner or developer developing a planned unit
development bordering on one or more roadways is obligated to contribute
one-half the cost of improving such roadway or roadways on all streets; the
obligation shall endure for ten (10) years from the date of the final
development plan is recorded unless:
SEC. 15.9-12(Cont.4)
a. The developer builds the half of the street adjacent to his
development, in which case the developer shall have no obligation;
or
b. The Town obtains the right-of-way and Adjacent Substandard
Roadway Improvement Guarantee and Security for the roadway
opposite the development, in which case the developer’s obligation
shall be limited to five (5) years from the date the final plan is
recorded.
2. Guarantee and Security.
a. Security. The Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement
Guarantee shall be secured in one of the following ways:
(1) By posting a corporate surety bond with the owner or
developer as Principal and an insurance company duly
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as surety in a
penal amount not less than that determined by SEC. 16.3-
4(B)(1) of the Subdivision Code. The owner or developer
shall keep such corporate surety bond in full force and effect
until one year after official action by the President and Board
of Trustees of the Town of Normal accepting the street for
maintenance or until such later date as any written claim
against the surety by the Town is finally resolved.
(2) By posting a cash reserve account with the Town of Normal
in the amount determined by SEC. 16.3-4(B)(1) as adjusted
by releases authorized pursuant to SEC. 16.3-4(A)(4) of the
Subdivision Code.
(3) By posting an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount
determined by SEC. 16.3-4(B)(1) of the Subdivision Code
from a local bank or savings and loan association naming the
Town as beneficiary thereof.
b. Form of Guarantee.
(1) The form of the Adjacent Substandard Roadway
Improvement Guarantee and Security secured by corporate
surety is as provided in Exhibit I.
(2) The form of the Adjacent Substandard Roadway
Improvement Guarantee secured by cash escrow is as
provided in Exhibit J.
SEC. 15.9-15(Cont.5)
(3) The form of the Adjacent Substandard Roadway
Improvement Guarantee and Security secured by an
irrevocable letter of credit is as provided in Exhibit K.
SEC. 15.9-13 AS-BUILT PLANS.
A. General. After completion, inspection and approval of all public improvements but
prior to acceptance of the public improvements for maintenance, the owner or
developer shall submit all information required by this Section in the form specified.
Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information in the form required
shall be sufficient grounds for the Town to refuse to release the owner or developer
from his or its Final Development Plan Public Improvement Payment, Performance
and Workmanship Bond; Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee
or to release the security or reserve for such bond, bonds or guarantee, and shall
constitute a violation of this Code.
B. Required Form. As-built plans shall consist of photographic reproductions of
abelene, tracing cloth or mylar, with a maximum size of 24” by 36”.
C. Required Content. As-built plans shall provide the content required for utilities
(specified in SEC. 16.3-2(D) of the Subdivision Code) but shall accurately depict the
plans, profiles, standard details and special details as actually installed, inspected and
approved, rather than as proposed.
SEC. 15.9-14 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this Section to provide specific additional regulations for
Planned Unit Developments located in residential zoning districts.
B. Permitted Uses in a Residential Planned Unit Development. In addition to the
lawfully authorized uses permitted in each zoning district, the following additional
uses are permitted in a Residential Planned Unit Development:
1. Residential Planned Unit Developments in the R-1AA, R-1A and R-1B
Zoning Districts.
a. Semi-detached single-family dwelling units (one (1) dwelling unit
joined to one (1) other dwelling unit by a party wall);
b. Attached single-family dwelling units, townhouses and row houses
in groups of no more than five (5) dwelling units per building;
c. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by special use
permit or after site plan review.
SEC. 15.9-14(Cont.1)
2. Residential Planned Unit Developments in the R-2 District. Same as in the
R-1 District.
3. Residential Planned Unit Developments in the R-3A and R-3B Districts.
a. Semi-detached single-family dwelling units (one (1) dwelling unit
joined to one (1) other dwelling unit by a party wall);
b. Attached single-family dwelling units, townhouses and row houses
in groups of no more than five (5) dwelling units per building;
c. Multi-family dwellings or apartment dwellings;
d. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by special use
permit or after site plan review.
4. Detached single-family mobile homes (R-4 Zoning District only).
5. Detached single-family manufactured units (R-4 Zoning District only).
(Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
C. Minimum Land Area Requirement for a Residential Planned Unit Development.
1. In R-1AA, R-1A and R-1B Planned Unit Developments – five (5) acres.
2. In R-2 Planned Unit Developments – five (5) acres.
3. In R-3 Planned Unit Developments – one (1) acre.
D. Minimum Dwelling Unit Requirement. No Residential Planned Unit Development
shall contain less than five (5) dwelling units.
E. Density, Floor Area and Common Recreation Space and Requirements For
Residential Planned Unit Developments Outside of the Parking Impact Zone. In
accordance with the following table:
SEC. 15.9-14(Cont.2)
Zoning
District
R-1AA
R-1A
R-1B
R-2
R-3A
R-3B
R-4
Maximum
Net Density
(Dwelling
Units/Acre)
2.00
4.00
8.00
10.00
23.00
58.00
8.00
Maximum
Floor Area
(% of Land
Area)
10.0%
20.0%
34.8%
40.0%
52.8%
80.0%
34.8%
Minimum
Open Space
(% of Floor
Area)
800%
380%
210%
180%
140%
85%
210%
Minimum
Common
Recreation
Space (% of
Floor Area)
25%
18%
14%
13%
12%
10%
14%
F. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. Two (2) parking spaces for each
dwelling unit, unless the property is in the Parking Impact Zone. Then, the
provisions of the Parking Impact Zone shall apply.
G. Architectural Plans. When townhouses (rowhouses) are proposed as a part of a
Planned Unit Development in the R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B and R-1 Districts, building
elevations and architectural renderings shall be required with submission of the
preliminary development plan.
H. R-3A and R-3B Planned Unit Developments within the Parking Impact Zone.
Within the Parking Impact Zone, R-3A and R-3B PUDs shall not have a maximum
net density, maximum floor area, minimum open space, or minimum common
recreational space. Such PUDs shall meet the minimum green space requirement as
set forth in SEC. 15.14-7(D) and minimum parking requirements and setbacks
established in SEC. 15.7-4.
(Entire SEC. 15.9-14 Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
SEC. 15.9-15 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS.
A. Intent. It is the intent of these requirements to provide additional specific regulations
for Planned Unit Developments located in commercial or business districts.
B. Permitted Uses. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by special use
permit or after site plan review.
C. Minimum Land Area Requirement for a Commercial Planned Unit Development.
One (1) acre.
D. Minimum Use Requirement. No Commercial Planned Unit Development shall
contain less than three (3) commercial uses.
SEC. 15.9-15(Cont.1)
E. Maximum Floor Area Requirement. Thirty-one percent (31%) of the gross land area
in the Planned Unit Development.
F. Minimum Landscaped Open Space Requirement. Fifteen percent (15%) of the gross
land area in the Planned Unit Development.
G. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement. Four and one-half (4.5) parking spaces
for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
SEC. 15.9-16 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT.
A. Intent. It is the intent of these requirements to provide additional specific regulations
for Planned Unit Developments located in the Industrial or Manufacturing Zoning
District.
B. Permitted Uses. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by special use
permit or after site plan review.
C. Minimum Land Area Requirement for an Industrial Planned Unit Development.
Two (2) acres.
D. Minimum Use Requirement. No Industrial Planned Unit Development shall contain
less than three (3) industrial uses.
E. Maximum Floor Area Requirement. Fifty percent (50%) of the gross land area in
the Planned Unit Development.
F. Minimum Landscaped Open Space Requirement. Ten percent (10%) of the gross
land area in the Planned Unit Development.
G. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement. One (1) parking space for every six
hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area.
SEC. 15.9-17 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR A C-1 MULTI-USE OFFICE PARK.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-1, Multi-Use Office Park Planned Unit Development
is to accommodate the redevelopment and encourage the re-use of an existing set of
structures on a site that has been vacated by the previous tenant and/or owner.
B. The multi-use office park has a controlled environment; it is not merely a freestanding
office building, but a cluster of structures having characteristics of the
planned unit development. In some respects the multi-use office park may be similar
to the shopping center and the industrial park. Like the shopping center, the multiuse
office park calls for unified control, continuing management and services to
tenants, on-site parking for tenant-employees and for tenant-callers. Like the
SEC. 15.9-17(Cont.1)
industrial park, other features include on-site traffic circulation, extensive
landscaping, sign control and other covenants. Depending on its size and level of
employment, the multi-use office park may include corollary uses such as a retail
store, bank, restaurant, conference center and residential uses. Flexibility is a factor
in multi-use office park design. The grouping and use of buildings may be designed
to meet special requirements for a single tenant or to provide for multiple tenants.
C. Permitted Uses. Permitted Uses and Special Uses in the C-1 Office District, S-1
University District, S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District, R-1AA Single Family
Residence District, R-1A Single Family Residence District, R-1B Single Family
Residence District, R-3A Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District, and
R-3B High Density Multiple-Family Residence District, except: Correctional
Institution, Criminal Rehabilitation Center, Dormitories and Residence Halls, Farms,
Fraternities – Sororities, Gas Company Plants and Facilities, Industrial Center,
Rooming Houses, Sanitary Landfill and Zoo. The application or preliminary
development plan for multi-use office park shall specify the proposed use or uses
and the location thereof during the Planned Unit Development review and approval
process, consideration of a proposed use or development proposal which would
otherwise be authorized by a special use permit or after site plan review shall replace
and be a substitute for the special use permit review process or site plan review
process. (Amended by Ord. No. 4168 on 9/20/93)
D. Minimum Land Area Requirement for a Multi-Use Office Park Planned Unit
Development. Ten (10) acres.
E. Minimum Use Requirement. No multi-use office park shall contain less than five
(5) principal uses.
F. Maximum Floor Area Requirement. Forty percent (40%) of the gross land area in
the planned unit development.
G. Minimum Landscaped Open Space Requirement. Fifteen percent (15%) of the gross
land area in the planned unit development.
H. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement. Parking provisions for existing
buildings in multi-use office parks have no standards. Each multi-use office park is
unique in its environment and characteristics and it is not accurate to utilize
generalized planning factors for these traffic and parking generators. All uses within
multi-use office parks are traffic generators, however, they must accommodate the
needs of those who use automobiles to visit them. The multi-use office park must
accommodate needs of a variety of parker types; parking space needs must be
considered in relation to use characteristics, building layout and site constraints.
Parking demand will vary with the size of the multi-use office park and its activities.
Parking facilities should be large enough to accommodate worker shift changes, if
any, which is the peak time for parking. Because of differing uses located in a multiuse
office park, planning ratios of total employee or gross floor area are unreliable
SEC. 15.9-17(Cont.2)
for estimating parking needs. In order to evaluate parking space needs, number of
employees and building use should be accounted for on a site specific basis. A
definitive parking space needs estimate for each use in a multi-use office park can be
derived using four variables:
1. Typical daily tenant-employee population;
2. Typical daily tenant-caller population;
3. Percent of tenant-employees being auto drivers; and
4. Percent of tenant-callers being auto drivers.
Based on the above guidelines, the final development plan for the multi-use office
park shall reflect parking adequate to handle proposed uses.
I. Any new construction that takes place within a C-1 Multi-Use Office Park Planned
Unit Development shall meet all applicable regulations and standards contained in
other sections of this Chapter of the Municipal Code.
J. The Town Council may waive any portion of the standards, requirements or
procedures for this section of the Code, provided that such waivers are not contrary
to the spirit, purpose and intent of this Code and in accordance with all applicable
Federal and State laws.
(Entire Division 9 Amended 5/21/90)
SEC. 15.10-1
DIVISION 10 - SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS
SEC. 15.10-1 PURPOSE. Recognized are certain uses of land which by their very nature
and their unique characteristics cannot be permitted in a particular district or districts without special
consideration being given to the characteristics of surrounding property, as well as the site itself and
the impact such a use would have on adjoining or nearby property. The purpose of this section is to
specify standards that shall be required to be met before the issuance of a special use permit. In
addition to the underlying zoning district regulations and the general standards applicable to all
Special Use requests, each Special Use shall meet the specific standards set forth for that particular
use and any conditions imposed by the corporate authority in the ordinance granting the Special Use
Permit.
Such Special Uses fall into two categories:
A. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
B. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that their operation may give
rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or
public facilities.
SEC. 15.10-2 INITIATION OF SPECIAL USE APPLICATIONS. The Town Council;
the Town Staff, at the direction of the Town Council; any person having a freehold interest in land,
or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession; or a contractual interest which may become
a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest; and which is specifically enforceable may
request to use such land for one or more of the Special Uses provided for in this Code in the zoning
district in which the land is located.
SEC. 15.10-3 PROCESSING.
A. Application for a Special Use. All requests for Special Use Permits other than those
initiated by the Town Council or by the Town Staff at the direction of the Town
Council shall only be accepted when filed on the proper application forms furnished
by the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Normal, which application form
shall conform to the submission requirements listed in SEC. 15.14-5 of this Code
and which shall generally require the submission of a sketch plan showing the
location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
driveways, parking areas with spaces marked and numbered, light poles or fixtures,
landscaping indicating that which is to be planted and such existing landscaping as is
to be retained. Where such applications are required, the information requested on
them is deemed to be a minimum and applicants may be required to supply
additional information prior to hearings on their requests. Such forms shall be filed
in duplicate as a prerequisite to the commencement of any action on the part of the
Town except that if the site plan is filed on anything other than 8 l/2 x 11 inch paper,
18 copies rather than two (2) copies shall be submitted. The Town Clerk shall, at
such times as she is in receipt of completed applications for Special Use Permits,
SEC. 15.10-3(Cont.1)
forward a copy of said application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Amended
1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
B. Hearing on Application. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and
supporting material referred to above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a least
one (1) administrative public hearing on the proposed Special Use in the manner
provided in SEC. 15.12-1©(3)(b). If variations to the bulk, sign and off-street
parking and loading regulations of this Code would otherwise be necessary for the
development proposal, such proposal shall be exempt from the administrative public
hearing on the variation request and such review procedure shall be deemed to occur
simultaneously with the Zoning Board of Appeals’ administrative public hearing and
recommendation on the Special Use Permit application.
SEC. 15.10-4 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS. The purpose of this Section is to specify
standards that shall be required to have been met before the issuance of a Special Use Permit. In
addition to the standards summarized in this Section, each Special Use applicant shall show that the
Special Use requested conforms specifically, or by necessary implication, to the general standards
for evaluation of a Special Use as stated in SEC. 15.10-5(A)(2) of this Code.
A. Agricultural and Horticultural Fairs, Displays and Exhibits.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC.15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 25 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): 500.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 150.
(2) Collector Street: l50.
(3) Minor Street: l50.
b. Side: l00.
c. Rear: l00.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 50.
b. Stories: 4.
5. Additional Requirements. No motor vehicle racetrack shall be erected or
operated. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for 30
percent of the peak daily attendance as adduced from testimony before the
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.1)
Zoning Board of Appeals. Access shall be located on a major or collector
street or road and roadway shall have a minimum surface improvement of A-
3. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted showing graphic
scale, north point, site size in acres; existing physical features such as
drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed location and dimensions of
buildings and structures; proposed utilities showing size, types, locations and
elevations (including water mains, valves, hydrants, sanitary and storm
sewers); proposed sidewalks and pedestrian ways; parking plan and direction
of traffic flow; landscaping plan; location of refuse storage (dumpsters must
be screened); sign and lighting plan; drainage plan, indicating direction of
run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers and water impoundment
areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and
easements for other utilities; location and dimensions of curb cuts (must be
150 feet from intersection and 150 feet for any other curb-cut serving
facility); location and dimension of any other proposed physical
improvements.
B. Antennas. See Telecommunication Antennas (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
C. Asphalt Plant.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Five (5) acres.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front yard: 100 foot minimum
b. Side yard: 50 foot minimum
c. Corner side yard: 100 foot minimum
d. Rear yard: 50 foot minimum
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is located; however, this height limit shall not apply to
unoccupied structures used in asphalt production or storage.
b. Stories: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is located.
5. Additional Requirements.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.2)
a. The proposed facility shall comply with the current regulations set
forth by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. All
emissions from the proposed facility, including noise, smoke, and
particulate matter, must meet standards set by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. The Town must receive
confirmation from the IEPA that these standards are being met
within 90 days of the Town granting an occupancy permit.
b. The facility shall have a hard-surfaced driveway of at least 25 feet
wide wherever any truck traffic is proposed. With the exception of
equipment and material storage areas, all parking and traffic
circulation areas shall be hard surfaced.
c. Hours of operation for loaded asphalt trucks entering and leaving the
site are 6:00 a.m. until 7:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
d. Expanded hours and Sunday operation may be allowed on an
occasional basis (no more than 12 projects per year) provided such
operation is registered in advance with the Town of Normal. During
expanded hours and Sunday operation, the City Manager may
impose additional restrictions reasonably related to health, safety,
and welfare.
Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted showing graphic scale,
north point, site size in acres; existing physical features such as drainage
easements, streams, marshes; proposed location and dimensions of buildings
and structures, proposed utilities, showing size, types location and elevations
(including water mains, valves, hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers);
landscaping plan; location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened);
sign and lighting plan; finished topography of site at two foot contour
intervals; drainage plan, indicating direction of run-off flow, location of
catch basins, storm sewers, and water impoundment areas, if any; land to be
dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for other
utilities; proposed location, dimensions and surface materials of all off-street
parking, loading and driveway areas.
(Entire Section C Amended 8/20/07 by Ord. No. 5145)
D. Bed and Breakfast.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 7000 sq. ft. plus 500 sq. ft. for each bed and breakfast room.
b. Width: 60 ft.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.3)
3. Required Yards. Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height. Same requirement as the zoning district in which
proposed use is to be located.
5. Signs. One wall sign not to exceed 16 sq. ft. Design shall be compatible
with building style and surrounding area.
6. Additional Requirements.
a. Any structure devoted to the bed and breakfast use must have: S-3
Historic/Cultural zoning and a Certificate of Appropriateness issued
by the Normal Historic Preservation Commission.
b. Provide a maximum of five (5) guest rooms, for rent, limited to two
adult guests per night.
c. Shall operate for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month
period.
d. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted
in accordance with SEC. 15.14-5 and shall generally include location
and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, building
setbacks, location and type of screening and fencing, location of
parking area, access drives, and recreation areas. Dumpsters serving
bed and breakfast must be screened by solid fence or plantings on all
sides except that area that must remain unobstructed in order to allow
garbage pick up. Location and types of landscaping materials. The
lighting plan submission shall comply with SEC. 15.14-5.
(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
e. Minimum of a one (1) inch water service line shall be installed.
f. Required to be licensed annually upon completion of an approved
inspection by the Town's Housing Department. Annual license fee
shall be $50.00.
(Entire Subsection (D) Added 7/19/99 by Ord. No. 4606)
E. Cemeteries.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.4)
a. Area: 2 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): l50.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 30.
b. Stories: 2.
5. Additional Requirements. Water shall be available within 400 feet of all
gravesites. Trash receptacles shall be located adjacent to roadways and not
more than 200 feet apart. All roadways shall be a minimum of 14 feet in
width and shall have a minimum surface improvement of class A-3 or
equivalent with an eight (8) inch crushed aggregate base. Any security
lighting on premises shall be no greater than a residential street light (4,000
lumens) and shall have fixtures that direct light away from adjoining
residential structures. Storage of any maintenance machinery or other
equipment shall be within completely enclosed buildings. No rubbish shall
be allowed to accumulate upon the site except within trash receptacles.
Identification sign shall be no greater than 24 square feet in area and shall
not be illuminated. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted
showing graphic scale, north point, site size in acres; existing physical
features such as drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed location
and dimensions of buildings and structures; proposed utilities showing size,
types, location and elevations (including water mains, valves, hydrants,
sanitary and storm sewers); landscaping plans; location of refuse storage
(dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting plan; finished topography of
site at 2 foot contour intervals; drainage plan, indicating direction of run-off
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.5)
flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers, and water impoundment areas,
if any; land to be dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and
easements for other utilities.
F. Churches, and Other places of Public Worship.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 2 Acres in R-1A; 1 Acre in all other districts where allowed.
b. Width (ft.): 200.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 35.
b. Stories: 3.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located with access only from a major or
collector street facility. Curb cuts must be located at least 150 feet from any
intersection and 150 feet from any other curb cut serving facility. Twenty
(20) copies of a site plan must be submitted showing graphic scale, north
point, site size in acres; existing physical features such as drainage
easements, building schematics, streams, marshes, proposed location and
dimensions of buildings and structures; proposed utilities showing size,
types, locations and elevations (including water mains, valves, hydrants,
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.6)
sanitary and storm sewers); proposed sidewalks; parking plan and direction
of traffic flow; location and dimension of curb cuts; landscaping plan;
location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting
plan; finished topography of site at 2 foot contour intervals; drainage plan,
indicating direction of run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers
and water impoundment areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and
drainage right-of-way and easements for other utilities.
G. Coal Storage.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Five (5) acres.
b. Width (ft.): Two Hundred (200) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the proposed
use is to be located.
b. Stories: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the
proposed use is to be located.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located on a major or collector street
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.7)
facility that has been improved to meet the standard for its classification.
Shall have on-site drainage retention facility designed and built in such a
manner that all run-off from the coal storage area is effectively prohibited
from entering the ground water table or surface waterways. The facility shall
have a have a hard surfaced driveway of at least 25 feet in width at all
locations where vehicular traffic is proposed. All loaded trucks leaving the
site shall exit the facility at a single access point. Hours of operation may be
from 7:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., no more than six (6) days a week.
Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted drawn to scale showing
the graphic scale, north point, site size in acres, existing physical features
such as drainage easements, streams, marches; proposed location and
dimensions of buildings and structures; proposed utilities, showing size,
types, locations and elevations (including watermains, valves, hydrants,
sanitary and storm sewers); landscaping plan; screening plan, indicating
height and type of screening materials to be used; location of refuse storage
(dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting plan; finished topography of
site at two (2) foot contour intervals; drainage plan, indicating direction of
run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers, and retention area; land
to be dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for other
utilities; proposed location, dimensions and surface materials of all off-street
parking, loading and driveway areas.
H. College, University Classroom.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 10,000 square feet
b. Width: 75 feet
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.8)
b. Side: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed use
is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the proposed
use is to be located.
b. Stories: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the
proposed use is to be located.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located on a major or collector street
facility. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted drawn to
graphic scale and north point showing dimensions of lot, proposed location
of buildings or structures, building schematics, proposed setbacks from front,
side and rear lot lines, parking plan, direction of traffic flow, location of curb
cuts, landscape, sign and lighting plan, and location of refuse storage
(dumpsters must be screened on all sides).
(Entire Section (H) added 4/17/95 by Ord. No. 4308)
I. Concrete Batch Plant.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required.
If lot coincides with the lot line of an adjacent residential district or is
adjacent to an alley or street which separates such lot and residential district,
screening shall be provided with densely planted evergreen trees at least five
(5) feet at planting and maturing to at least twenty (20) feet. Planting shall
be parallel to and within ten (10) feet of such lot line. If the lot is not
adjacent to a residential district or to an alley or street which separates such
lot and residential district, the lot must comply with Division 14 of this
Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Three (3) acres.
b. Width (ft): Two hundred (200) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.9)
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is located.
b. Stories: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is located.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located on a major or collector street
facility that has been improved to meet the standard for its classification.
The facility shall have a hard-surfaced driveway of at least 25 feet wide
wherever any truck traffic is proposed; all loaded trucks leaving the site shall
exit the facility at a single access point. Operation shall meet all applicable
E.P.A. requirements. Hours of operation may be from 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
p.m., no more than six days a week, Monday through Saturday. Expanded
hours and Sunday operation may be allowed on an occasional basis (no more
than 12 occurrences per year) provided such operation is registered with the
Town of Normal.
Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted showing graphic scale,
north point, site size in acres; existing physical features such as drainage
easements, streams, marshes; proposed location and dimensions of buildings
and structures, proposed utilities, showing size, types location and elevations
(including water mains, valves, hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers);
landscaping plan; location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened);
sign and lighting plan; finished topography of site at two foot contour
intervals; drainage plan, indicating direction of run-off flow, location of
catch basins, storm sewers and water impoundment areas, if any; land to be
dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for other
utilities; proposed location, dimensions and surface materials of all off-street
parking, loading and driveway areas.
(Entire Section (I) added 6/19/95 by Ord. No. 4326)
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.10)
J. Convenience Establishments within Multiple-Family Dwellings.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
b. Width (ft.): Same requirements as the zoning district in which
proposed use is to be located.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the proposed
use is to be located.
b. Stories: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the
proposed use is to be located.
5. Additional Requirements. No such individual establishment shall occupy
more than 5,000 square feet of floor area and total floor area so occupied in
any one building shall not exceed ten (10) percent of total, gross floor area of
multiple-family dwelling in which located. No outdoor advertising or signs
shall be allowed. Establishments shall not have direct customer access from
exterior of building. Twenty (20) copies of interior building plans shall be
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.11)
submitted showing location, dimensions, use and customer and service
entrances to establishments in sufficient detail to allow Town Staff to
determine if proposed establishments meet above stipulations.
K. Country Clubs and Private Golf Course.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 15 Acres for Par 3; 40 Acres for 9-hole regulations; 75 Acres,
for 18-hole regulation.
b. Width (ft.): 500.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 50.
(2) Collector Street: 50.
(3) Minor Street: 50.
b. Side: 50.
c. Rear: 50.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 35.
b. Stories: 2.
5. Additional Requirements. Where a public right-of-way or private property
other than subject tract lies within fifty (50) feet of a golf green or within one
hundred (100) feet of a fairway centerline, additional barriers may be
required. Curb cut shall be located at least 150 feet from nearest
intersection. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted showing
graphic scale, north point; site size in acres; existing physical features such
as drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed location and dimensions
of buildings and structures; building schematics, proposed utilities showing
size, types, locations and elevations (including water mains, valves,
hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers); parking plan and direction of traffic
flow; landscaping plan; location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be
screened); sign and lighting plan; drainage plan, indicating direction of runoff
flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers and water impoundment
areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and
easements for other utilities; location and dimensions of curb cuts; finished
topography of site at 2 foot contour intervals, restaurant and cocktail lounge
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.12)
may be allowed as accessory to club house facility provided no outdoor
advertising and signs shall be allowed.
L. Day Care Centers.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. Children's outdoor play area must be enclosed
by four (4) foot high fence. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 10,000 square feet.
b. Width (ft.): 75.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 70.
(2) Collector Street: 65.
(3) Minor Street: 55.
b. Side: Same requirements as zoning district in which proposed use is
to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 35.
b. Stories: 2.
5. Additional Requirements. Must be located on either a major or collector
street facility. Shall have off-street area for loading and unloading children.
Maneuvering room must be provided on tract for parking and loading area so
as to preclude necessity of backing out onto public street facility. Twenty
(20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted drawn to scale that shows
location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, location and
type of screening and fencing, location of parking area, access drives and
child loading/unloading area and location of playground areas. Dumpsters
serving day care center must be screened by solid fence or plantings on all
sides except that area that must remain unobstructed in order to allow
garbage pick up.
M. Extraction, Loading, Storage, Washing and Hauling of Sand, Gravel or Topsoil.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.13)
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. Six (6) foot wire mesh fence.
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 3 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): None.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 50.
(2) Collector Street: 50.
(3) Minor Street: 50.
b. Side: 50.
c. Rear: 50.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 45.
b. Stories: 4.
5. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of site plan shall be submitted
showing graphic scale and north point indicating existing topography (at 2
foot contour intervals), water courses and drainage ways through the site,
area to be excavated and finished grade after excavation is completed (at 2
foot contour intervals), erosion and sediment control devices, proposed
locations for sorting, grading, crushing, and similar operations, locations of
vehicular access and egress, and any proposed lighting. A surety bond or
other such reasonable requirement of assurance that such a reclamation
project will be completed may be required by the Town Council. Plans shall
also be submitted indicating proposed reclamation of the area after
termination of extraction activities.
N. Gun Ranges, Indoor.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. Same requirement as the zoning
district in which proposed use is to be located.
2. Minimum Lot Size. Same requirement as the zoning district in which
proposed use is to be located.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.14)
b. Side: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed use
is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed use
is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed use
is to be located.
b. Stories: Same requirement as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
5. Additional Requirements. Each applicant must submit plans and drawings
signed by a design professional (licensed architect or engineer) that the range
is designed to meet the standards listed in this Section.
a. Noise Abatement. The design must incorporate sound reduction
techniques so that noise in an adjacent unit or adjacent property is not
unreasonably disruptive.
b. Ventilation. HEPA filters are required for exhaust fans. Exhaust
vents must be located away from other air intakes, including
neighboring property.
c. Solid Lead. The application must provide a plan for the safe removal
and disposal of lead and lead dust. Lead and lead dust may not be
disposed of in either the storm or sanitary sewer system.
d. Containment. Bullet traps, range walls, floors and ceilings must
capture all bullets. Bullet traps, floors, walls and ceilings must all be
sufficiently strong to prevent bullets from leaving the range.
e. Security. The application must include a security plan which at a
minimum contains a continuously operating video surveillance
system located on all exterior entrances.
(Sub-Section N Added 6/17/13 by Ord. No. 5495)
O. High-Rise Buildings.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code, except that where a side or rear lot line in the
B-1 or C-3 District coincides with a lot line of an adjacent residence district,
a dense compact planting screen of not less than five feet in height shall be
required along the lot line. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.15)
2. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) R-3B District: A minimum of 10 feet, except a minimum of
25 feet on a corner lot.
(2) B-2 District: No minimum requirement.
(3) B-1, C-1, C-3 Districts: A minimum of twenty-five feet.
b. Side:
(1) R-3B District: A minimum of 10 feet, except a minimum of
25 feet on a corner lot.
(2) B-1, B-2, C-1 and C-3 Districts: For all stories for residential
use, a setback of 10 feet from the line is required, except that
a minimum of 20 feet from a residential story wall to an
adjacent high rise building wall must be maintained.
c. Rear:
(1) R-3B District: A minimum of 20 feet.
(2) B-2 District: No rear yard is required except a rear yard of 10
feet is required if any alley exists. A minimum of 20 feet
from a residential story wall to an adjacent building wall
must be maintained.
(3) B-1, C-1 and C-3 Districts: A minimum of twenty-five feet.
3. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: No maximum.
b. Stories: No maximum.
4. Additional Requirements. Permitted and Special Uses shall be the same as
in the applicable zoning districts. In the B and C Districts all residential use
must be above the ground level story. In cases of combined commercial and
residential use, the residential use is permitted only in stories above the
commercial use, except that a restaurant or club is permitted on the topmost
story. A minimum ratio of two stories of residential use to one story of
commercial use must be maintained. A structure of four or more stories in
height designed for commercial or residential use, or both, must provide
elevator service to tenants above ground level story. In any applicable
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.16)
district, a minimum of 500 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit shall be
provided. An efficiency dwelling unit or a lodging room may be considered
0.75 dwelling unit in determining compliance. Shall be located on a major
or collector street facility, curb cut shall be located at least one hundred fifty
(150) feet from the nearest intersection and if more than one (1) curb cut, all
such curb cuts shall be spaced a minimum distance of one hundred and fifty
(150) feet. Sidewalks four (4) feet in width shall be installed on at least one
(1) side of all roadways. Twenty (20) copies of a
site plan shall be submitted showing graphic scale, north point; site size in
acres; existing physical features such as drainage easements, streams,
marshes; proposed location and dimensions of buildings and structures;
building schematics, proposed utilities showing size, types, locations and
elevations (including water mains, valves, hydrants, sanitary and storm
sewers); parking plan and direction of traffic flow; landscaping plan;
location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting
plan; drainage plan, indicating direction of run-off flow, location of catch
basins, storm sewers and water impoundment area, if any; land to be
dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for other
utilities; location and dimensions of curb cuts; and finished topography of
site at two (2) foot intervals.
(Sub-section (O) Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
P. Mobile Home Parks.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 10 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): 400.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 75.
(2) Collector Street: 60.
(3) Minor Street: 50.
b. Side: Per Section 22.8-7(8)(a).
c. Rear: Per Section 22.8-7(8)(a).
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 25.
b. Stories: 2.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.17)
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located on major or collector street
facility. Curb cut shall be located at least 150 feet from nearest intersection;
if more than one (1) curb cut, all such curb cuts shall be spaced a minimum
distance of 150 feet. Sidewalks 4 feet in width shall be installed on at least
one (1) side of all roadways. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be
submitted showing graphic scale, north point, site size in acres; existing
physical features such as drainage easements, streams, marshes; landscaping
and buffering plan; finished topography of site at 2 foot contour intervals;
location and dimension of curb cuts; land to be dedicated for streets and
drainage right-of-way and easements for other utilities. Above information
shall be required in addition to that required for a Mobile Home Park in
SEC. 22.8-2(2). Dumpsters must be screened on all sides except that area
that must remain unobstructed in order to allow garbage pick up.
Q. Multiple Family Dwelling in the B-1 General Business District.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. For lots adjacent to or within 100
feet of Single-Family Residence District a masonry wall at least six feet in
height, or a decorative wood fence at least six feet in height must be
maintained on the lot line between the multiple family dwellings and
adjacent single family use.
2. Minimum Lot Size. one acre.
3. Required Yards.
a. For lots adjacent to or within 100 feet of Single-Family Residence
District: In accordance with the R-3A Medium Density Multiple
Family Residence District standards.
b. For other lots: In accordance with the R-3B High Density Multiple
Family Residence District standards.
4. Building Heights. The greater of the height allowed in the Parking Impact
Zone (SEC. 15.7-4) or the following:
a. For lots adjacent to or within 100 feet of Single-Family Residence
District: In accordance with the R-3A Medium Density Multiple
Family Residence District standards.
b. For other lots: In accordance with the R-3B High Density Multiple
Family Residence District standards.
5. Off-street Parking & Loading Regulations. Except as herein provided all
off-street parking shall conform to the requirements contained in Division
7 of this Code.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.18)
a. Parking shall be fully enclosed within a structure or comply with
the following:
(1) Front and Corner Side Yard parking is prohibited unless
provided in a parking deck or fully screened from public
view.
(2) Side and Rear Yard Parking must be buffered with a five
foot wide perimeter landscaped area.
(3) Surface Parking lots shall comply with Division 14 of this
Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
b. The following requirements apply to parking decks:
(1) The preferred location for parking decks is on the interior
of lots.
(2) Decks fronting on a public street must contain retail space
fronting the street. Street facades must be substantially
similar to the facades illustrated in Appendix E.
6. Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted in compliance
with Town zoning code requirements.
7. Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements contained in Division
13 of this Code for the R-3 zoning district except each commercial use
shall be allowed a wall or building mounted sign not exceeding twentyfive
square feet in total sign area
8. Lighting. All lighting must conform with the provisions set forth in
Division 14 of this Code. A lighting plan must be submitted in accordance
with SEC. 15.14-5 and shall include the following:
a. A foot candle calculation for the site and off-site light generated
from the site.
b. Cutsheets for all luminaries, poles, and luminaire mounting arms.
c. Foot candle averages and maximum to minimum uniformity ratios.
d. All proposed light locations and mounting heights.
e. All light levels shall be shown as initial light levels.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.19)
f. All outdoor lighting shall have fixtures that are fully shielded from
adjoining residential property and public rights of way.
g. All light level calculations must factor in existing light affecting
the site from off-site lighting fixtures.
(Entire Sub-section 8 Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
9. Appearance Review. All proposed development shall comply with the
requirements of Division 14 of this Code, provided however where these
special use standards are stricter than the requirements of Division 14, the
special use standards shall control.
10. First Floor Commercial Use. Buildings shall be occupied by a
“designated” B-1 use as follows: For buildings located on corner lots or
through lots at least 50% of the total lineal building frontage on the street
shall be occupied by a “designated” B-1 use. For buildings located on an
interior lot 100 % of the total lineal building frontage on the street shall be
occupied by a “designated” B-1 use. As used herein “designated” B-1 use
means any use permitted in the B-1 zoning district except the following
uses:
a. Agriculture
b. Agricultural Implement, Sales & Repair
c. Agricultural Supply Store
d. Arena, Stadium
e. Auction House
f. Automobile Service Station
g. Automobile, Truck Sales
h. Boat Sales
i. Bus Passenger Terminal
j. Car Wash
k. Contractor’s Shop
l. Exhibition Hall, Exposition Hall
m. Food Locker Plants
n. Fur Store
o. Ice Rink
p. Lumberyard, Building Materials Storage
q. Mini-warehouse (with or without dwelling unit for superintendent)
r. Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle Rental and Sales
s. Motor Vehicle Repairs, Paint Shop
t. Motor Vehicle Sales
u. Motor Vehicle Storage
v. Parking Lot
w. Recreational Vehicle Sales
x. Retail Lumber Sales
y. Trailer Rental and Sales
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.20)
z. Truck Freight Terminal
aa. Truck Stop
bb. Truck Terminal
cc. Warehouse; Mini (with or without dwelling unit for Superintendent)
dd. Wholesale Distributors
11. Parkland. Parkland dedication or a fee in lieu shall be required for the
residential dwelling unit uses as if the property is zoned R-3B or R-3A based
on the applicable bulk standards per Sections 3 and 4 above.
12. School Land. School land dedication or a fee in lieu shall be required for the
residential dwelling uses as if the property is zoned R-3B or R-3A based on
the applicable bulk standards per Sections 3 and 4 above.
13. Additional Requirements. 20 copies of a site plan shall be submitted, in
accordance with SEC. 15.14-5, and shall be drawn to scale, showing the
north point dimensions of lot, proposed location of buildings or structure,
setbacks from front, side and rear lot lines, parking plan, direction of
traffic flow, location and dimensions of curb cuts, lighting plan, sign plan,
landscaping and/or screening plan and location of refuse storage
dumpsters and the other matters required by the foregoing standards.
(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
(Entire Letter Q – Multiple Family Dwelling in the B-1 General Business District Added
7/21/03 by Ord. No. 4881)
R. Nurseries and Greenhouses.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 2 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): 200.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 100.
(2) Collector Street: 100.
(3) Minor Street: 50.
b. Side: 50.
c. Rear: 50.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.21)
a. Feet: 25.
b. Stories: 2.
5. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be
submitted showing graphic scale, north point, site size in acres; existing
physical features such as drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed
location and dimensions of buildings and structures, off-street parking and
loading areas, traffic circulation, proposed location and dimensions of curb
cuts; location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened); sign and
lighting plan; drainage plan for parking and loading areas indicating
direction of run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers, and water
impoundment areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and drainage
right-of-way and easements for other utilities. The propagation of plants,
shrubs, and trees is permitted in the required front yard, provided that SEC.
15.4-5 (A)(6) of this Code is fully complied with.
S. Nursing and Retirement Homes.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Ten Thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Width: Sixty (60) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 25.
(2) Collector Street: 25.
(3) Minor Street: 25.
b. Side yards: Ten (10) feet minimum. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord.
No. 4356)
c. Rear yard: Thirty (30) feet minimum. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord.
No. 4356)
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 35.
b. Stories: 2.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.22)
5. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of a plot plan shall be
submitted drawn to scale and north point showing dimensions of lot,
proposed location of buildings or structures, proposed setbacks, from front,
side and rear lot lines, parking plan, direction of traffic flow, location and
dimensions of curb-cut(s), lighting plan, landscaping and/or screening plan,
and location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened). Shall not have
access to parking facilities from an alley unless said alley is of an all-weather
pavement surface and has been designated by the Town as one-way in
direction. All parking and maneuvering room shall be provided on the
subject property; Said parking shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures that
direct the light away from adjoining residential property and shall not
increase the intensity of light within ten (10) feet of a Residence District
boundary line by more than one-half (l/2) foot candle. A minimum of a one
(1) inch water service line shall be installed if the property is not served by
one at the time of application.
T. Offices.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 10,000 square feet.
b. Width (ft.): 75.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.23)
a. Feet: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the proposed
use is to be located.
b. Stories: Same requirement as the zoning district in which the
proposed use is to be located.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located adjacent to C-1, C-2, C-3, B-1 or
B-2 district or adjacent to a conforming office structure. Shall be located on
a major or collector street facility. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be
submitted drawn to graphic scale and north point showing dimensions of lot,
proposed location of buildings or structures, building schematics, proposed
setbacks from front, side and rear lot line, parking plan, direction of traffic
flow, location and dimension of curbcuts, sign and lighting plan and location
of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened). The total floor area of all
buildings on a lot shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the net lot area. A
minimum of twenty (20) percent of the net lot area shall be landscaped in
accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)(2) and (3) of this Code.
U. Remote Controlled Racetracks.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. The racetrack shall be fully
screened from public rights-of-way by dense landscaping. Such screening
shall comply with SEC. 15.4-7(C) and Division 14 of this Code.
2. Required Yards. The front, side, corner, and rear yards shall be the same as
required in the Zoning District in which the proposed use is to be located.
3. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of a Site Plan shall be
submitted, drawn to graphic scale and north point showing dimensions of lot;
proposed location of buildings or structures; building schematics; proposed
setbacks from front, side, corner, and rear lot lines; a parking plan; direction
of traffic flow; location and dimension of curb cuts, sign and lighting plan;
landscaping plan; and location of any refuse storage areas. Additional
requirements include the following:
a. If a viewing platform is proposed, the plans for such platform must
be provided by a professional engineer or architect and shall include
an occupant load to be posted on the platform. The platform shall be
no more than twelve (12) feet in height. Barriers must be installed
near the platform to protect the structure from any vehicular traffic
when the structure is located in a parking lot. Only one (1) platform
is permitted per racetrack.
b. No permanent signs shall be permitted.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.24)
c. One (1) parking space must be provided on site for fifty percent
(50%) of the maximum platform occupant load. Such on site
parking may not displace any Code required parking for other uses
on the site.
d. The racetrack operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.,
Sunday through Thursday, and 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., on Friday
and Saturday.
e. Erosion control plans and drainage plans shall be submitted meeting
Town approval.
f. No sound amplification shall be allowed.
g. Public restrooms must be available within five hundred (500) feet of
the racetrack.
h. All remote-controlled racetrack improvements must be removed and
the property restored with improvements and landscaping meeting
Town Code within sixty (60) days following permanent cessation of
racetrack operations.
(Sub-section U added 1/17/06 by Ord. No. 5047)
V. Riding Stables.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: 5 Acres.
b. Width (ft.): 400.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: 100.
(2) Collector Street: 100.
(3) Minor Street: 100.
b. Side: 100.
c. Rear: 100.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 25.
b. Stories: 2.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.25)
5. Additional Requirements. Riding paths or trails across a public street or
right-of-way shall not be permitted. A caretaker’s or supervisor’s residence
is permitted as an accessory use. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be
submitted showing graphic scale, north point, site size in acres; existing
physical features such as drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed
location and dimensions of buildings and structures; parking plan and
direction of traffic flow; landscaping plan; location of refuse storage
(dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting plan; drainage plan,
indicating direction of run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers
and water impoundment areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and
drainage right-of-way and easements for other utilities; location and
dimensions of curb cuts; finished topography of site at 2 foot contour
intervals and location of proposed riding trails and rings.
W. Rooming House.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. Parking area shall comply with
Division 14 of this Code and shall also be screened along the rear of the
property. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Four hundred (400) square feet per roomer plus twenty-four
hundred (2,400) square feet for supervisor’s dwelling, if applicable.
b. Width (ft.): Sixty (60) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.26)
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Thirty-five (35).
b. Stories: Two (2).
5. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of a plot plan shall be
submitted drawn to scale and north point showing dimensions of lot,
proposed location of buildings or structures, proposed setbacks from front,
side and rear lot lines, parking plan, direction of traffic flow, location and
dimensions of curb-cut(s), lighting plan, landscaping and/or screening plan,
and location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened). Shall not have
access to parking facilities from an alley unless said alley is of an all-weather
pavement surface and has been designated by the Town as one-way in
direction. All parking and maneuvering room shall be provided on the
subject property; said parking shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures that
direct the light away from adjoining residential property and shall not
increase the intensity of light within ten (10) feet of a Residence District
boundary line by more than one-half (l/2) foot candle. A minimum of a one
(1) inch water service line shall be installed, if the property is not served by
one at the time of application.
X. Telecommunication Antennas and Related Telecommunication Facilities.
As required in SEC. 15.15-6. (Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
Y. Therapeutic Care Homes.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. Outdoor recreation and/or play area must be
enclosed by four (4) foot high fence. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: Four hundred (400) square feet per occupant plus twenty-four
hundred (2,400) square feet for supervisor’s dwelling, if applicable.
b. Width: Sixty (60) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.27)
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
c. Rear: Same requirements as the zoning district in which proposed
use is to be located.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: Thirty-five (35).
b. Stories: Two (2).
5. Additional Requirements. Twenty (20) copies of a plot plan shall be
submitted drawn to scale and north point showing dimensions of lot,
proposed location of buildings or structures, setbacks from front, side, and
rear lot lines, parking plan, direction of traffic flow, location and dimensions
of curb-cut(s), lighting plan, landscaping and/or screening plan, and location
of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened). All parking and
maneuvering room shall be provided on the subject property; said parking
shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures that direct light away from
adjoining residential property and shall not increase the intensity of light
within ten (10) feet of a Residence District boundary line by more than onehalf
(1/2) foot candle. A minimum of a one (1) inch water service shall be
installed, if the property is not served by one at the time of application.
Z. Tourist Cabins, Travel Trailer and Tourist Camps.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. Forty-two (42) inch high fence
enclosing outdoor swimming area. Camping pads or cabins shall be
screened along any boundary abutting a public right-of-way.
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: l,200 square feet per cabin or camp site, exclusive of any
common recreation area.
b. Width (ft.): Sixty (60) feet.
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.28)
(1) Major Street: 75.
(2) Collector Street: 75.
(3) Minor Street: 75.
b. Side: 50.
c. Rear: 50.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 15.
b. Stories: 1.
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be screened with natural plant materials
along any boundary adjoining a residence district property line; transitional
yard regulations shall also apply. Each trailer, cabin or recreation vehicle
shall be spaced no less than twenty (20) feet apart. Office shall provide eight
(8) parking spaces; said parking area shall also include adequate provisions
for parking and maneuvering of recreation vehicles and cars towing trailers.
Camping and cabin area shall be illuminated for security purposes but with
fixtures that direct light away from campsites and/or cabins. Roadways may
have an eight (8) inch crushed aggregate base and bituminous surface class
A-3 or equivalent. Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted
showing graphic scale, north point, site size in acres; existing physical
features such as drainage easements, streams, marshes; proposed location
and dimensions of buildings and structures and campsites; proposed utilities
showing size, types, locations and elevations (including watermains, valves,
hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers); proposed sidewalks and pedestrian
ways; parking plan and direction of traffic flow; landscaping plan; location
of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting plan;
drainage plan indicating direction of run-off flow; location of catch basins,
storm sewers and water impoundment areas, if any; land to be dedicated for
streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for other utilities; location
and dimensions of curb cuts (must be located 150 feet from nearest
intersection and 150 feet apart); and location and dimensions of any other
proposed physical improvements.
AA. Veterinary Hospitals.
1. Minimum Fencing/Screening Required. In accordance with SEC. 15.4-7(C)
and Division 14 of this Code. A six (6) foot mesh fence shall enclose
outdoor animal areas. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
2. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Area: One (1) Acre.
b. Width (ft.): Two hundred (200) feet.
SEC. 15.10-4(Cont.29)
3. Required Yards (feet).
a. Front:
(1) Major Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
(2) Collector Street: Same requirement as the zoning district in
which the proposed use is to be located.
(3) Minor Street: Same requirements as the zoning district in
which proposed use is to be located.
b. Side: 75.
c. Rear: 75.
4. Maximum Height (whichever is lower).
a. Feet: 25.
b. Stories: Two (2).
5. Additional Requirements. Shall be located at least 660 feet from a residence
district boundary line. Shall be located on a major or collector street facility.
Twenty (20) copies of a site plan shall be submitted showing graphic scale
and north point; proposed location and dimensions of buildings and
structures; parking plan and direction of traffic flow; landscaping plan;
location of refuse storage (dumpsters must be screened); sign and lighting
plan; drainage plan for parking lot and other paved areas indicating direction
of run-off flow, location of catch basins, storm sewers and water
impoundment areas, if any; land to be dedicated for streets and drainage
right-of-way and easements for other utilities; location and dimensions of
curb cuts; location and dimensions of any other proposed physical
improvements.
(Sections (H) through (U) relettered by Ord. No. 4326 on 6/19/95)(Sections (B) through
(W) relettered by Ord. No. 4456 on 6/16/97)(Sections (E) through (X) relettered by Ord.
No. 4606 on 7/19/99)(Sections (T) through (Z) relettered by Ord. No. 5047 on
1/17/06)(Sections (N) through (AA) relettered by Ord. No. 5495 on 6/17/13)
SEC. 15.10-5 DECISIONS.
A. Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
1. Findings of Fact. No Special Use Permit shall be recommended by the
Zoning Board of Appeals until written Findings of Fact are made indicating:
SEC. 15.10-5(Cont.1)
a. The extent to which the specific special use standards specified in
SEC. 15.10-4 are met;
b. The extent to which the general special use standards enumerated in
this Section are met;
c. Recommendations, if any, of conditions deemed reasonably
necessary to meet any or all of such general or specific special use
permit standards.
2. General Standards. Standards applicable to all Special Use include the
following:
a. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures shall be
located and designed in a manner which will maximize automotive
and pedestrian safety and convenience, facilitate traffic flow and
control and provide easy and adequate access in case of fire or other
catastrophe;
b. Off-street parking and loading areas where required or provided,
shall be located and designed in a manner which will maximize the
items referred to in Paragraph (a) above and will minimize any
adverse economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special use on
adjoining or nearby properties;
c. Refuse and service areas, if provided, shall be located and designed
in a manner so as to accomplish the objectives specified in
Paragraphs (a) and (b) above;
d. Utilities provided in connection with the special use shall be
designed and located so as to encourage the efficient and economic
utilization, extension and expansion of the public utility system;
e. Screening and buffering materials shall be sufficient to insure that the
proposed special use will have no greater impact on surrounding land
uses than other uses authorized as a matter of right;
f. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting shall be located and
designed to maximize traffic safety and compatibility and harmony
with adjoining or nearby properties and so as to minimize glare,
noise and adverse economic impact on surrounding properties or
authorized land uses;
g. Required yards and open spaces shall be sufficient to insure that the
proposed special use will have no greater impact on surrounding land
uses than other uses authorized as a matter of right;
SEC. 15.10-5(Cont.2)
h. The site on which the special use is located shall be designed to make
the proposed use generally compatible with adjoining or nearby
properties;
i. The special use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located and of the entire
municipal code, including but not limited to Division 14, except as
such regulations may in each instance be modified by the President
and Town Council pursuant to the recommendations of the Zoning
Board of Appeals or as allowed for a Planned Unit Development.
(Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
3. Hearing on Application. Upon receipt in proper form of an application and
supporting material, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold at least one (1)
administrative public hearing on the application for a Special Use Permit, in
the manner provided in SEC. 15.12-1(C)(3)(b).
4. The President and Town Council must grant or deny any application for a
Special Use Permit after receiving the report of findings and
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals including the
recommended stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees, when
they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.
B. Protest. In case a written protest against any proposed special use permit signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage to be altered; the
owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be
altered; or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across the alley therefrom is filed with the Town Clerk, the Special Use
Permit cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
members of the Town Council.
C. Refiling Period. No application for a Special Use which has been denied wholly or
in part by the President and Town Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one
year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of conditions found to be valid by the President and Town Council.
D. Minor Changes. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of structures may
be authorized by the Building Commissioner, however, no such change may involve
a change in the character of the development, or a substantial increase in the
intensity of use, reduction of parking spaces, or landscaping requirements.
E. Non-Minor Changes. Decisions concerning non-minor changes in the location,
siting and height of structures, any change in the character of the development or a
substantial increase in the intensity of use, reduction of parking spaces, or
landscaping shall be made by the Town Council, after the Zoning Board of Appeals
conducts an additional administrative public hearing and submits a recommendation
SEC. 15.10-5(Cont.3)
on such proposed changes or deviations. In all non-minor changes, the Zoning
Board of Appeals and the Town Council shall apply the standards set forth in this
Division for special uses. (Added by Ord. 3784, 6/20/88)(Amended by Ord. 3972,
4/15/91)(Amended by Ord. No. 4356, 11/20/95)
SEC. 15.11-1
DIVISION 11 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 15.11-1 BONUS PROVISIONS. It is the intent of these bonus provisions to
encourage certain types of development or the creation of specific amenities that are deemed in the
public interest. More specifically, these bonus provisions are intended to encourage developments
which allow for ample public open space, free flow of pedestrian traffic, abundant light and air,
housing for the elderly, and other related elements that protect and promote the health, safety, and
welfare of the community.
SEC. 15.11-2 FLOOR AREA BONUSES. In the C-1, C-2 and B-2 Zoning Districts, the
normal maximum floor area as calculated by the percentages set forth in each district may be
exceeded to the extent provided below, subject to the requirement that no normal maximum floor
area be exceeded by more than fifty (50) percent. The open space in required front yards or side
yard abutting a street shall be excluded in computing the bonuses allowed. Floor area bonuses
apply to any structure located on the same lot as the amenity which gives rise to the bonus.
A. Open Plaza Bonus. Ten (10) square feet of floor area in excess of the normal
maximum floor area may be allowed for each square foot of open plaza. An open
plaza is a non-publicly owned area which is:
1. Not bounded on more than one side by a building or structure.
2. Open from the plaza level to the sky.
3. Open for its entire width and accessible from a public right-of-way.
4. Not less than ten (10) feet in depth, measured perpendicularly to the public
right-of-way from which it is accessible.
5. Not less than forty (40) feet in width, measured parallel to the public rightof-
way from which it is accessible.
6. A publicly usable pedestrian space developed with no less than thirty (30)
percent of its area landscaped in natural plant materials and provided with
street furniture.
B. Inner Arcade Bonus. Six (6) square feet of floor area in excess of the normal
maximum floor area may be allowed for each square foot of inner arcade. An inner
arcade is a non-publicly owned area which is:
1. Entirely within the face of the exterior wall of a building or structure.
2. Not less than twelve (12) feet in height.
3. Accessible to a public sidewalk directly, or through an outer arcade or open
plaza, by an entrance not less than twenty (20) feet in width.
SEC. 15.11-2(Cont.1)
4. Not less than twenty (20) feet in depth, measured perpendicularly to the
public right-of-way from which it is accessible.
5. Not less than twenty (20) feet in width, measured parallel to the public rightof-
way from which it is accessible.
6. Not more than four (4) feet above or below the elevation of the public rightof-
way from which it is accessible.
7. A publicly usable pedestrian space developed with no less than thirty (30)
percent of its area landscaped in natural plant materials and provided with
street furniture.
C. Outer Arcade Bonus. Five (5) square feet of floor area in excess of the normal
maximum floor area may be allowed for each square foot of outer arcade. An outer
arcade is a non-publicly owned area which extend for the entire dimension of a
building measured parallel to a public right-of-way from which it is accessible, and
which is:
1. Entirely open in its long dimension and accessible from a public sidewalk,
open plaza or inner arcade, with the exception of structural columns not
exceeding five (5) percent of the total arcade area.
2. Not less than eight (8) feet in depth, measured perpendicularly to the public
right-of-way or accessible open space from which it is accessible.
3. Not less than ten (10) feet in height.
4. A publicly usable pedestrian space developed with no less than thirty (30)
percent of its area landscaped in natural plant materials and provided with
street furniture.
D. Elderly and Low and Moderate Income Housing Bonus. One (1) square foot of
floor area in excess of the normal maximum floor area may be allowed for each two
(2) square feet of living space designated for occupancy by elderly persons or low
and moderate income families. Eligibility for this bonus provision will be
determined by the project’s qualification for federal or state funding in these
categories.
E. Covered Vehicle Parking Bonus. One (1) square foot of floor area in excess of the
normal maximum floor area may be allowed for each four (4) square feet of covered
vehicle parking. Such covered vehicle parking shall be below grade and enclosed.
SEC. 15.11-3
SEC. 15.11-3 PARKING REQUIREMENT BONUS. In the R-3B, C-1 and B-2 zoning
districts, the parking space requirements for dwelling units may be reduced to one (1) parking space
for each dwelling unit designated for occupancy by elderly persons, when more than eight (80)
percent of the dwelling units in a particular development are designated for occupancy by elderly
persons. Eligibility for this bonus provision will be determined by the project's qualification for
federal or state funding in this category.
SEC. 15.12-l
DIVISION 12 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 15.12-1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
A. Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Building Commissioner or such other person as
designated by the City Manager shall be the Zoning Administrator and shall
administer and enforce this Code. In furtherance of such authority, the Zoning
Administrator may:
1. Interpret, construe and apply the provisions of this Code;
2. Notify in writing any person responsible for violating any of the provisions
of this ordinance, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it;
3. Order discontinuance of uses of land, buildings or structures; order removal
of buildings or structures and alterations or structural changes thereof; order
discontinuance of work being done; or take any other action authorized by
this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions;
4. Issue all building permits, and make and maintain records thereof;
5. Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records thereof;
6. Enforce all ordinances granting Special Use Permits after they have been
approved by the Town Council in accordance with SEC.15.10-5(A)(4) of
this Code;
7. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to determine
compliance with this Code;
8. Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to this Code, including
but not limited to: maps, amendments, plans, special uses, variations,
appeals and applications therefor; and designate on the Zoning Map each
amendment, special use and variation;
9. Provide and maintain public information relative to all matters arising out of
this Code;
10. Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this
Code, and make reports of his recommendations to the Planning
Commission.
SEC. 15.12-1(Cont.1)
B. Special Use Permits. The City Clerk shall issue copies of ordinances granting
Special Use Permits in accordance with Division 10 of this Code.
C. Zoning Board of Appeals.
1. Creation. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Normal, Illinois,
which has been duly created by the President and Town Council, is the
Zoning Board of Appeals referred to in this Code.
2. Jurisdiction.
a. To conduct administrative public hearings, make findings of fact, and
decide duly initiated appeals from any administrative order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Commissioner
of Buildings or his deputies or assistants in the enforcement of this
Code in the manner provided in SEC. 15.12-3 of this Code.
b. To conduct administrative public hearings, make findings of fact and
grant or deny variations in the manner provided in SEC. 15.12-4 of
this Code.
c. To conduct administrative hearings, make findings of fact and
recommend to the Corporate Authority approval or disapproval of
applications for Special Use Permits in the manner provided in
Division 10 of this Code.
d. To recommend to the Corporate Authority amendments to this Code.
3. Meetings, Hearings, Procedures and Rules.
a. Meetings. All meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held
at the call of the Chairman and at such times and places as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. Anything herein to the
contrary notwithstanding, the Zoning Board of Appeals will meet at
5:00 p.m. on the third Thursday of each month for regularly
scheduled meetings at such places as said Board may determine.
b. Administrative Public Hearing.
(1) All administrative public hearings shall be held at regularly
scheduled or properly called meetings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(2) Notices.
SEC. 15.12-1(Cont.2)
(a) Legal notice of an administrative public hearing shall
be given not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days before said hearing by publishing a
notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Town.
(b) Courtesy notices may be given by the mailing of a
notice of hearing to the owners of any land within
400 feet from the parcel on which action is proposed.
(3) Administrative Public Hearing Procedure.
(a) Parties. The applicant, the Town of Normal and the
person filing a written Entry of Appearance is a party
to an administrative public hearing procedure.
(b) Appearance of Others. Any person may appear and
testify at an administrative public hearing, either in
person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney.
(c) Oaths or Affirmation. The Chairman or in his
absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths
or affirmations.
(d) Compelling the Attendance of Witnesses. The
Chairman or in his absence, the Acting Chairman,
may compel the attendance of witnesses by mailing
to such persons a Notice compelling attendance, not
less than five (5) days before the Public Hearing.
Failure of a person to appear in response to such a
Notice shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(4) Record Keeping.
(a) Sound Recording. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall make a sound recording of all administrative
public hearings and shall retain such tape for not less
than one (1) year following the closing of the hearing.
(b) Verbatim Transcripts. In the event that any party
desires a verbatim transcript of the administrative
public hearing, a written request therefore shall be
filed with the Chairman of the Zoning Board of
Appeals not less than three (3) weeks before the
hearing date. Costs of taking such a transcript shall
SEC. 15.12-1(Cont.3)
be shared equally between the requesting party and
the Town. Any party desiring a transcript of the
proceedings shall pay all transcription or copying
costs.
(5) Notification of Decision. Copies of findings of fact and
decisions or recommendations of the Board shall be served
by mailing a copy thereof to all parties other than the Town.
(6) Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this
Code.
D. Planning Commission.
1. Creation. The Planning Commission of the Town of Normal, Illinois, which
has been duly created by the President and Board of Trustees, is the Planning
Commission referred to in this Code.
2. Jurisdiction.
a. To conduct legislative public hearings and submit reports and
recommendations to the Corporate Authority on applications or
proposals to amend the boundaries of the zoning districts created by
this ordinance; that is, zoning district amendments.
b. To conduct legislative public hearings and submit reports and
recommendations to the Corporate Authority on proposed
amendments to the regulations imposed by this Code; that is, zoning
text amendments.
c. To conduct legislative public hearings and recommend approval or
disapproval of Preliminary Plans for subdivisions and, if directed by
the Corporate Authority, to report on Final Subdivision Plats in the
manner provided in Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code of the Town
of Normal, Illinois, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
d. To conduct legislative public hearings and recommend approval or
disapproval of Preliminary Development Plans for Planned Unit
Developments and, if directed by the Corporate Authority, to report
on Final Development Plans in the manner provided in SEC. 15.9-4
of this Code.
e. When required by this Ordinance or the Corporate Authority to
conduct legislative public hearings and recommend approval or
disapproval of site plans as required by provisions of this Code.
SEC. 15.12-1(Cont.4)
f. To recommend to the Corporate Authority amendments to this
Chapter and Chapter 16 of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal, Illinois.
g. To carry out and perform such additional duties as are assigned to
them by the Corporate Authority.
3. Meetings, Hearings, Rules and Procedures.
a. Meetings. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held as
the call of the Chairman and at such times and place as the Planning
Commission may determine. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Planning Commission will meet at 5:00 p.m. on
the first Thursday following the first Monday of each month for
regularly scheduled meetings at such place as the Commission may
from time to time establish. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.
b. Legislative Public Hearings.
(1) All legislative public hearings shall be regularly scheduled or
properly called meetings of the Planning Commission.
(2) Legal Notices.
(a) Legal notices of a legislative public hearing shall be
given not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty
(30) days before said hearing by publishing a notice
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town.
(b) Courtesy notices may be given by the mailing of a
notice of hearing to the owners of any land within
400 feet from the parcel on which action is proposed.
(3) Legislative Public Hearing Procedure.
(a) Appearances. Any person may appear and testify at a
legislative public hearing, either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney.
(b) Oaths. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths.
(c) Compelling the Appearance of Witnesses. The
Chairman or in his absence, the Acting Chairman,
SEC. 15.12-1(Cont.5)
may compel the attendance of witnesses by mailing
to such persons a Notice compelling attendance, not
less than five (5) days before the Public Hearing.
Failure of a person to appear in response to such a
Notice shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(4) Record Keeping. The Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact.
(5) Transmittal of Recommendations to Council. A copy of the
minutes of the Planning Commission meeting and any reports
or recommendations prepared by the Commission shall be
filed with the Town Council prior to final action by the
Corporate Authority on a particular item and shall become
part of the public records of the municipality, provided
however, the failure to file such minutes or report shall not
invalidate any action of or by the Corporate Authority.
(6) Rules and Procedures. The Planning Commission may adopt
its own rules and procedures not in conflict with this Code.
E. Historic Preservation Commission. (See SEC. 15.16)
(Subsection E added 8/20/1990 by Ord. No. 3925)(Amended 5/21/01 by Ord. No. 4723)
SEC. 15.12-2 AMENDMENTS OF REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS.
A. Authority. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and morals,
comfort and general welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the Town
and lessening and avoiding congestion of the public streets and highways, the
President and Town Council may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set
forth, amend the regulations imposed in this Code and the Districts provided hereby,
provided that in all amendments adopted under the authority of this Section, due
allowance shall be made for the existing condition, the conservation of property
values, the direction of building development to the best advantages of the entire
Town and the use to which the property is devoted at the time of the adoption of
such amendments.
B. Initiation of Amendment. Amendments to the districts established hereby may be
proposed by the President and Board of Trustees, property owners or parties to a
valid and enforceable purchase option contract. Amendments to the regulations
imposed hereby, that is, zoning text amendments, may be proposed by the President
and Board of Trustees, by the Town's staff at the direction of the President and
Board of Trustees, or by property owners or parties to a valid and enforceable
purchase or option contract, or lessees of real property within the Town of Normal.
SEC. 15.12-2(Cont.1)
C. Procedure.
1. Application for Amendment. That all requests for zoning amendments other
than those submitted by or at the direction of the Town Council shall
henceforth only be accepted when filed on proper application forms
submitted by the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Normal and upon
payment of the required fee. When such applications are required, the
information requested on them is deemed to be a minimum and applicants
may be requested to supply additional information prior to the hearings on
their requests. Such forms shall be filed in duplicate as prerequisite to the
commencement of any such action on the part of the Town. The Town
Clerk shall, upon receipt of the properly completed applications for zoning
amendments, forward one application to the Planning Commission.
2. Notification and Hearing Procedure. The Planning Commission shall give
notice and hold a legislative public hearing on each request for a zoning
district or zoning text amendment, in the manner provided by SEC. 15.12-
1(D)(3)(b) of this Code.
3. Recommendation by the Planning Commission.
a. Textual Amendments. In making its recommendation, on zoning
textual amendments, the Planning Commission shall be guided by
those purposes for which this Code was adopted and shall endeavor
to accomplish those standards and objectives for which this Code is
designated and intended and shall not recommend the adoption of an
amendment unless it finds that such is in the public interest.
b. District Amendments. In making its recommendation on zoning
district amendments, the Planning Commission shall be guided by
those purposes for which this Code was adopted and in making its
recommendation, may consider the following:
(1) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by
the existing zoning;
(2) The length of time the property has remained vacant as zoned
considered in the context of land development in the area;
(3) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by
the proposed zoning;
(4) The existing land uses of nearby property;
(5) Existing zoning of nearby property;
SEC. 15.12-2(Cont.2)
(6) Relative gain or hardship to the public as contrasted and
compared to the hardship or gain of the individual property
owner resulting from the approval or denial of the zoning
amendment application.
4. Decisions by the President and Board of Trustees.
a. The President and Board of Trustees upon receiving the report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission, as an exercise of the
legislative discretion vested in the Corporate Authority of the Town
of Normal, may grant or deny the requested textual or district
amendment.
b. If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally
by the President and Board of Trustees within three (3) months of the
date upon which such application is received by the President and
Board of Trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied unless
extended by an agreement of the applicant and President and Board
of Trustees reflected in the minutes of the Town Council.
c. In case a written Protest against any proposed zoning district
amendment, signed and acknowledged by owners of 20 percent of
the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of
the frontage directly opposite of the frontage to be altered or by the
owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across
the alley therefrom is filed with the Town Clerk, the amendment
cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds of all
members of the Town Council.
d. No application for a district amendment which has been denied
wholly or in part by the President and Board of Trustees shall be
resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of
denial, except on the grounds of error in the original proceedings or
change of conditions in either case found to be valid by the President
and Board of Trustees.
SEC. 15.12-3 APPEALS.
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the zoning administrator’s
orders, requirements, determinations, interpretations or applications of this Code, but
shall do so only where the zoning administrator has either misinterpreted or
erroneously applied the provisions of this Code or has misunderstood the factual
situation giving rise to the action appealed from.
B. Initiation. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any property
owner, the Board of Trustees, or parties to an enforceable purchase option contract,
SEC. 15.12-3(Cont.1)
aggrieved by an administrative Ordinance by the Building Commissioner.
C. Procedure. An appeal shall be initiated by filing a written statement of the order,
requirements, determination, interpretation or application appealed from and the
factual situation giving rise to such action, in the office of the Town Clerk. Upon
receipt of a completed application, one (1) copy thereof will be forwarded to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Standards in Reviewing an Appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare
findings of fact from the evidence adduced at the administrative public hearing
indicating the extent to which the following items are demonstrated:
1. That the zoning administrator misinterpreted or erroneously applied the
provisions of this Code;
2. That the zoning administrator misunderstood the factual situation giving rise
to the action appealed from.
E. The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the action of the zoning
administrator if either of the foregoing standards is demonstrated. If neither of the
foregoing standards is demonstrated, the appeal shall be denied and the zoning
administrator’s action sustained.
F. The Zoning Board of Appeals in hearing appeals shall not have the authority or
power to change, modify, waive or relax requirements or regulations of this Code.
G. Decisions. All decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals initiated
hereunder shall be final and reviewable only in the courts in accordance with
applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois.
SEC. 15.12-4 VARIATIONS.
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit variations to the bulk, sign,
off-street parking and loading regulations, and Community Design Standards of this
Code and to allow the enlargement and structural alteration of a non-conforming
single-family dwelling or non-conforming two-family dwelling, but shall do so only
when the granting of such a variation would be in harmony with the Code’s general
purpose and intent and may vary them only in specific instances where there would
be practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the bulk, sign, Community Design Standards, and/or off-street parking and
loading regulations of this Code and then only in the manner provided herein.
Except with respect to bulk, sign, Community Design Standards, and off-street
parking and loading requirements (other than parking and loading design,
construction and maintenance standards) the Zoning Board of Appeals, permitting
variations, does not have the authority or power to change, modify, waive or relax
SEC. 15.12-4(Cont.1)
other requirements or regulations of this Code. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No.
4356)(Amended 6/16/2014 by Ord. No. 5548)
B. Initiation. An application for a variation may be made by any person, firm or
corporation, or by any office, department, Board, bureau, or Commission requesting
or intending to request application for a building permit or by the Town Council or
the Town staff at the direction of the Town Council. When an application is made
by someone other than the owner(s) of the subject property, then the owner(s) must
join the application or consent thereto. (Amended 11/20/95 by Ord. No. 4356)
C. Procedure.
1. Application. All requests for variations other than those initiated by or on
behalf of the Town Council shall only be accepted when filed on proper
application forms furnished through the office of the Town Clerk of the
Town of Normal and after payment of the required fee. Where such
applications are required, the information requested is deemed to be a
minimum, and applicants may be required to supply additional information
prior to public hearings on their requests. Such forms shall be filed in
duplicate as a prerequisite to the commencement of any action on the part of
the Town. The Town Clerk shall, at such times as she is in receipt of the
completed application forms, forward a copy thereof to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for action by said Board.
2. Hearing. No variation shall be granted or denied by the Zoning Board of
Appeals except after an administrative public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals, conducted in a manner provided in SEC. 15.12-1(C)(3)(b)
of this Code.
D. Standards. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare findings of fact from the
evidence adduced at the administrative public hearing indicating the extent to which
the following items are demonstrated. The Board may, in its findings of fact,
impose any conditions or restrictions on the granting of the requested variation
which it deems necessary to insure that the preceding standards are met.
If such conditions or restrictions are imposed, the Board shall specify with
particularity as part of the Findings of Fact the specific restrictions or conditions and
the standards to which they pertain. It shall be unlawful for any owner, developer or
person to use property for which a variation has been granted except in strict
accordance with the Board's findings of fact, any condition or restrictions imposed
therein and all other applicable codes and regulations of the Town of Normal.
1. That granting of the variation will be in harmony with the purpose and intent
of this Ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
SEC. 15.12-4(Cont.2)
2. That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to
be used only under the conditions allowed by the bulk, sign, or off-street
parking and loading regulations of the zoning classification of the property in
question.
3. The plight of the owner is due to special circumstances.
If each of the foregoing standards are met, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant
the variation. If they are not, the Board shall deny the variation.
E. Decisions.
1. All decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals on variations shall be final and
reviewable only in the courts in accordance with the applicable statutes of
the State of Illinois, except as follows:
a. Any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning a variation
request in the R-3A, R-3B, R-2, B-1, B-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and
M-2 Zoning Districts shall be considered a provisional decision for a
period of ten (10) days. During the ten-day provisional period any
member of the Normal Town Council may file in writing with the
Town Clerk a stay of decision. Upon receipt of such stay, the Town
Clerk shall forward a notice of stay of decision to the applicant and
the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The provisional
Zoning Board of Appeals decision shall be forwarded to the next
Normal Town Council Meeting and be deemed a recommendation
from the Zoning Board of Appeals on the variation requested. The
Normal Town Council shall conduct a de novo hearing and hear
arguments by the parties. Parties shall include: (1) the applicant; and
(2) any other interested person filing a written entry of appearance.
The Normal Town Council shall in the exercise of its legislative
authority render a final decision on the variation request. The
Normal Town Council shall render its final decision within ninety
(90) days following the notice of stay of decision issued by the Town
Clerk. Such time period may be extended by agreement with the
applicant. The Town Clerk shall mail a copy of the final decision to
all parties of record.
In the event no Town Council Member files a stay of the provisional
award as provided above, the provisional award shall become a final
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals on the eleventh day
following its initial decision.
All final decisions of the Normal Town Council and the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be reviewable only in the courts in
SEC. 15.12-4(Cont.3)
accordance with the applicable statutes and law of the State of
Illinois. (Entire Subsection (1) Amended 4/16/01 by Ord. No. 4721).
2. No application for variation which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted for a period of one (1) year
from the date of said order of denial except on grounds of error in the
original proceedings or change of conditions found to be valid by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
3. Unless otherwise specified by the Board, any order or decision of the Board
authorizing a variation, will expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building
permit within one year from the date of the decision.
SEC. 15.12-5 COMPLAINTS AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
A. Complaints. In case any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in
violation of this Code, any person may file a written complaint with the Zoning
Administrator stating fully the causes and basis thereof. After investigation, the
Zoning Administrator may, if a violation exits, institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to:
1. Prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use;
2. Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land;
3. Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises; or
4. Restrain, correct or abate the violation;
5. Allege a violation of this Code and seek the imposition of the penalties
provided herein;
6. Obtain a search warrant in the manner described in Chapter 38 Illinois
Revised Statutes Section l-3 to verify that violation of the zoning ordinance
does exist.
B. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the investigation or enforcement of
any of the provisions of this Code, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than three hundred ($300.00)
dollars for the first offense and not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180
day period; and further provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of
fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the
SEC. 15.12-5(Cont.1)
Illinois Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. l975, Ch. 110, para 1 et seq.). A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person
shall continue any such violation or permit any such violation to exist after
notification or knowledge of the existence thereof.
(SEC. 15.12-5 Amended 8/20/01 by Ord. No. 4742)
SEC. 15.12-6 SCHEDULE OF FEES. An application for approval of a variation, district
amendment, special use, site plan review or planned unit development or an appeal, other than those
initiated by or at the direction of the Town Council, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
accompanied with payment of the appropriate fee as required by SEC. 25.16-2.
(Amended 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4286)(Amended 5/19/08 by Ord. No. 5197)
SEC. 15.13-1
DIVISION 13 - SIGN REGULATIONS
SEC. 15.13-1 TITLE. This Division shall be known, cited and referred to as: The Town
of Normal Sign Code (hereinafter referred to as "Code").
SEC. 15.13-2 INTENT. The purpose of the regulations set forth in the Town of Normal
Sign Code is to further an overall plan for the enhancement of public safety, consistent
community development, preservation of property values, and the general welfare of the Town
of Normal. The regulations are further intended to: aid in traffic control and safety; preserve
and protect property values; lessen congestion of land and air space; provide against undue
concentrations of signs which distract and endanger traffic safety and traffic flow; establish
reasonable standards for commercial and other advertising through the use of signs in order to
maintain and encourage business activity and area development; avoid uncontrolled proliferation
of signs; recognize the rights of the public in its use of roads, streets and highways; preserve the
wholesome and attractive character of the Town; and to recognize that the general welfare of the
public includes a community plan that provides for a community that shall be beautiful as well as
healthful, spacious as well as clean, and well balanced in its growth and development.
The promotion of the public health and safety is to be accomplished by reducing the
distractive characteristics of signs along public streets and highways, by prohibiting all signs
which interfere with public traffic control devices, and by assuring the establishment of adequate
and sufficient standards for the erection and maintenance of all signs and sign structures.
The promotion of the public comfort and welfare is to be accomplished by reducing the
number of signs in the Town of Normal and by insuring adequate and appropriate spacing of
signs so that confusion is reduced and so that businesses can effectively communicate with the
public. The public comfort and welfare will be furthered by regulating the size, height, location
and general characteristics of permitted signs in order to protect and to enhance the physical
appearance and scenic value of the Town of Normal and the surrounding area, and by regulating
signs located near or visible from public property such as streets, highways, parks, schools,
nursing homes and hospitals where such signs could jeopardize the public's investment in these
facilities.
SEC. 15.13-3 GENERAL PROHIBITION. Any sign not expressly permitted by this
Code is prohibited in the Town of Normal. All signs must comply with all applicable provisions
of the Building, Electrical and Municipal Codes of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 15.13-4 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
A. Rules of Construction.
The language set forth in the text of this Code shall be interpreted in accordance
with the following rules of construction;
1. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense
includes the present;
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.1)
3. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders;
5. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Code, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the Definitions hereof;
and,
6. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is
one-half (1/2) foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken.
B. Definitions. Where a definition is not specifically set forth herein, the term shall
be defined in the Zoning Code.
1. Abandoned Sign. A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any
person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity
conducted or product available on or off the premises where such sign is
displayed.
2. Administrator. The Building Commissioner or his duly appointed
representative
3. Animated Sign. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined
and regulated by this code, include the following types:
Electrically activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical or electro–mechanical input
and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment
of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
a. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of non-illumination. For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing
will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on–
off phases of illumination exceeds 4 seconds.
b. Patterned illusionary movement. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated
movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light
patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
Environmentally activated. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind,
thermal changes or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners,
pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond
to naturally occurring external motivation.
Mechanically activated. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by
electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.2)
4. Architectural Projection. Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building, but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also,
Awning; Back–lit awning; and Canopy, attached and freestanding.
5. Awning. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of
rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that
may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures that are
internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
6. Awning Sign. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also, “Wall” or “Fascia sign.”
7. Back-lit Awning. An awning with a translucent covering material and a
source of illumination contained within its framework.
8. Banner. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
9. Banner Sign. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
10. Billboard. See “Off–premise sign” and “Outdoor advertising sign.”
11. Building Elevation. The entire side of a building, from ground level to the
roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
12. Building Facade. All windows and wall area in one plane or elevation.
13. Canopy (Attached). A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides
and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at
additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may
be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See also,
“Marquee.”
14. Canopy (Freestanding). A multisided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external
sources of light.
15. Canopy Sign. A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy. For reference, see SEC. 15.13-5.
16. Changeable Sign. A sign with the capability of content change by means
of manual or remote input, including signs which are:
Manually activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can
be changed manually.
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.3)
Electrically activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on–off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components
arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the
components, such as characterized by lamps or other light–emitting
devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off
the changeable component display. See also, “Electronic message sign or
center.”
17. Combination Sign. A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly by
a building structure.
18. Copy. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address only.
19. Development Complex Sign. A freestanding sign identifying a multiple–
occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial
park, which is controlled by a single owner or landlord.
20. Directional Sign. Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of
providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
21. Double-faced Sign. A sign with two faces, back to back.
22. Electric Sign. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
23. Electronic Message Sign or Center. An electrically activated changeable
sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
24. Exterior Sign. Any sign placed outside a building.
25. Facade. See “Building facade.”
26. Fascia Sign. See “Wall sign.”
27. Flashing Sign. See “Animated Sign, electrically activated.”
28. Freestanding Sign. A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by
one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. For
visual reference, see SEC. 15.13-5.
29. Frontage (Building). The length of an exterior building wall or structure
of a single premise oriented to the public way or other properties that it
faces.
30. Frontage (Property). The length of the property line(s) of any single
premise along either a street or public right of way.
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.4)
31. High Rise Sign. A sign that exceeds the allowable height as defined in
Figures 1008.1.2 (1-3) of this code.
32. Illuminated Sign. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either
projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off
its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
33. Interior Sign. Any sign placed within a building, but not including
“window signs” as defined by this ordinance. Interior signs, with the
exception of window signs as defined, are not regulated by this section.
34. Low Rise Sign. A sign that meets the height and area requirements of
Table 1008.1.1 and Table 1008.1.2.
35. Mansard. An inclined decorative roof–like projection that is attached to an
exterior building facade.
36. Marquee. See “Canopy (attached).”
37. Marquee Sign. See “Canopy sign.”
38. Menu Board. A freestanding sign oriented to the drive–through lane for a
restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drive–through
window.
39. Monument Sign. A free standing sign that has at least 75% of its sign
display in contact with the ground and a decorative sign base.
40. Multiple-faced Sign. A sign containing three or more faces.
41. Non-conforming Sign. Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this Code and any amendments thereto, and which fails to
conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Code.
42. Off-premise Sign. See “Outdoor advertising sign.”
43. On-premise Sign. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the
use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
44. Outdoor Advertising Sign. A permanent sign erected, maintained or used
in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial
or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold
on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
45. Parapet. The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof.
46. Pole Sign. See “Freestanding sign.”
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.5)
47. Political Sign. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign
shall not be considered to be a political sign.
48. Portable Sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface.
49. Projecting Sign. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects
more than 18 inches (457 mm) from a building face or wall or from a
structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. For
visual reference, see SEC. 15.13-5.
50. Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the property or premises upon which it is located.
51. Revolving Sign. A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See also,
“Animated sign, mechanically activated.”
52. Roof Line. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
53. Roof Sign. A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of
a building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building
and which is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs
mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves and architectural projections
such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs. For
a visual reference example of a roof sign, and a comparison of differences
between roof and fascia signs, see SEC. 15.13-5.
54. Sign. Any device visible from a public place that displays either
commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation
of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations.
55. Sign Area. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face.
The area of any double–sided or “V” shaped sign shall be the area of the
largest single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area
of a circle. The area of all other multiple–sided signs shall be computed as
50 percent of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
56. Sign Copy. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of
numerals identifying a street address only.
57. Sign Face. The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the
sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
See SEC. 15.13-5.
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.6)
a. In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate
upon which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open
space between separate panels or cabinets.
b. In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the
sign face shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed,
except where interrupted by a reveal, border, or a contrasting
surface or color.
c. In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or
graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face
shall comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of
regular geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or
separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the
open space between separate groupings of sign copy on the same
building or structure.
d. In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the
color of the building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the
area within the contrasting background, or within the painted or
illuminated border.
58. Sign Structure. Any structure supporting a sign. The area of the sign
structure shall not exceed two times the sign area.
59. Temporary Sign. A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable
signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not
permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
60. Under Canopy Sign or Under Marquee Sign. A sign attached to the
underside of a canopy or marquee.
61. V Sign. Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected
upon common or separate structures, positioned in a “V” shape with an
interior angle between faces of not more than 90 degrees with the distance
between the sign faces not exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm) at their closest
point.
62. Wall or Fascia Sign. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 18 inches
(457 mm) from the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to
architectural projections from a building provided the copy area of such
signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to
the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed. For
visual reference and comparison examples of differences between wall or
fascia signs and roof signs, see SEC. 15.13-5.
SEC. 15.13-4(Cont.7)
63. Window Sign. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from
adjacent property.
64. Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of
Normal.
65. Zoning Code. Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 15.13-5. GENERAL SIGN TYPES. Sign types and the computation of sign area
shall be as depicted in Figures 15.13-5(A) through 15.13-5(D).
FIGURE 15.13-5(A)
GENERAL SIGN TYPES
SEC. 15.13-5(Cont.1)
FIGURE 15.13-5(B)
COMPARISON—ROOF AND WALL OR FASCIA SIGNS
SEC. 15.13-5(Cont.2)
Notes: Sum of shaded areas only represent sign area. Sign constructed with panels or cabinets.
FIGURE 15.13-5(C)
SIGN AREA—COMPUTATION METHODOLOGY
SEC. 15.13-5(Cont.3)
Notes: Sum of shaded areas only represent sign area for code compliance purposes. Signs consisting of individual letters,
elements or logos placed on building walls or structures.
FIGURE 15.13-5(D) SIGN AREA—COMPUTATION METHODOLOGY
SEC. 15.13-6
SEC. 15.13-6 – GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Conformance To Codes. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the
provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of Chapter 11 of the Municipal
Code Town of Normal and of any other applicable ordinance or regulations of the
Town of Normal.
B. Signs In Public Rights-Of-Way. No sign other than an official traffic sign or
similar sign shall be erected within the right-of-way lines of any street, or within
any public way, unless specifically authorized by other ordinances or regulations
of the Town of Normal or by specific authorization of a Town official.
Such signs may be deemed a hazard to the community and may be removed
immediately by the sign administrator or delegate. These signs may be disposed
of or held at the discretion of the sign administrator for retrieval by the offending
party.
C. Traffic Visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the intersection of
any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, nor at any location
where by its position, shape or color it may interfere with or obstruct the view of
or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
D. Computation Of Frontage. If a premises contains walls facing more than one
property line or encompasses property frontage bounded by more than one street
or other property usages, the allowable sign area for the parcel shall be computed
on the longer of the sides fronting a right of way.
E. Maintenance, Repair And Removal. Every sign permitted by this ordinance shall
be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes insecure, in danger
of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the code official, or if any sign shall
be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions
of this ordinance, the owner thereof or the person or firm using same shall, upon
written notice by the code official forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and
in any case within not more than 10 days, make such sign conform to the
provisions of this ordinance, or shall remove it. If within 10 days the order is not
complied with, the code official shall be permitted to remove or cause such sign
to be removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign.
F. Obsolete Non-Premise Sign Copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or
identifies a use conducted on the property on which said sign is erected must have
the sign copy covered or removed within 30 days after written notification from
the municipal code official; and upon failure to comply with such notice, the code
official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign copy, and any expense
incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or ground on
which the sign is located.
G. Nonconforming Signs. Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this
ordinance that does not conform in use, location, height or size with the
regulations of the zone in which such sign is located, shall be considered a legal
SEC. 15.13-6(Cont.1)
nonconforming use or structure and shall be permitted to continue in such status
until the earlier of such time as it is either abandoned or removed by its owner.
1. A non-conforming sign may not be:
a. Changed to another non-conforming sign;
b. Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign;
c. Expanded;
d. Re-established after its removal for a period of more than thirty
(30) days;
e. Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense
of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of its fair cash value
prior to the time of destruction. (Subsection G Amended 5/21/12
by Ord. No. 5440)
H. Freestanding Sign Design Regulations. All freestanding signs, including but not
limited to On-Premise, High-Rise and Outdoor Advertising Signs (Billboards)
shall be constructed and designed so as not to detract aesthetically, or create an
adverse economic impact upon adjacent or surrounding property.
The following basic design elements shall be considered by the Town prior to the
issuance of a permit to construct, alter or modify any sign located in the Business,
Commercial or Manufacturing districts within the Town of Normal.
1. Structural elements or components of a sign shall be treated or screened to
prevent or reduce the visibility from a public way or an adjacent property.
This shall be accomplished with the use of decorative building materials,
landscape materials including trees, shrubs, bushes or flowers.
2. Where an existing or proposed structure is present sign on a lot, sign
construction shall be similar in design, material and architecture so as to
be harmonious with the building and its surroundings.
3. Lighting associated with a freestanding signs shall provide a plan
indicating beam spread foot-candle levels and shall be installed so as not
spillover or glare to adjacent property or public right-of-way.
I. Sign Location. All freestanding signs, must be located on a lot of record with
frontage on a public road.
SEC.15.13-7 EXEMPT SIGNS. The following signs shall be exempt from the permit
provisions of this chapter. No sign shall be exempt from SEC. 15.13-8. These signs are
permitted in addition to the signs permitted in the respective use districts, but are subject to the
conditions and limitations set forth herein.
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety official.
B. Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal, state or
municipal governments.
SEC. 15.13-7(Cont.1)
C. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address signs that
contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed 6 square feet (0.56 m²) in
area or 6 feet in height.
D. Temporary Political Campaign Signs. Temporary political campaign signs may be
erected and maintained within the boundaries of private property only and shall
not extend over or into the public right-of-way. All such signs shall be removed
within fourteen (14) days following the date of the election to which the signs
pertain.
E. Public Signs. Signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include safety signs,
danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, street name signs and municipal
identification signs, signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest, memorial
plaques, signs and emblems of nationally recognized service club organizations
and all signs erected by an order of a public official in the performance of a public
duty.
F. Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, business
enterprise, educational institution or service organization; such flags to be
appropriately and properly displayed.
G. Integral Signs. Names of buildings, dates of construction, commemorative
tablets, and similar signs, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or
made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction and made an
integral part of the building or structure.
H. Private Traffic Direction Signs and Related Signs. Signs directing traffic
movement onto a premises or within a premise, when such signs are located on
the premises, shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area for each sign and if freestanding,
do not exceed six (6) feet in total height. Such signs are considered to
include parking directions, exit or entrance signs, drive-up window signs and
restroom signs.
I. Real Estate Sale or Rental Sign. An on premise sign advertising for sale, rental,
or lease, all or a portion thereof, the real estate upon which such sign is located.
All such signs must be removed within fourteen (14) days following the sale,
consummation of the lease, or rental of the property to which the sign pertains.
1. In the R-1AA and R-1A and R-1B Single-Family Residence Districts, and
the R-2 Mixed Residential District and the R-3A Medium Density
Multiple-Family Residence District and R-4 Mobile Home Residence
District, either a wall-mounted or free-standing sign is permitted per
dwelling, except in the R-2 Mixed Residential District and R-3A Medium
Density Multiple-Family Residence District and R-3B High Density
Multiple-Family Residence District one (1) wall-mounted or free-standing
sign is permitted for each dwelling unit, provided the dwelling in which
such dwelling unit is located is not licensed by the Town as a Multiple-
Family Dwelling. In any event, a free-standing sign shall not exceed six
(6) feet in height and six (6) square feet in sign area, and a wall-mounted
sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area.
SEC. 15.13-7(Cont.2)
2. In all other Zoning Districts, either a wall-mounted or free-standing sign is
permitted. If free-standing, such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in
height and thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area.
3. Where a property is both for sale and for rent simultaneously, one (1)
advertising the sale and one (1) sign advertising the rental or lease is
permitted in accordance with the foregoing size limitations.
J. Underground Public Utility Warning Signs. Standard types of warning signs
marking the routes of underground public utility pipes, conduits and cables.
K. Issue of General Public Interest Sign. Any sign which depicts an issue of general
public interest and/or personal beliefs and views to same may be erected and
maintained within the boundaries of private property only and shall not exceed
over or into the public right-of-way. Such sign is to be removed within fourteen
(14) days after the public interest in question has transpired or been finalized by
court or other governmental mandate.
SEC. 15.13-8 PROHIBITED SIGNS. The following devices and locations shall be
specifically prohibited:
A. Signs of the size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination
which may be confused with, or construed as a traffic control device, or which
hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal, are prohibited. No sign or
other advertising structure shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such
a manner as to obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device, or which makes use of words “stop”, “look”, “danger”, or
any other word, phrase symbol or character, in such a manner as to interfere with,
or mislead or confuse pedestrians or operators of vehicles upon the thoroughfare.
B. Except as provided for elsewhere in this code, signs encroaching upon or
overhanging public right–of–way. No sign shall be attached to any utility pole,
light standard, street tree or any other public facility located within the public
right–of–way.
C. Animated Signs. No sign shall be permitted which is animated by means of
flashing, scintillating, blinking or traveling lights.
D. Portable electric signs.
E. Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or private
property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
1. The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs.
2. The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of the
vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do
not break the silhouette of the vehicle.
3. The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and
licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used or
SEC. 15.13-8(Cont.1)
available for use in the daily function of the business to which such signs
relate.
F. Vehicles and trailers used primarily as static displays, advertising a product or
service.
G. Balloons, streamers, pinwheels, non-exempt flags or banners except those
temporarily displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or community event.
For the purposes of this subsection, “temporarily” means no more than 84 days in
any calendar year.
H. Abandoned Signs. Any sign which constitutes an abandoned sign for fourteen
(14) consecutive days.
I. Lots of Record. No freestanding sign shall be placed or allowed to remain on
property unless such property is a lot of record with frontage on a public road.
SEC. 15.13-9 PERMITS.
A. Permits Required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained from
the code official for the erection and maintenance of all signs erected or
maintained within this jurisdiction and in accordance with other ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Signs erected or maintained within the B-2 Central Business District
also require a Certificate of Compliance, as provided in Division 17 of this Code.
Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be
construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from responsibility for its
erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in a manner in accordance with all
the other provisions of this ordinance. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
B. Construction Documents. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign
or sign structure requiring such permit, construction documents shall be filed with
the code official showing the dimensions, materials and required details of
construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other pertinent data.
The permit application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner
or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected. Any sign greater
than 100 square feet in area or greater than 15 feet in height shall require
construction documents sealed by a structural engineer.
C. Changes To Signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or relocated
except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until a proper permit, if
required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of moveable parts or
components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the
changing of copy, business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display and/or
graphic matter, or the content of any sign shall not be deemed a structural
alteration. Changes to copy, sign faces, or content do require a permit as required
in the permit fee schedule.
D. Permit Fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted within this jurisdiction as set forth in Division 16 of
Chapter 25. (Amended 2/16/09 by Ord. No. 5236)
SEC. 15.13-9(Cont.1)
E. Duration of Permit. Every sign permit issued by the Administrator shall become
null and void if manufacture is not commenced within one hundred twenty (120)
days from the date of such permit. If work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for one hundred twenty (120) days any time after the
work is commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so and the fee shall
be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work provided that no
changes have been made in the original plans. Such permit may not be
unreasonably withheld, providing that proper application and payment of permit
fees is complied with.
F. Issuance. The Administrator shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration or
relocation of a sign within the Town when an application therefore has been
properly made and the sign described therein complied with all appropriate laws
and regulations of the Town.
G. Effect of Issuance. No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to
constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any
permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful
sign.
SEC. 15.13-10 SPECIFIC SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
A. Sign Area Allowed Per Lot. Every building site may display signage up to the
maximum allowed in Table 1008.1.1(1) The allowable signage is contingent
upon the style of signs selected for the site and the linear lot frontage. Sign
requirements in the B-2 Central Business District are set forth in Division 17 of
this Code.
TABLE 1008.1.1(1)
Sign Square Footage Allowed per Linear Foot of Longest Lot Frontage
ZONING CLASS
SITE SIGNAGE
Wall Signs and/or Freestanding
Low Rise Signs
SITE SIGNAGE
Wall Signs and/or Freestanding Signs
not Classified as Low Rise
A, R1, R-2, R-4 0 a 0 a
R3A, R3B 0 b 0 b
S1
S2
S3
0 c
2 d
Historic Preservation Review e
0 c
NA
Historic Preservation Review e
C1
C2
2.25 f 1.5
C3
B1
M1, M2
3 f
2
Table 1008.1.1 (1) – The allowable sign area for a lot is 50% higher if all freestanding signs
on the lot are “Low Rise” as defined in footnote f . The increase in sign area does not
increase the maximum freestanding sign size permitted by Figures 1008.1.2(1-3)
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.1)
a The square footage in these districts is not determined by lot frontage, the maximum sign square footage is
two (2) square feet.
b The signage square footage in these districts is not determined by lot frontage. The maximum sign square
footage is forty (40) and the maximum height for a sign is six (6) feet.
c S1 University District is regulated by Illinois State University and not subject to the Town’s sign
regulations
d S2 Public Lands and Institutions shall be permitted to install one monument sign for each public street
frontage and the maximum sign heights and area shall be sized in accordance with the following:
Lot Frontage 200’ or less 6’-0” in height and 75 sq/ft in area
Lot Frontage over 200’ and less than 500’ 10’-0” in height and 150 sq/ft in area
Lot Frontage over 500’ 12’-0” in height 200 sq/ft in area
e S3 Historic District signs are subject to review and approval by the Normal Historic Preservation Commission.
f The minimum sign package area allowed in C3, M1, M2, and B1 is 50 square feet regardless of the lot frontage.
Sign height is measured from grade to the top of the sign. The width of a Low Rise sign shall be not more than
twice the allowable height. The maximum height for a sign to qualify for additional sign area in the B-1, C and M
districts are as listed:
Lot Frontage 100’ or less: 8’-0” or less in height
Lot Frontage over 100’ and less than 200’ 10’-0” or less in height
Lot Frontage over 200’ 12’-0” or less in height
Lot Frontage over 200’ in C3 and M2 15’-0” or less in height.
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m² For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
B. Freestanding Signs. Sign Display Restrictions. In addition to any allowable wall
signs, every single–family residential subdivision, multifamily residential
complex, commercial or industrial building, and every separate nonresidential
building in a residential zone shall be permitted to display freestanding or
combination signs per street frontage subject to the limiting standards set forth in
Table 1008.1.2. Every sign displayed on a site is subject to the restrictions in
Table 1008.1.2
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.2)
Table 1008.1.2 Sign Display Restrictions
a Sign is to be affixed to dwelling door or wall adjacent thereto.
b Sign is to be located 12 feet back from the property line or one-half the front yard depth whichever is
less.
c Sign is to be located 12 feet back from the property line or one-half the front yard depth whichever is
less.
d S2 – If building mounted, these signs shall be mounted flush against the wall and shall not project above
the roof line or front facade of the building.
e S3 – No sign shall be erected in the S-3 Historical District without the approval of the Normal Historical
Commission. The underlying zoning district bulk requirements regarding maximum sign area and sign
height must be met.
f C1, C2, C3, B1, M1, M2 – One free standing sign is permitted for each lot frontage on a street or right
of way so long as a minimum distance of 100 feet is maintained between the freestanding signs on said
lot.
ZONING DISTRICT
TYPE OF
SIGN
NUMBER OF
SIGNS
MAX SIGN HEIGHT
MAX SIGN
AREA
A, R1, R2, and R4 Wall Only 1 6a 2a
Special Use R-1 All other signs 1 of each type Wall Height 50b
Freestanding 1 of each type 6b 50b
R3A, R3B All other signs 1 of each type Wall Height 40c
Freestanding 1 of each type 6c 40 Monument
S1 - - - -
S2
All other signs No Limit
1 per public
street frontage
Wall Height d 50 d
Freestanding Per Table 1008.1.1(1) Per Table
1008.1.1(1)
S3
All other signs
By Review e
By Review e
By Review e Freestanding
C1
C2
All other signs No Limit Figure
1008.1.2.(1-3)
Figure
Freestanding 1 per frontage f 1008.1.2.(1-3)
C3,
B1,
M1, M2
All other signs No Limit Figure
1008.1.2.(1-3)
Figure
Freestanding 1 per frontage f 1008.1.2.(1-3)
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.3)
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/hr.
FIGURE 1008.1.2(1)
PERMITTED HEIGHT AND AREA FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS IN ZONING
DISTRICTS B1, C1, C2, C3, M1, AND M2 WHERE
VEHICULAR SPEED SUBJECT TO POSTED LIMITS IS
35 MILES PER HOUR AND UNDER.
Lot Frontage Maximum Allowable Maximum Sign Area
On a Public Street Freestanding Sign Height Pending Lot Frontage
0’ up to 150’-0” 15’-0” 150 sq/ft
150’-0” and over 20’-0” 200 sq/ft.
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.4)
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/hr.
FIGURE 1008.1.2(2)
PERMITTED HEIGHT AND AREA FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS IN ZONING DISTRICTS
B1, C1, C2, C3, M1, AND M2 WHERE
VEHICULAR SPEED SUBJECT TO POSTED LIMITS IS
OVER 35 MILES PER HOUR AND UNDER 55 MILES PER HOUR.
Lot Frontage Maximum Allowable Maximum Sign Area
On a Public Street Freestanding Sign Height Pending Lot Frontage
0’ to 87’-6” 15’-0” 150 sq/ft.
87’-6” to 150’-0” 20’-0” 225 sq/ft
150’-0” and over 30’-0” 300 sq/ft
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.5)
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/hr.
FIGURE 1008.1.2(3)
PERMITTED HEIGHT AND AREA FOR SIGNS IN ZONING DISTRICTS B1, C1, C2, C3,
M1, AND M2 WHERE VEHICULAR SPEED SUBJECT TO POSTED LIMITS IS
55 MILES PER HOUR AND ABOVE.
Lot Frontage Maximum Allowable Maximum Sign Area
On a Public Street Freestanding Sign Height Pending Lot Frontage
0’ to 22’-6” 15’-0” 120 sq/ft
22’-6” to 75’-0” 25’-0” 225 sq/ft
75’-0” to 127’-6” 35’-0” 330 sq/ft
127’-6” and over 50’-0” 450 sq/ft
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.6)
C. Requirements for Specific Sign Types.
1. Canopy and Marquee Signs.
a. The permanently affixed copy area of canopy or marquee signs
shall not exceed an area equal to 25 percent of the face area of the
canopy, marquee or architectural projection upon which such sign
is affixed or applied.
b. Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a building,
canopy, marquee or architectural projection shall not be included
in the computation of sign copy area.
2. Awning Signs.
a. The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area equal to 25
percent of the background area of the awning or awning surface to
which such a sign is affixed or applied, or the permitted area for
wall or fascia signs, whichever is less.
b. Neither the background color of an awning, nor any graphic
treatment or embellishment thereto such as striping, patterns or
valances, shall be included in the computation of sign copy area.
3. Projecting Signs.
a. Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding signage
on any street frontage limited to one sign per occupancy along any
street frontage with public entrance to such occupancy, and shall
be limited in height and area as set forth in Section 1008.
b. No such sign shall extend vertically above the highest point of the
building upon which it is mounted.
c. Except in the B-2 Central Business District, such signs shall not
extend over a public sidewalk or right-of-way.
4. Under Canopy Signs. Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance
above any sidewalk or pedestrian way a minimum of eight (8) feet.
5. Roof Signs.
a. Roof signs shall be permitted only in B-1, C, and M Zoning
districts.
b. Such signs shall be limited to a height above the ground and a sign
area no more than the height and area provided in Figure 1008.1.2
(1-3) for freestanding signs.
c. The sign area for roof signs shall be assessed against the aggregate
permitted area for wall signs on the elevation of the building most
closely parallel to the face of the sign.
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.7)
6. Menu Boards.
For a business that utilizes a drive-up service, a maximum of two (2)
freestanding menu or communication boards shall be permitted for a
single-lane drive through, and not more than four (4) for a dual-lane drive
through. Each such board shall not exceed 8’ in height. The main menu
board shall not exceed 75 square feet in area, and a pre-order board may
not exceed 50 square feet in area. These boards are exempt from the sign
bulk requirements.
7. Outdoor Advertising Signs.
a. The maximum sign height and area shall be determined by the
specific zoning district and the posted street mph. These are
determined by Tables 1008.1.1 and 1008.1.2, Figures 1008.1.2(1),
1008.1.2(2) and 1008.1.2(3)
b. Freestanding signs shall a minimum of 1000’ from any other freestanding
off-premise sign located on the same side of a two-way
street, and 500’ from any other free-standing off-premise sign on
the opposite side a two-way street. The setback shall be measured
from a perpendicular line across the street from the existing
freestanding sign.
c. Freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 1000’ from any other
freestanding off-premise sign located on either side of a one-way
street. The setback shall be measured from a perpendicular line
across the street from the existing freestanding sign.
d. Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 200’ from any
residential zoning district.
e. Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 100’ from any
other free-standing on-premise sign located on a lot.
f. Freestanding signs may be located within the B-1, Commercial and
Manufacturing zoning districts, however signs shall count toward
the allowed number of free-standing signs for a site, and not be
allowed as additional signs.
g. Trim. Freestanding signs shall be constructed with a trim not to
exceed two inches in width.
h. Backs. Freestanding signs with backs visible from a public right of
way shall be improved with decorative panels to cover the
structural support of the sign area.
8. Temporary Signs. A permit is required for all temporary signs. The
square footage for temporary signs shall be determined as follows:
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.8)
a. Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street front.
b. Such signs may be displayed for not more than 84 days in any
calendar year. The signs shall be erected no more than 5 days prior
to the event or grand opening, and shall be removed not more than
1 day after the event or grand opening.
c. The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 1.5 square feet area
for each linear foot of lot frontage square feet in any business,
commercial or industrial district.
d. Residential properties shall be limited to 100 square feet of
signage.
e. Permit fees shall be assessed based on the schedule in SEC. 15.13-
9(D)
9. Development and Construction Signs. Signs temporarily erected during
construction to inform the public of the developer, contractors, architects,
engineers, the nature of the project or anticipated completion dates, shall be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
a. Such signs on a single residential lot shall be limited to one sign,
not greater than six (6) feet in height and six (6) square feet in area.
b. Such signs for a residential subdivision or multiple residential lots
shall be limited to one sign, at each entrance to the subdivision or
on one of the lots to be built upon, and shall be no greater than 10
feet in height and 32 square feet in area.
c. Such signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be
limited to one sign, and shall be no greater than 10 feet in height
and 32 square feet in area.
d. Such signs for commercial or industrial projects shall be limited to
one sign per street front, not to exceed ten (10) feet in height and
thirty-two (32) square feet for projects on parcels 5 acres (20 235
m²) or less in size, and not to exceed ten (10) feet in height and one
hundred (100) square feet for projects on parcels larger than 5
acres (20 235 m²).
e. Development and construction signs may not be displayed until
after the issuance of construction permits by the building official,
and must be removed not later than 24 hours following issuance of
an occupancy permit for all or any portion of the project.
10. Highrise Sign Corridor. Freestanding signs located within the “Highrise
Sign Corridor” as defined may be seventy-five (75) feet in height and up
to four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area. Figures 1008.1.2(1-3) shall
determine the actual allowable sign area. The corridor is as defined:
SEC. 15.13-10(Cont.9)
a. 800’ from each edge of Interstate 55 right of way as shown in
Appendix A.
b. 800’ from each edge of Interstate 39 north of Interstate 55 as
shown in Appendix A.
c. 660’ of the 800’ is controlled by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, in the event of code conflict the more restrictive
provisions will apply.
d. 250’ from each edge of Main St. right of way south of Interstate 55
south to Raab Rd.
e. Lots have frontage on Main St. south of Raab Rd. to the end of the
B-1 General Business Zoning District as shown in Appendix A
(Approximately 600’)
(Entire Division 10 of SEC. 15.13 Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)(Entire Division
10 of SEC. 15.13 Amended 5/21/12 by Ord. No. 5440)

SEC. 15.13-11
SEC. 15.13-11 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
A. Compliance with Building Code. All signs shall comply with the appropriate
detailed provisions of the Building Code as currently adopted by the Town, relating
to design, structural members and connections. Any sign exceeding 100 square feet
in area or, 15’-0” in overall height shall be supplied with constructions documents
sealed by a licensed Illinois Structural Engineer. Signs shall also comply with the
provisions of the Town of Normal Electrical Code and the additional construction
standards hereinafter set forth in this Section.
B. Freestanding Signs & Materials. All freestanding sign structures or poles shall be
self-supporting structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete
foundations. Such structures or poles shall be fabricated only from painted steel or
such other materials as permitted by the Building Code as adopted by the Town.
C. Strength of Parapet Wall. A parapet wall must have sufficient strength to support
any sign which is attached hereto.
D. Supports and Braces. Metal supports or braces shall be adequate for wind loadings.
Wire or cable supports shall have a safety factor of four (4). All metal, wire cable
supports and braces and all bolts used to attach sign to bracket or brackets and signs
to the supporting building or structure shall be galvanized or an equivalent material.
E. Wind Loads. All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the
provisions for materials, loads, stresses of Articles 7 and 8, and the requirements of
the Building Code as currently adopted by the Town. The effect of special local
wind pressures shall be thoroughly considered in the design, but in no case shall the
wind load be assumed less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net exposed
area for roof signs.
F. Sign Anchoring. Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that
would cause wear on supporting members or connectors.
G. Maintenance and Repair. Every sign, including but not limited to those for which a
permit is required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural
material condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts, painting,
repainting, cleaning, and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign.
H. Electrical Requirements.
1. All illuminated signs shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance
with the National Electrical Code. All illuminated elements of any sign shall
always be maintained in satisfactory working condition, and shall be
immediately repaired or replaced as needed. Signs that are only partially
illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that portion directly
illuminated. Electrical wiring for illuminated signs shall be installed by an
electrical contractor licensed (or registered) with the Town of Normal. Sign
contractors shall be permitted to make electrical connections from
illuminated signs to approved electrical wiring located within six (6) feet of
signs or sign structures, provided that such connections are made in
accordance with the National Electric Code.
SEC. 15.13-11(Cont.1)
2. When a sign is illuminated either from an external source or by an internal
source of light, direct rays of light shall not beam to or reflect upon any part
of an existing residential building, nor into a residence zoned district, nor
into a public street. A sign that is in the direct line of vision of any motorist
with a traffic signal light shall not have read, green yellow, or amber
illumination when such illumination is likely to be confused with such
signal.
3. All gas discharge tubing systems (neon) shall be Underwriters’ Laboratory
(UL) listed or an approved equal. Systems shall be designed and installed
per Article 600 of the National Electrical Code. Complete system drawing
are to include but are not limited to the following: complete tubing design
layout and wiring circuits, transformer size(s) and secondary voltage(s).
Maximum open circuit voltage shall be 7,500 volts to ground. Transformers
above 7,500 volts shall be of balanced design and mid-point wired and
enclosed in metallic raceways. All secondary components shall be rated for
the circuit voltage and listed on the submitted data. All wiring and electrical
terminations shall be protected from physical contact if less than eight (8)
feet above finished floor.
4. Any sign contractor who installs, services, or constructs signs requiring or
using electricity shall be registered with the Town of Normal. Sign
contractors will register annually with the Building Commissioner or his
representative at a charge of $50 per calendar year.
(SEC. 15.13-11 Amended 5/21/12 by Ord. No. 5440)
SEC. 15.13-12 VIOLATIONS.
A. In any instance where signs have been abandoned and/or where the specific event
(such as, the sale of real estate, the official determination of a political election,
the expiration of a holiday has transpired and the sign or signs in question have
not been removed per the requirements established in this Code, the Administrator
upon five (5) days’ prior written notice to the party maintaining the sign in
violation of this Code, may enter the property to remove the sign or signs in
violation thereof. Any part aggrieved by such notice from the Administrator may
resort to SEC. 15.12-3 of this Code for administrative relief.
B. Whenever it shall appear to the Administrator, other than in the instances above
set forth in the preceding paragraph, that any sign has been constructed, erected,
or is being maintained in violation of the Code provisions of the Town, such
Administrator shall issue a notice in writing to the owner or lessee of the sign or
to the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located. Such notice
in writing shall inform the recipient(s) of the violation(s) depicted and shall direct
said party to make such alteration, repair, or removal as is necessary to secure
compliance with the Code of the Town. Fourteen (14) days from the date of the
notice shall be deemed reasonable time, except in instances of mechanical or
structural repair. Upon failure of the notice to comply with terms of the
violation(s) so noticed within said time period, the Administrator is authorized to
remove, alter, or appropriately repair the sign(s) in question for the benefit of the
SEC. 15.13-12(Cont.1)
health, welfare, and safety of the general public. All expenses incident thereto
shall be charged to said notice and subject to collection by court action by the
Town.
C. Except as otherwise provided, the Administrator may remove or cause to be
removed immediately any sign(s) without service of the appropriate notice if in
the Administrator’s opinion the condition of the sign(s) is such as to present an
immediate threat to the safety of the general public.
D. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the enforcement official relative to the
provisions of this Code may within five (5) days of receipt of such decision
appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in SEC. 15.12-3
of the Zoning Code. For purposes of this Section, receipt of an administrator’s
decision shall be presumed on the fourth (4th) day after mailing.
SEC. 15.13-13 VARIATIONS. Variations as described hereinafter may be permitted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in appropriate cases, subject to the legislative intent specified in
SEC. 15.13-2 of this Division, and standards established by SEC. 15.12-4 of the Zoning Code.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority to grant variations from the maximum height,
maximum area and minimum setback requirements of this Division.
SEC. 15.13-14 PENALTIES. The penalties of the Zoning Code are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof.
SEC. 15.13-15 SEVERABILITY. If any part, provision, portion, article, section or
subdivision of this Sign Code or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding does not affect
other provisions or applications of this Sign Code which can be given effect without the invalid
application or provision, and the provisions of this Sign Code are severable unless otherwise
provided.
SEC. 15.13-16 PRESERVATION OF PENDING CLAIMS. The adoption of this new
Division Thirteen shall not affect, abrogate or abridge any action now pending or any action that
could be brought within the time provided by law for violation of Division Thirteen as the same
existed prior to adoption of this new division.
(Entire Division 13 of Chapter 15 Revised 12/17/2001 by Ord. No. 4761)
SEC. 15.14-1
DIVISION 14 - COMMUNITY DESIGN STANDARDS
SEC. 15.14-1 PREAMBLE. It is the general purpose and intent of this Code to foster
the use and development of land in an orderly manner by both private and public interests with
special consideration given to the appearance of the community as a result of such development.
It is recognized that the appearance of property has a direct bearing on the economic value of
such property and also the economic value of adjacent and surrounding property. The
appearance of a single property affects not only surrounding property, but the cumulative affect
is to enhance or diminish the beauty of the entire Town, and consequently the values of property
within the Town.
It is further recognized that the appearance of property not only has economic effects but
also affects the general welfare, health, and safety of Town citizens. An aesthetically pleasing
environment is a clean, healthy, and safe environment.
This Division provides a procedure by which development of property within the Town
may be reviewed and modified in order to enhance the aesthetic beauty of the Town, and
consequently, the economic value of property and general welfare of the citizens. Specific
purposes of this Division include the following:
A. To provide for the orderly and functional arrangement of land uses and buildings.
B. To establish standards for the orderly development or redevelopment within the
Town of Normal.
C. To permit public involvement in the planning of private land uses which have the
potential for significant impact on the use and enjoyment of surrounding property
or on the public resources and facilities of the Community.
D. To conserve and protect the taxable value of land and buildings in the Town of
Normal.
E. To protect the air, water and land resources within Normal from the hazards of
pollution and misuse.
F. To protect land and buildings from natural hazards including flooding, erosion
and fire.
G. To preserve, protect and encourage the development of buildings, groups of
buildings and development sites of distinguished architectural character and
appearance.
H. To avoid the deterioration of the health, sanitation, safety, and public welfare
brought about by poor planning and by indiscriminate and unregulated
construction of inferior and unsuitable buildings.
SEC. 15.14-2
SEC. 15.14-2 APPLICATION.
A. This Division shall apply to all new development in the following Zoning
Districts, which development requires the issuance of a permit by the Town of
Normal. The application of this Division to sites developed prior to 12/1/03 is
explained in SEC. 15.14-2(B) below. Development does not include interior
building repairs or modifications. No permit shall be issued except upon
approval of the development plan in conformance with the procedures and
standards set forth in this Division. Maintenance standards in this Division apply
to all development approved pursuant to this Division. Zoning Districts which are
subject to this Division are as follows:
1. R-1AA – Single Family Residence District
2. R-1A – Single Family Residence District
3. R-1B – Single Family Residence District
4. R-2 Mixed Residence District
5. R-3A – Medium Density Multiple Family Residence District
6. R-3B – High Density Multiple Family Residence District
7. C-1 – Office District
8. C-2 – Neighborhood Shopping District
9. C-3 – Community/Regional Shopping District
10. B-1 – General Business District
11. M-1 – Restricted Manufacturing District
12. M-2 – General Manufacturing District
13. S-2 – Public Lands and Institutions District
B. Exceptions.
1. In the R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B and R-2 Districts, this Division only applies to
the development that involves a Special Use Permit or a Planned Unit
Development.
2. Hard surfaces dedicated to equipment, product, or merchandise storage are
exempt from the parking lot interior landscaping requirements set forth in
SEC. 15-14-7(G).
3. The M-2 district is excluded from the Building Design Standards
established in SEC. 15.14-7(A).
4. The M-1 district is excluded from the following Building Design
Standard: SEC. 15.14-7(A)(6)(d) – Rooflines.
5. Sites developed prior to 12/1/03 must come into compliance with the
landscaping provisions of this Division to the extent that the site is altered.
In order to establish the number of plantings required, the site perimeter
adjacent to the site alterations will be measured. The baseline tree and
shrub requirements set forth in SEC. 15.14-7(D) shall be calculated based
SEC. 15.14-2(Cont.1)
on that perimeter. The plantings required will then be installed on the site
where plantings are deficient, including along public right-of-way, in areas
that screen parking, and within the parking lot. If a parking lot is being
resurfaced as part of the project, it must come into compliance with the
interior parking lot landscaping standards of this Division.
Adding or replacing signs shall not trigger compliance with the entire
Division. However, new freestanding signs must be landscaped around
the base.
(Entire SEC. 15.14-2 Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)(SEC. 15.14-2 Amended
9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
SEC. 15.14-3 COMMUNITY DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
A. Creation. The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint a Community Design
Review Committee composed of Town staff. The number and term of employees
serving on the Community Design Review Committee shall be at the City
Manager’s discretion. However, the Zoning Administrator and Town Planner
shall serve on the Committee.
B. Authority. The Community Design Review Committee shall establish its own
rules of order and shall have authority to review proposed development plans as
provided in this ordinance.
C. Waiver. The Community Design Review Committee may waive any of the
standards and submittal requirements of this Division where such standards and
submittals are not necessary to review a proposed development.
SEC. 15.14-4 DEFINITIONS.
Accent. An area covering no more than 25% of a building’s surface area visible to the
public.
Appearance. The outward aspect visible to the public.
Appurtenances. The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings.
Architectural Character. The composite or aggregate of the characteristics of structure,
form, materials, and function of a building, group of buildings, or other architectural
composition.
Architectural Concept. The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or
structures, including the site and landscape development, which produces the
architectural character.
Architectural Feature. A prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure,
or site.
SEC. 15.14-4(Cont.1)
Architectural Style. The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular
historic period.
Berm. A raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character.
A berm must have earthen sides and a crest area of no less than four feet in width. The
slope of the berm may not exceed one foot of vertical rise per three feet in horizontal
distance. Berms must be at least three and one-half feet high. Organic topsoil must cover
the entire berm in a way that facilitates plant growth.
Bright or Brilliant Colors. Highly saturated chroma as defined in the Munsell System of
Color Notation.
Cohesiveness. Unity of composition between design elements of a building, or a group
of buildings, and the landscape development.
Compatibility. Harmony in the appearance of two or more buildings, structures, and
landscape developments in the same vicinity.
Conservation. The protection and care which prevent destruction or deterioration of
historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings, or natural resources.
Cutoff Luminaire. The candela at 90 degrees above nadir is less than 5% of rated
lumens, and less than 20% of rated lumens at 80 degrees above nadir.
Decorative Screen. A wall or fence intended to partially or entirely cut off visibility to
the area behind it.
Development. Both the act of changing and the state of a tract of land after its function
has been purposefully changed by man, including, but not limited to, construction,
exterior improvement or exterior alteration of structures on the land and alterations to the
land.
Exterior Building Component. An essential and visible part of the exterior of a building.
Flood or Spotlight. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to
concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
Footcandle. See Lumen.
Full Cutoff Light Fixture. Fixtures, as installed, that are designed or shielded in such a
manner that all light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp(s) or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the
lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
Glare. The sensation produced by luminances within the visual field that are sufficiently
greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, which causes annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
SEC. 15.14-4(Cont.2)
Height of Luminaire. The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the
ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting
part of the luminaire.
Indirect Light. Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces.
Lamp. The part of the luminaire that produces the actual light.
Landscape. Elements of nature, topography, buildings, and other man-made objects
combined in relation to one another, including but not limited to trees, shrubs, vines,
ground cover, flowers, grass, rock, stone, architectural or structural features such as
fountains, reflecting pools, artwork, screens, fences, and benches so long as such nonvegetative
components compose no more than 25 percent of required landscaping.
Landscape Professional. One who is employed in the business of landscape sales,
installation, or design and who is an Illinois Certified Nurseryman or equivalent
designation.
Light Pollution. Any adverse effect of manmade lighting, including, but not limited to,
uplighting and sky glow, both of which diminish the ability to view the night sky, and
light trespass.
Light Trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of
the property on which it is located.
Lighting Fixture. The entire assembly that houses the lamp or lamps.
Lumen. A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For the
purposes of this ordinance, the lumen output values shall be the initial lumen output
ratings of a lamp.
Luminaire. A complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
Mechanical Equipment. Equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to
water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and similar purposes.
Miscellaneous Structures. Structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways.
Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters,
fences and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities.
Ornamental Grass. An annual or perennial grass plant valued for its texture and color in
the landscape.
Outdoor Lighting. Night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made
device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
SEC. 15.14-4(Cont.3)
Plant Materials. Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials, annuals, and
bulbs.
Proportion. Relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each
other and to the whole.
Rules of Procedure. Regulations adopted by the Community Design Review Committee
for the administration of duties delegated by the legislative authority.
Screening. Structure or planting which conceals from view from public ways the areas
behind such structure or planting.
Shrub. A multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
Significant Tree. Any deciduous, shade-variety tree or any evergreen tree with at least a
12-inch diameter as per standard Diameter Breast Height. Trees listed in SEC. 8.7-4(A)
of the Code are not significant trees, regardless of size. (Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No.
5349)
Site Break. A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual
interest in a site development.
Street Hardware. Objects other than buildings, structures, and plantings located in
streets and public ways and outside of buildings. Examples are: lamp posts, utility poles,
traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire
hydrants.
Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of
natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving, planting, street
hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
Uplighting. Lighting that is directed in such a manner as to shine light rays above the
horizontal plane of the luminaire.
Utilitarian Structure. A structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical
services to a building or development.
Utility Hardware. Devices such as poles, cross-arms, transformers and vaults, gas
pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas,
oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a project.
Utility Service. Any device including wire, pipe, and conduit which carries gas, water,
electricity, oil, and communications into a building or development.
SEC. 15.14-5
SEC. 15.14-5 PROCEDURE.
A. Submission. Any person desiring to develop property in a zoning district subject
to this Division, shall file two (2) copies of a development plan with the Town
Clerk in the form specified. The Development Plan shall be prepared by a
professional engineer and/or architect and shall contain the name and seal of such
professional engineer and/or architect. The Development Plan shall be drawn to
scale. Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information in the form
required shall be sufficient grounds for the Community Design Review
Committee to refuse to accept the filing or reject the application at any stage in
the review and approval process and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of
this Code. The development plan shall at a minimum consist of the following:
(Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
1. A completed Application for Community Design Review.
2. Legal Description, and the Parcel Identification Number for the all of the
property included in the development plan.
3. Name, address and phone number of the owner or owners of record of all
property described in the Development Plan; name, address and phone
number of the developer of the property described in the Development
Plan; name, address and phone number of the registered professional
engineer and/or architect preparing any part of the Development Plan or
supporting material; name, address and phone number of attorneys
representing the owners and/or developers.
4. Existing Conditions. Survey maps and drawings indicating existing
conditions prepared by a Registered Illinois Land Surveyor or Licensed
Professional Engineer showing the boundary lines, the location and
perimeter of any area designated as its Special Flood Hazard Area as
defined in Chapter 28 of the Municipal Code. Specific identification,
location and dimensions, if applicable, of the following located within or
within fifty (50) feet of the area included in the Development Plan: rightsof-
way, lots of record, streets, roadways, driveways, curb cuts, drainage
ways improved or unimproved, trees (sizes, species and location),
walkways, sidewalks, parking areas, light poles, light fixtures, public
easements, private easements, railroad rights-of-way, section lines,
corporate limit lines, public parks, schools and other public lands,
buildings and structures to remain on the property and buildings and
structures to be removed.
5. Proposed Development. Surveys, maps, plans and drawings of proposed
development. A Registered Land Surveyor or Registered Professional
Engineer, or Licensed Architect shall prepare graphic presentations of the
following: rights-of-way, interior and exterior streets, interior and exterior
roadways, street and roadway names, alleys, walkways, sidewalks, public
SEC. 15.14-5(Cont.1)
easements, private easements, lots, outlots, setback lines, public parks or
areas to be designated as common public space, other areas proposed for
dedication or reservation to the public, railroad crossings and rights-ofway,
bridges, size, location, type of construction and proposed use of all
proposed buildings and structures, location and composition of all
landscaping material and screening material, general parking plan and
direction of traffic flow, location and dimension of curb cuts, sign plan
(see SEC. 15.13 for the sign code provisions), lighting plan (see SEC.
15.14-7(G) for lighting plan requirements), preliminary drainage plan,
detailed elevation drawings of all sides of the proposed construction or
renovation and a list of building materials and color samples for the
building exterior, and for all freestanding and building signs. A
Landscape Professional shall prepare, or certify a landscape plan for the
site. See SEC. 15.14-7(I) for landscape plan requirements.
B. The Community Design Review Committee shall have authority to waive
submittal of any of the previously listed elements for projects only involving the
renovation of existing structures. The information described above is deemed to
be a minimum and applicants may be requested to supply additional information
for appropriate review.
C. Committee Notification. Upon receipt of a completed application for Community
Design Review and submission of the complete Development Plan, the Town
Clerk shall forward copies of all application materials to the members of the
Community Design Review Committee.
D. Application Review. Upon complete submission of the development plans to the
Town Clerk, a review shall begin.
E. Community Design Review Committee Meeting. In reviewing the proposed
development plan, the Committee shall apply the design guidelines set forth in
this Division. If the Committee finds that the applicant has complied with all of
the design guidelines, the Committee shall approve the development plan. If the
Committee finds that the applicant has not complied with all of the design
guidelines, the Committee may take one of the following actions:
1. Issue a conditional approval of the development plan, in which the
applicant agrees to implement all additional design elements and to
remove all rejected design elements as required by the Committee;
2. Issue a conditional approval of the development plan in which the
applicant must, prior to beginning the project, obtain variances from the
Zoning Board of Appeals or Town Council through the applicable
variation review procedures established in this Division or this Code; or
SEC. 15.14-5(Cont.2)
3. Deny the application entirely. An application denied entirely shall be
considered a decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building
Commissioner, subject to the appeal process in SEC. 15.12-3 of this Code.
In the event the Community Design Review Committee requires additional
documentation or material in order to conduct its review, the Community Design
Review Committee may continue its consideration of the application for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days without the consent of the applicant.
F. Decisions of the Community Design Review Committee. Within five (5) days of
the close of review by the Community Design Review Committee, the Committee
shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision regarding the proposed
development plan.
SEC. 15.14-6 EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS
A. Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, an applicant may seek expedited
review for the following:
1. Permits issued for any exterior development as follows;
a. R3A or R3B, $7,500.00 or less
b. B1, C1, C2, M1, $15,000.00 or less
c. C3 or M2, $25,000.00 or less
2. Repair or rehabilitation work in which like materials will be used.
3. Improvements that are not visible from a public way.
4. Emergency situations in order to protect persons and/or property from
significant injury or damage.
B. Application and Notice. Upon receipt of an expedited review application, the
Town Clerk shall immediately forward such application to a representative of the
Community Design Review Committee. The representative shall review the
application within three days of the submittal.
C. Expedited Review. When conducting an expedited review the representative of
the Community Design Review Committee shall be governed by the design
guidelines in this Division and shall determine whether or not the proposed
construction permanently and significantly alters the exterior appearance of a
structure. If in the opinion of the representative the exterior appearance of the
structure is significantly and permanently altered, the applicant shall be referred to
the full Community Design Review Committee and the process for full review
shall apply. As used herein significantly and permanently altered means a repair
that results in a change in fifty (50%) percent or more of the exterior of a structure
or a change in less than fifty (50%) percent of the exterior of a structure but such
SEC. 15.14-6(Cont.1)
change results in a design appearance which should be avoided as provided in the
design review standards and either change is expected to last more than ninety
(90) days.
D. Expedited Decision. If the representative determines that the proposed
construction activity does not significantly and permanently alter the exterior of
the structure, the representative shall note his/her approval on the application.
SEC. 15.14-7 STANDARDS FOR DESIGN. The purpose of these standards is to
establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of the Town environment.
Pertinent to appearance is design of the site, building, and structures, planting, signs, street
hardware, lighting, and miscellaneous other objects which are observed by the public. These
standards are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in
focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory
visual appearance within the Town.
A. Building Design. Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the
appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design in relationship
to surroundings. All new construction of buildings and all alterations,
modifications, and improvements to existing buildings shall meet the following
standards:
1. Building components shall be proportional and relational to one another.
2. Bright or brilliant colors shall be for accent and limited to 25% of the
building facade.
3. Building design shall be visually attractive. Variety of detail, form, or
siting may be used to provide visual interest by using the following or an
equivalent design element:
a. Roof treatment
b. Wall and facade treatments
c. Building theme or style
d. Artistic elements
e. Innovative stormwater design
f. Site and building lighting treatment
g. Window or wall opening treatment
h. Building entry treatment
i. Decorative glass
j. Accent materials or colors
k. Courtyards
4. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or
buildings, shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious
with the building, or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any
public ways.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.1)
5. Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior
work areas shall be screened from view from public ways as required in
SEC. 15.4-5(E).
6. Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be
avoided by incorporating the following design features:
a. Facade Articulation. No building wall or roofline that faces a
public street or connects a pedestrian walkway shall have an
uninterrupted length exceeding fifty percent of the length of the
building wall.
b. Building Entries. Each building shall have a clearly defined,
prominent, primary entrance that features at least two of the
following or equivalent design elements:
(1) Canopies and awnings
(2) Porticos, arches, pillars
(3) Decorative doors
(4) Entry recesses or projections
(5) Raised cornice, parapets
(6) Peaked roof forms
c. Multi-Sided Facade Treatment. Each building shall incorporate
similar material types and design elements on all sides of a
building. Facades fronting a public way (excluding alleys), or
adjacent to residential zoning shall incorporate at least two of the
following elements or equivalent design elements. (Amended
9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
(1) Change in wall plane
(2) Mix of building materials
(3) Decorative building materials
(4) Decorative windows or doors
d. Rooflines. Rooflines exceeding 75’ in length fronting a public
way, or adjacent to residential zoning shall have incorporate one of
the following elements:
(1) Change in roof plane
(2) Mix of roof styles
(3) Architectural or decorative roof materials
(4) Dormers, gables, gable vents, mansards
(5) Cupolas, steeples, clock tower
7. Canopies covering gas station pumps, bank facilities, or other drivethrough
facilities.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.2)
a. Canopies may have a clearance of no more than 15 feet, and the
overall height of canopies may not exceed 20 feet.
b. The square foot area of a canopy may be no greater than 450
square feet per parking space at regular gas pumps. Spaces next to
special pumps, including pumps dedicated to diesel or propane,
may not be factored into the calculation.
B. Relationship of Building to Site.
1. Unless otherwise provided by variance or code waiver pursuant to
applicable ordinance procedures, the site shall conform to all bulk
requirements of the Town Zoning Code.
2. Newly installed utility services and service revisions necessitated by
exterior alterations shall be underground.
C. Landscape and Site Treatment. This section sets forth minimum landscaping
requirements. The Morton Arboretum Tree and Shrub Handbook is hereby
adopted as a guideline for appropriate plantings. This document is on file with
the Town Clerk. Prohibited tree species are listed in SEC. 8.7-4(A).
1. Natural or existing topographic patterns shall be preserved and developed.
Modification to topography will be permitted only where preservation is
not technically feasible due to site construction, or where it contributes to
improved site appearance. (Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
2. Tree Preservation Purpose and Intent. Trees are a critical part of the
vegetation that serves to decrease and filter storm water runoff, to mitigate
the urban heat island effect created by paved and other built surfaces, to
remove pollutants from the air, to abate visual and noise pollution, and to
provide habitat for wildlife. Tree removal thus increases the burden on the
community to effectively address these issues. The goals of the tree
preservation provisions are to reduce tree loss during development, to
reduce damage to standing trees during construction, to provide for
replacement of trees lost during construction, to provide for the planting of
trees where none occurred previously, and to provide for the maintenance
of preserved trees after construction is completed.
3. Preservation and Replacement. On properties developed prior to 12/1/03,
all healthy significant trees on a site shall be preserved where feasible. No
tree shall be removed until the Town determines it is not a healthy
significant tree. Where preservation is not feasible, significant trees that
are removed must be replaced on-site. Trees on sites with a landscaping
plan approved after 12/1/03 may not be removed unless the Town
determines the tree is unhealthy or a hazard, regardless of size. (Amended
9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.3)
4. Replacement Tree Location. It is preferred that all replacement trees be
planted on site; however, where this is not feasible, the applicant can pay a
fee in lieu of the replacement tree as per SEC.15.14-7(D)(3).
5. Tree Replacement Requirements. For every significant tree removed from
a site there shall be a tree replacement at a ratio of 1:1. All new trees must
be at least 4” caliper, and all of them offset the original baseline number of
trees required on site. (Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
6. Existing Landscape Material. Where vegetation exists along a site’s
perimeter and provides a screen to adjacent properties, such vegetation
shall not be removed unless the Town finds the vegetation to be unhealthy.
If the Town approves a new landscaping plan for the perimeter, the new
plantings must be phased into the existing vegetative screen so as to
maintain a continuous screening effect for neighboring properties.
D. Site Landscape Requirements.
1. Landscape Plan Requirements. For development under this ordinance
landscape plans shall be prepared or certified by a Landscape Professional.
Plans shall include plant location, number, species, size and expected
maturity size. Plans shall be to scale and shall include a directional arrow
indicating “north.”
2. Overall Landscaping Requirement. At least twenty (20) percent of the
total land area of any development must be landscaped. Landscaping must
be dispersed throughout the entire development and must not be
concentrated in one area. Fifty (50) percent of the required landscaping
must be located along streets, parking lots and yards adjoining residential
zoning. With the exception of parking lot interior landscape requirements
set forth hereafter, required landscape is not required to be evenly spaced
throughout the development. At least fifty (50) percent of all trees planted
on site, including significant trees preserved on site, must be large, shade
tree species.
3. Minimum Planting Requirements. The purpose of this provision is to
establish the minimum number of trees, shrubs and plantings required for
a site. The plantings shall be used to satisfy the public frontage, parking
lot perimeter and interior parking lot landscaping, and adjacent residential
requirements. Significant trees preserved on site shall count toward the
number of trees for the site. Shrubs may be replaced with ornamental
grasses or perennials (ground cover plantings not included); however, such
replacement shall not exceed 50 percent of the required number of shrubs.
The following ratios shall be used:
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.4)
a. One Acre or Less: (1) tree and (5) shrubs for each 100’ of
perimeter lot footage
b. Over One Acre but Less than Five Acres: (1) tree and (5) shrubs
for each 50’ of perimeter lot footage
c. Five Acres or Greater: (1) tree and (5) shrubs per 33’ of perimeter
lot footage
At the election of the property owner, up to 25% of the plantings may be
planted with the owner paying the fee in lieu explained below. Also,
when planting on-site is not feasible, as determined by the Committee, the
applicant shall pay a fee in lieu to the Town of Normal. The fee in lieu
will be used to pay for a comparable planting on Town property. The fee
schedule is as follows:
Large shade tree $500, except when the tree is in lieu of
significant tree replacement; then the fee
shall be $250 per shade tree.
Ornamental Tree $300
Evergreen $300
Shrub $75
Ornamental Grass $30
Perennial $30
4. Detention/Retention Basins and Ponds. Detention/retention basins located
on the same lot as the development or within a Planned Unit Development
may be counted toward the overall green space required on a site.
Detention basins and ponds shall be landscaped along the perimeter of the
high water level of the basin or pond. Such landscaping shall include at
least one shade or ornamental tree per 50 lineal feet, and a combination of
evergreens, shrubbery, hedges and/or other live planting materials. At
least 50 percent of the trees surrounding the detention/retention basins and
ponds must be medium- to large-sized, long-lived shade trees.
5. Screening of service yards, mechanical equipment, and service areas shall
be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combination of
these. Screening shall be effective in winter and summer. Screening of
refuse areas shall comply with SEC. 15.4-5(E).
6. In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians, or
motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or
other devices where possible.
7. Signs. Freestanding signs must be landscaped around the base.
(SEC. 15.14-7(D) amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.5)
E. Landscape Material Minimum Standards.
1. Plant Species. The selection of plant materials shall be based on the Town
of Normal's climate and site conditions with a goal of promoting
xeriscaping principles. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its
structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are
hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used.
See the Morton Arboretum Tree and Shrub Handbook on file with the
Town Clerk. Plant diversity is required for the health of the overall
landscaped area.
2. Plant Quality. All plants shall be A-Grade or No. 1 Grade and free of
defects. All plants shall be normal health, height, leaf density, and spread
as defined by the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1
latest available edition, or the American Association of Nurserymen.
Plants shall have full, even, well-developed branching and a dense,
fibrous, and vigorous root system. The Landscape Professional shall be
required to submit a certificate of compliance to the Town to assure
delivery and installation of the proper grade and size of materials.
3. Plant Sizes and Specifications. The following minimum sizes shall be
required:
a. Canopy Shade Tree: 2.0-inch diameter breast height, balled, and
burlapped, or equivalent.
b. Ornamental Tree: 1.75-inch diameter breast height, balled and
burlapped or equivalent or 7 feet for a multi-stemmed tree.
c. Evergreen Tree: 6 feet high, balled, and burlapped or equivalent.
d. Shrubs: 24-inch balled and burlapped or 3-gallon minimum
container size.
e. Ornamental Grasses: 2-gallon minimum container size.
f. Perennials: 1-gallon minimum container size.
F. Parking Areas and Accessways. Parking lots shall be enhanced with landscaped
spaces containing trees or tree groupings as follows:
1. Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping Applicability.
a. The parking lot perimeter landscaping requirements shall apply to
all new public and private off-street parking lots, and to expansion
of existing lots of more than twenty-five (25) percent of existing
spaces.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.6)
2. For existing parking lots attempting to comply with requirements of this
section, a ten (10) percent reduction in the number of code required
parking spaces is permitted. The reduction may be considered
administratively without a public hearing or Town Council approval.
3. Minimum Parking Lot Dimensional Standards. All parking lots shall be
screened from public streets, public open space, and adjacent residential
properties by complying with one of the following perimeter options:
a. A twenty-foot (20) perimeter landscaped area shall be provided for
areas along a public street. Public land may not be counted toward
fulfillment of this standard.
b. A 15-foot to 20-foot perimeter landscaped area may be provided
for yards along a public street where dense plantings with twice the
required number of shrubs for the area along the street is provided.
(Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
c. An area greater than ten (10) feet and less than twenty (20) feet is
allowed only if a decorative fence and twice the required number
of shrubs for the area along the street is provided. The fence or
parking blocks must be installed to prohibit car overhang into the
landscaped area.
4. Fencing/Wall Specifications. All fencing or walls utilized to satisfy the
requirements of this section shall meet the following specifications:
a. Ornamental metal fencing or masonry walls or masonry pillars
with decorative metal fencing shall be allowed. Chain link fencing
and wood fencing are prohibited for screening purposes.
b. Fencing or walls shall be a minimum of three (3) feet high and
shall not exceed four (4) feet in height along a public street.
5. Minimum Plant Quantity. Where perimeter areas are to be landscaped, the
following minimum plant materials shall be provided:
a. One tree for every 25 lineal feet of perimeter area, excluding
driveway openings. At least half of these trees must be shade
varieties. Trees may be spaced evenly or grouped. (Amended
9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
b. A diverse combination of shrubs, grasses, and flowers throughout
the area.
c. Organic mulch, vegetative ground cover, or decorative landscape
rock.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.7)
G. Parking Lot Interior Landscaping Requirements.
1. All new private and public off-street parking lots with more than forty (40)
parking spaces and expansion of existing lots of more than twenty-five
(25) percent are subject to the requirements of this Section. In the M-1
and M-2 Manufacturing Zoning Districts, parking lot interior landscaping
requirements of this Section shall apply only to customer and employee
parking areas and not storage or large truck maneuvering areas.
(Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
2. For existing parking lots attempting to comply with requirements of this
Section, a ten percent (10%) reduction in the number of Code required
parking spaces is permitted. The reduction may be considered
administratively without a public hearing or Town Council approval.
3. Minimum Landscape Coverage.
a. Parking lots with 40 to 75 spaces shall have at least five percent
(5%) of the interior lot area landscaped.
b. Parking lots with more than 75 spaces but less than 150 shall have
at least seven percent (7%) of the interior lot area landscaped.
c. Parking lots with 150 parking spaces or more shall have at least ten
percent (10%) of the interior lot area landscaped.
d. In the Parking Impact Zone interior lot area, landscaping may be
reduced up to fifty percent (50%) of the above requirements.
e. Parking lots that provide in excess of one hundred twenty-five
percent (125%) of parking spaces required by Town Code shall
have at least fifteen percent (15%) of the interior lot area
landscaped.
f. Interior parking lot landscaping shall be calculated in the following
manner: multiply the number of parking spaces by 300 square feet
to determine the area of the parking lot. Calculate five, seven, or
ten percent (5%, 7%, or 10%) of that area to determine the interior
parking lot landscaping area requirement. In the Parking Impact
Zone multiply the number of parking spaces by 200 square feet to
determine the area of the parking lot.
g. Parking lot interior includes only the parking spaces and drive
aisles adjacent to the spaces.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.8)
4. Interior Landscaping Islands.
a. Spacing. Interior landscape islands must be evenly distributed
throughout the parking lot. Required plantings shall also be evenly
distributed in the islands.
b. Configuration and Size. Landscaped islands may be in any shape
or configuration, and all landscape islands must be a minimum of
two hundred (200) square feet.
5. Minimum Plant Quantity.
a. 40 to 150 parking spaces: 1 tree and 3 shrubs or ornamental grasses
per 20 spaces.
b. 150 or more parking spaces: 2 trees and 5 shrubs or ornamental
grasses per 20 spaces.
6. Tree Location and Quality. Trees should be distributed evenly throughout
the parking lot and not clustered. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the
required trees in the parking lot interior must be canopy shade trees.
(Entire Subsection G Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
H. Lighting Requirements.
1. Submission Requirements. All lighting plans must be prepared by a
lighting professional. The lighting supplier shall be required to submit a
certificate of compliance to the Town to verify the installation of the
proper light fixtures. Lighting plans must include the following
information:
a. A site photometric plan indicating footcandle levels at grade to the
lot lines.
b. Specifications for all luminaires, poles, and luminaire mounting
arms.
c. Lighting specifications including footcandle initial averages, and
maximum-to- minimum uniformity ratio.
d. The location, mounting height, lamp intensity for all exterior
luminaries.
e. An after hours security lighting plan indicating not more than 33%
of site lighting as operational.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.9)
2. Architectural Compatibility. Outdoor lighting fixtures must be compatible
with the architectural elements located throughout the development.
3. Prohibition Against Glare. Outdoor lighting may not create a glare that
may be hazardous for motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians.
4. Luminaires. In order to prevent unreasonable light pollution, any
luminaire and all non-decorative, wall-mounted luminaries used for area
light shall use a full cutoff luminaire positioned in a way that the cutoff
effect is maximized. Tilt arms are prohibited. Decorative light fixtures
must include internal louvers to minimize glare as determined by Town
Staff. (Amended 9/20/10 by Ord. No. 5349)
5. Facade and Fascia Lighting.
a. The exterior building façade lighting power shall not exceed
0.25W/ft² of the illuminated area. Floodlights used for facade
lighting may be no farther from the building than one-third (1/3)
the distance of the building height. The mounting height of such
floodlights shall not exceed the building height.
b. Fascia lighting is limited to the street-facing side of the building
and may not exceed an area twice the size of the building sign.
6. Lighting Context. Outdoor lighting must consider existing light sources
that impact the site and land uses that will be impacted by the lighting.
a. In order to prevent lighting redundancy, proposed new outdoor
lighting must factor in existing light affecting the site, including
light provided by public light fixtures.
b. All outdoor lighting shall have fixtures that shield affected
residential areas and public rights-of-way from all direct light.
7. Light Levels, Luminaire Mounting Position, and Timing of Parking Areas.
a. Lighting levels must meet a uniformity ratio of 20:1.
b. Average initial light levels may not exceed 1footcandle in
residential zoning districts, and shall not exceed 2footcandles in
other districts regulated by this ordinance.
c. Light levels created by proposed new outdoor lighting shall not
exceed 1fc at the property line.
SEC. 15.14-7(Cont.10)
d. Canopy lighting. All lighting under a canopy must be cutoff or
recessed, with no lens dropping below the horizontal plane of the
canopy. Light levels under the canopy shall not exceed an average
of 25fc at grade.
e. Display areas. Areas dedicated to the display of merchandise may
have an average light level of up to 10 footcandles.
f. All exterior lighting shall be controlled by a photo sensor, or time
switch that automatically reduces exterior lighting when sufficient
daylight is available, and automatically extinguishes no more than
one hour after the close of business, excluding lighting for security
purposes. Site security lighting shall not exceed 33% of the
luminaries. Individual luminaries may not increase intensity for
security lighting purposes.
8. Lighting Exceptions.
a. All temporary lighting needed by the police, fire, or other
municipal departments, emergency services, as well as all
vehicular luminaries, shall be exempt from the requirements of this
article.
b. All hazard warning luminaries required by law are exempt from
the requirements of this article.
c. Recreational and outdoor event lighting is exempt only during
times the lighted area is actually in use. Nonetheless, recreational
and outdoor event lighting shall be installed in a way that
minimizes light emitted above the horizontal and onto adjacent
property.
d. Lighting associated with a holiday.
e. Other exceptions as required by law.
I. Bicycle Parking Requirements. All new developments must provide at least one
(1) bicycle parking space. For lots exceeding fifty (50) automobile spaces,
bicycle parking spaces shall be provided at one (1) bicycle parking space for
every fifty (50) automobile parking spaces, with a maximum of twenty bicycle
parking spaces required.
J. Sign Requirements. All developments shall comply with SEC. 15.13 Sign
Regulations of the Zoning Code. Use of a low-rise sign, as defined in SEC.
15.13-4(B)(34), will count as satisfying one of the building design elements
required in SEC. 15.14-7.
SEC. 15.14-8
SEC. 15.14-8 MAINTENANCE FOR GOOD APPEARANCE.
A. Site.
1. Landscape materials, other than plant materials, which have deteriorated
or have been damaged or defaced, shall be properly repaired or replaced.
2. Plant materials that have deteriorated or died shall be replaced with
healthy plantings, or the area shall be redesigned with other treatment to
provide an attractive appearance.
3. Plant materials shall be kept watered, fed, cultivated, and pruned as
required to give a healthy and well-groomed appearance during all
seasons.
4. Parking areas shall be kept in good repair, properly marked, and clear of
litter and debris.
5. Vacant property shall be kept free of refuse and debris, and shall have the
vegetation cut periodically during the growing season in order to comply
with Town Code.
B. Buildings and Appurtenances.
1. Buildings and appurtenances, including signs, shall be cleaned, painted, or
repaired as required to present a neat appearance.
2. Deteriorated, worn, or damaged buildings and appurtenances shall be
rebuilt or replaced.
C. Building and sign illuminating elements shall be replaced as required to maintain
the effect for which designed.
D. Public Property.
1. Parkway planting areas shall be maintained by the adjacent property
owner or tenant in order to add to the aesthetic enhancement of the private
property and the overall attractiveness of the streetscape.
2. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, roadside berms, and other public
improvements in the public right-of-way shall be repaired and maintained
as necessary.
3. Refuse containers of an aesthetically satisfactory design and color should
be placed in locations which will encourage their use – to avoid littering of
waste materials.
SEC. 15.14-8(Cont.1)
4. Street hardware shall be erected and secured properly, and shall be cleaned
or painted regularly to present an orderly appearance. Signs shall be
treated similarly.
SEC. 15.14-9 INCENTIVES FOR BETTER DESIGN SOLUTIONS. Excellence in
design and planning which may be achieved through appropriate innovation and imaginative
concepts shall be encouraged. To accomplish this, trade-offs may be offered by the Community
Design Review Committee to achieve appearance standard goals. The Community Design
Review Committee may advocate variances to the bulk zoning requirements for excellent
designs, such as through the use of attractive low-rise signs, and development plans containing
innovative and imaginative concepts.
Consideration may be given to variation in building height, required yards, and other bulk
requirements, provided that such change will produce a more logical and attractive use of
property, and that it will be beneficial rather than detrimental to the surrounding area and the
community. Outstanding projects shall be given public recognition and adequate publicity along
with citations to those responsible for their development.
SEC. 15.14-10 OVERLAPPING JURISDICTION. Development subject to site plan
review, special use review or planned unit development review, shall not be subject to the review
procedures set forth in this Division, rather such review shall take place simultaneously with the
site plan review, special use review, or planned unit development review. The appropriate
reviewing body shall apply the standards of this Division during such review, giving deference to
Community Design Review Committee interpretation and application of such standards in
similar developments. In the event the substantive provisions of this Division
conflict with any other codes or regulations governing construction or development in the R-3A,
R-3B, C-1, C-2, C-3, B-1, M-1, M-2, or S-2 Districts, the more restrictive code or regulation
shall control.
SEC. 15.14-11 PENALTY. Any person owning or holding a possessory interest in
property subject to this Division who, after notice from the Town, shall fail to conform his
property to the standards provided in this Division shall be in violation of this Division and
subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Division 12 of this Code.
SEC. 15.14-12 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town
Council that the several provisions of this Division are separable in accordance with the
following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Division
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Code not
specifically included in such judgment order.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Division
to be invalid as to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment
shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or
structure not specifically included in such judgment order.
(Entire Division 14 Added 12/1/03 by Ord. No. 4914)(Entire Division 14 Amended 6/16/14 by
Ord. No. 5548)
SEC. 15.15-1
DIVISION 15 - TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA REGULATIONS
SEC. 15.15-1 TITLE. This Division shall be known, cited and referred to as: The Town of
Normal Telecommunication Antenna Code (hereinafter referred to as "Code").
SEC. 15.15-2 INTENT. The purpose of the regulations set forth in the Town of Normal
Telecommunication Antenna Code is to further an overall plan for the enhancement of public
safety, consistent community development, preservation of property values and the general welfare
of the Town of Normal. In order to accommodate the communication needs of the residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town, the
regulations are further intended to: facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to
the residents and businesses of the Town; nonetheless preserve and protect property values; avoid
potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure; lessen congestion of land and air space;
provide against undue concentrations of telecommunication antennas and antenna facilities which
may create adverse visual effects and detraction from a neighborhood's character; establish
reasonable standards for private and commercial use of telecommunications antennas; preserve the
attractive character of the Town; and to recognize that the general welfare of the public includes a
community plan that provides for a community that shall be beautiful as well as healthful, spacious
as well as clean, and well balanced in its growth and development.
The promotion of public health and safety is to be accomplished by reducing the distractive
characteristics of telecommunications antenna facilities or towers and insuring that unless otherwise
necessary telecommunication towers or antenna facilities shall not be located in an established
residential neighborhood.
The regulations in the Town of Normal Telecommunication Antenna Code expressly
distinguish between direct satellite dishes, amateur radio operator antennas, and commercial
antennas. This distinction is necessary in order to ensure compliance with the Federal Aviation
Authority (FAA) and Federal Communication Commission (FCC) policies and requirements as they
affect the telecommunication industry.
SEC. 15.15-3 GENERAL PROHIBITION. Any Telecommunication Antenna not
expressly permitted by this Code is prohibited in the Town of Normal. All telecommunications
antennas must comply with all applicable provisions of the Building, Electrical and Municipal
Codes of the Town of Normal , rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Bloomington Normal Airport Hazard Zoning
Regulations and the standards and regulations of any other agency of the State, Federal or local unit
of government with authority to regulate antennas.
SEC.15.15-4 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
A. Rules of Construction.
The language set forth in the text of this Code shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
SEC. 15.15-4(Cont.1)
1. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense
includes the present;
3. The word “shall” is mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive;
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders;
5. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Code, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the Definitions hereof;
and,
6. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is
one-half (1/2) foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken.
B. Definitions. Where a definition is not specifically set forth herein, the term shall be
defined as set forth in the Zoning Code.
1. Commercial Mobile Services. Mobile services that are for-profit, are
available to the public or a substantial portion of the public, and provide
subscribers with the ability to access or receive calls from the public
switched telephone network – examples are personal communication
services (PCS), cellular radio mobile service and paging.
2. Height. The vertical measurement from the ground to the vertical apex of
the telecommunication antenna facility.
3. Personal Communication Services. A digital, radio-based service that
transmits and receives low-powered electronic signals through networks of
linked transmitter/receiver sites with each transmitter/receiver or base station
covering smaller areas.
4. Personal Wireless Facilities. Transmitters, receivers, antenna facilities and
other types of installation used for the provision of personal wireless
services.
5. Personal Wireless Services. Commercial mobile services, cellular telephone
services, specialized mobile radio services (SMR), unlicensed wireless
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as now or
hereafter defined in Title 47 United States Code, Section 323(C)(7)(c).
6. Radio Broadcast. Traditional AM and FM radio broadcasts and amateur
radio broadcasts (HAM Radio).
7. Satellite Dish Antenna. A telecommunication antenna shaped like a bowl or
SEC. 15.15-4(Cont.2)
dish and used to receive wireless transmission of radio, data, or video from a
satellite orbiting the earth.
8. Telecommunication Antenna. A device affixed to the ground, a building or
other structure which device is capable of transmitting or receiving radio
waves. Telecommunication antenna includes but is not limited to devices
capable of transmitting or receiving radio waves supporting the following
types of communication:
a. Television broadcast, multichannel multipoint distribution (wireless
cable), direct broadcast satellites (DBS),
b. Radio broadcast (including AM, FM, and amateur radio antennas)
c. Wireless telecommunications, personal wireless services,
commercial mobile services, cellular telephone services, specialized
mobile radio services (SMR), unlicensed wireless services and
common carrier wireless exchange access services.
9. Telecommunication Antenna Facility. The antenna, mast, pole, lattice work,
structure, tower, building, equipment and other supporting material used to
mount and operate an antenna.
10. Unlicensed Wireless Service. The offering of telecommunication services
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses by
FCC, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
SEC. 15.15-5 REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS
PERMITTED IN SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS.
A. Within the R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, R-3B and R-4 Residence Districts
telecommunication antennas are permitted as follows:
1. Accessory use satellite dish receiving antennas exceeding one meter in
diameter shall be permitted on the following conditions:
a. such antennas shall be located only on a roof or in rear yards and no
closer than five (5) feet from a side or rear lot line and outside of
easements of record; and
b. the vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height from ground level for ground
mounted, and fifteen (15) feet in height from roof line for roof
mounted.
2. Satellite dish receiving antennas, one meter or less in diameter, television
SEC. 15.15-5(Cont.1)
broadcast receiving antennas, multichannel multipoint distribution receiving
antennas, radio broadcast receiving antennas, and amateur radio antennas
(receiving and transmitting), provided all such antennas are accessory use
antennas, shall be permitted on the following conditions:
a. such antennas shall be located only on a roof or in rear or side yards
unless such restriction precludes reception of an acceptable quality
signal. In such case such antennas may be placed anywhere on the
lot except within an easement of record. Proof of inability to receive
an acceptable quality signal shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator upon request; and
b. the vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall not
exceed the greater of the District Height Limit or seventy (70) feet in
height from ground level.
3. Other telecommunication antennas are prohibited, unless the same are
located on Town right-of-way or Town easement pursuant to an agreement
with the Town of Normal.
B. Within the A-Agricultural, S-1 University District, and S-2 Public Lands and
Institutions Districts telecommunication antennas are permitted subject to the bulk
requirements applicable to such district, and subject to site plan review procedures of
Division 8 and SEC. 15.4-5 of this Code.
C. Within the C-1 Office District, C-2 Neighborhood Shopping District, C-3
Community Regional Shopping District, B-1 General Business District, B-2 Central
Business District, M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District, and M-2 General
Manufacturing District telecommunication antennas are permitted as follows:
1. Accessory use satellite dish receiving antennas exceeding two meters in
diameter, and accessory use mobile radio antennas shall be permitted on the
following conditions:
a. such antennas shall be permitted only on the roof or in the rear or
side yards;
b. such antennas shall not be placed on an easement of record or within
five (5) feet of a property line; and
c. the vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall not
exceed the greater of the Zoning District Height regulations, or
fifteen (15') feet in height above the building roof line for roof
mounted.
2. Satellite dish receiving antennas less than two meters in diameter, television
SEC. 15.15-5(Cont.2)
broadcast receiving antennas, multichannel multipoint distribution receiving
antennas, and radio broadcast receiving antennas and amateur radio antennas
(receiving and transmitting) provided all such antennas are accessory use
antennas, shall be permitted on the following conditions:
a. such antennas shall be located only on a roof or in rear or side yards
unless such restriction precludes reception of an acceptable quality
signal. In such case such antennas may be placed anywhere on the
lot except within an easement of record. Proof of inability to receive
an acceptable quality signal shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator upon request; and
b. the vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall not
exceed the greater of the District Height Limit or seventy (70) feet in
height from ground level.
3. Accessory use mobile radio antennas not meeting the conditions of SEC. 15.
15(B)(1) above and all other telecommunication antennas shall be permitted
only as a Special Use pursuant to the procedures of Division 10 and the
standards of SEC. 15.15-6.
D. Within the S-3 Historic and Cultural District telecommunication antennas shall be
permitted in accordance with the above regulations for the applicable underlying
zoning district and in accordance with the procedures set forth in SEC. 15.6-13 and
the standards of SEC. 15.15-6.
SEC.15.15-6 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION
ANTENNAS. The purpose of this Section is to specify standards that shall be required to be met
before the issuance of a Special Use Permit.
A. Application Requirements.
1. Submission of a Site Plan drawn to scale, showing the location and
dimensions of existing and proposed buildings or structures, natural or
manmade features, topography, elevations and location of landscaping and
lighting.
2. Description of the proposed telecommunication antenna facility including
certification by an engineer regarding the structural integrity of the facilities,
and evidence of compliance with FCC emission standards.
3. Siting needs and sharing capabilities. An inventory of the existing
telecommunication antenna facilities including but not limited to existing
antenna facilities, silos, water tanks, buildings. Notification by way of
certified mail as proof of exhausting possible avenues for sharing space.
SEC. 15.15-6(Cont.1)
4. Maintenance plan. A description of anticipated maintenance needs,
including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and
traffic, noise and safety impacts on such maintenance.
5. Proof of approval or compliance with FAA standards.
6. Proof of liability insurance in the minimum single limit amount of two
hundred thousand dollars with the Town of Normal named as an additional
insured.
B. Bulk Regulations.
1. Lot Size Requirements. Minimum lot size for the district in which the
facilities are located.
2. Setback. A setback from adjoining property lines is required in order to
minimize the adverse affects of falling ice or damage due to antenna
collapse. A setback of fifty percent (50%) of the telecommunication antenna
facility height shall be maintained except a setback of five hundred feet
(500') shall be maintained from all residential zoning districts and from
buildings used for residential dwelling, day care, elementary or secondary
schools.
3. Separation from other antenna facilities. In order to encourage co-location
of antennas on a common facility all new antenna facilities exceeding
seventy feet (70') in height, shall not be located within one quarter mile
(1,320 feet) of another antenna facility which exceeds seventy feet (70') in
height.
4. Height. Antenna facilities shall not exceed one hundred and five feet (105')
in height.
C. Screening and Landscape Requirements.
1. The facility and every element thereof shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the architecture of surrounding area.
2. The proposed buildings, structures and use will be in harmony with the
general character of the neighborhood.
3. Screening and landscaping shall comply with Division 14 of this Code.
(Added 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
D. Lighting. Shall be consistent with FAA guidelines and have minimal spill over
effect on adjoining property. Lighting not controlled by FAA guidelines shall
comply with Division 14 of this Code. (Amended 1/20/04 by Ord. No. 4926)
SEC. 15.15-6(Cont.2)
E. Interference. The proposed facility shall not cause unreasonable interference with
existing radio, television, telephone or DBS reception or services.
F. Effect on Adjoining Properties. The proposed facility will cause no objectionable
noise, fumes, odors, glare, physical activity or effect that would impair the peaceful
enjoyment of neighboring properties.
G. Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed facility will be served by adequate public
services and facilities, including police and fire protection, water and sanitary sewer,
storm drainage, public roads and other public improvements.
H. FCC Compliance. The proposed facility meets FCC requirements.
I. Other Codes. The proposed facility complies with the building, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical and fire codes for the Town of Normal, other divisions of this Zoning
Code and other codes of applicable State, Federal and local agencies with
jurisdiction over such facility.
J. Abandonment. Facilities that remain unused for more than one year shall be
demolished at the owners cost.
K. Co-location or shared use. Applicants shall be required to exhaust all possible
avenues for sharing space on existing antenna facilities. Evidence shall be submitted
showing the following:
1. The availability of space on existing telecommunication antenna facilities;
2. The willingness of the telecommunication antenna facility owner to execute
a lease with the applicant and whether or not the terms of such lease are
agreeable to applicant;
3. The ability of applicant to reasonably meet its geographic service area
requirements by locating on existing telecommunication antenna facilities;
4. Any radio, mechanical or electrical incompatibilities, conflicts, or
interference caused by using an existing telecommunication antenna facility;
5. The comparative costs of new construction and co-location;
6. Any FCC or other governmental restrictions on co-location.
L. Signs. No signs shall be permitted on antenna facilities other than warning or
equipment signs, however the antenna may be located on an existing sign structure.
M. Waivers. The President and Town Council may modify or waive any of the
SEC. 15.15-6(Cont.3)
foregoing Special Use Standards where such waiver or modification is in the public
interest or necessary to comply with Federal Law.
N. General Conditions. Standards applicable to all Special Uses include the following:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures shall be located and
designed in a manner which will maximize automotive and pedestrian safety
and convenience, facilitate traffic flow and control and provide easy and
adequate access in case of fire or other catastrophe.
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required or provided, shall be
located and designed in a manner which will maximize the items referred to
in Paragraph (A) above and will minimize any adverse economic, noise,
glare or odor effects of the special use on adjoining or nearby properties.
3. Refuse and service areas, if provided, shall be located and designed in a
manner so as to accomplish the objectives specified in Paragraphs (A) and
(B) above.
4. Utilities provided in connection with the Special Use shall be designed and
located so as to encourage the efficient and economic utilization, extension
and expansion of the public utility system.
5. Screening and buffering materials shall be sufficient to insure that the
proposed Special Use will have no greater impact on surrounding land uses
than other uses authorized as a matter of right.
6. Proposed exterior lighting shall be located and designed to maximize traffic
safety and compatibility and harmony with adjoining or nearby properties
and so as to minimize glare, noise and adverse economic impact on
surrounding properties or authorized land uses.
7. Required yards and open spaces shall be sufficient to insure that the
proposed Special Use will have no greater impact on surrounding land uses
than other uses authorized as a matter of right.
8. The site on which the Special Use is located shall be designed to make the
proposed use generally compatible with adjoining or nearby properties.
9. The Special Use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located and of the entire Municipal
Code, except as such regulations may in each instance be modified by the
President and Town Council pursuant to the recommendations of the Zoning
Board of Appeals or as allowed for a Planned Unit Development.
SEC. 15.15-7
SEC. 15.15-7 SPECIAL USE PROCESS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION
ANTENNAS.
A. Application. Application for a Special Use Permit shall be submitted in the office of
the Town Clerk on forms approved by the Town Clerk. No application shall be
processed unless accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.
B. Hearing on Application. Upon receipt in proper form of an application and
supporting material, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold at least one (1)
administrative public hearing on the application for a Special Use Permit, in the
manner provided in SEC. 15.12-1(C)(3)(b).
C. Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
1. Findings of Fact. No Special Use Permit shall be recommended by the
Zoning Board of Appeals until written Findings of Fact are made indicating:
a. The extent to which the Special Use Standards specified in SEC.
15.15-6 are met;
b. Recommendations, if any, of conditions deemed reasonably
necessary to meet any or all of such general or specific Special Use
Permit Standards.
D. Action by Town Council. The President and Town Council must grant or deny any
application for a Special Use Permit after receiving the report of findings and
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals including the recommended
stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees, when they are deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest. All decisions of the President and
Town Council shall be in writing and based on written findings of fact.
E. Protest. In case a written protest against any proposed Special Use Permit signed
and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage to be
altered; the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the
frontage to be altered; or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom is filed with the Town Clerk, the
Special Use Permit cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all members of the Town Council.
F. Refiling Period. No application for a Special Use which has been denied wholly or
in part by the President and Town Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one
year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of conditions found to be valid by the President and Town Council.
G. Minor Changes. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of structures may
be authorized by the Building Commissioner, however, no such change may involve
SEC. 15.15-7(Cont.2)
a change in the character of the development, or a substantial increase in the
intensity of use, reduction of parking spaces, or landscaping requirements.
H. Non-Minor Changes. Decisions concerning non-minor changes in the location,
siting and height of structures, any change in the character of the development or a
substantial increase in the intensity of use, reduction of parking spaces, or
landscaping shall be made by the Town Council, after the Zoning Board of Appeals
conducts an additional administrative public hearing and submits a recommendation
on such proposed changes or deviations. In all non-minor changes, the Zoning
Board of Appeals and the Town Council shall apply the standards set forth in this
Division for special uses.
SEC. 15.15-8 VARIATIONS. In the event the standards and requirements of this Division
impair the receipt or transmission of an acceptable signal quality for an accessory use antenna
(except accessory use mobile radio antennas), the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance in
the strict application of this Division in accordance with SEC. 15.12-4 of this Code. Such variance
shall be no greater than reasonably necessary to receive or transmit an acceptable quality signal, and
shall be conditioned where necessary to protect public safety.
SEC. 15.15-9 CO-LOCATION INCENTIVE. In order to encourage the co-location of
antennas on existing antenna facilities, the Building Commissioner has the authority to permit the
placement of antennas on antenna facilities which have been approved pursuant to the Special Use
process provided there is no increase in the height of the approved antenna facility.
SEC. 15.15-10 FEDERAL POLICY. In considering any Special Use Permit and Variation
requests the following Federal Policy Directives shall be followed:
A. All requests shall be processed within ninety (90) days after the application is
properly filed with the Town Clerk. The ninety (90) day time limit may be extended
by agreement.
B. The substantive decision made by the appropriate body shall not unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provisions of the particular
telecommunication technology in the Town of Normal.
SEC. 15.15-11 NON-CONFORMITIES. Non-conforming telecommunication antennas
and antenna facilities which are lawful at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Division that could not be built under the terms of this Code, may continue so long as the same
remains otherwise lawful subject to the following:
A. No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its non-conformity.
SEC. 15.15-11(Cont.1)
B. Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair cash
market value prior to the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this Code.
C. Should such non-conforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved.
D. Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs may be made to an extent not exceeding
fifty (50) percent of the fair cash market value of the non-conforming structure.
(Entire Division 15 Added 6/16/97 by Ord. No. 4456)
SEC. 15.16-1
DIVISION 16 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SEC. 15.16-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
A. Composition. The Normal Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven
(7) members, residents of the Town, all of whom shall be appointed by the President
and approved by the Board of Trustees. The President shall make every reasonable
effort to try to appoint persons with a demonstrated interest in the history or
architecture of the Town, and at least one (1) member of the Preservation
Commission should, if possible, be an Illinois-registered architect, one (1) an
attorney, one (1) person experienced in real estate, and one (1) a person experienced
in building construction, and if possible one (1) person experienced in historic
preservation.
B. Terms. The term of office of the members of the Preservation Commission shall be
for four (4) years, excepting that the membership of the first Preservation
Commission appointed shall serve respectively for terms of: one (1) for one (1) year;
two (2) for two (2) years; two (2) for three (3) years; and two (2) for four (4) years.
A member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term only. Members may be recalled for cause as provided by
Chapter 10, Division 6, Section 10.6-1 through 10.6-3, of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969.
C. Officers. Officers of the Preservation Commission shall consist of a Chairperson
and a Vice-Chairperson who shall each serve a term of one (1) year and shall be
eligible for re-election. The Chairperson shall preside over meetings. In the absence
of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson. If both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson are absent, those
present shall elect a temporary Chairperson. It is the responsibility of the
Chairperson to ensure that the following duties are performed:
1. Preparation of minutes of each Preservation Committee meeting;
2. Publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions
of the Preservation Commission to the members of the Preservation
Commission;
3. Cause the publication of notice as required herein or by law for all public
hearings conducted by the Preservation Commission;
4. Advise the President of vacancies on the Preservation Commission and
expiring terms of members; and
5. Prepare and submit to the President and Board of Trustees a complete record
SEC. 15.16-1(Cont.1)
of the proceedings before the Preservation Commission on any matter
requiring Town Council consideration.
D. Meetings. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. Except otherwise
provided, all decisions or actions of the Preservation Commission shall be made by a
majority vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum
exists. Meetings shall be held monthly at regularly scheduled times to be established
by resolution of the Preservation Commission at the beginning of each calendar year
or at any time upon the call of the Chairperson. Meetings of the Commission may
be cancelled, postponed or rescheduled by the Chairperson. No member of the
Preservation Commission shall vote on any matter that may materially or apparently
affect the property, income, or business interest of that member. No action shall be
taken by the Preservation Commission that could in any manner deprive or restrict
the owner of a property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or
demolition until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at public
meeting of the Preservation Commission, as provided herein. The Chairperson, and
in his absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Preservation Commission shall be open
to the public. The Preservation Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and shall be public records.
E. Powers and Duties. The Preservation Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
1. To adopt its own procedural regulations;
2. To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and architecturally
significant properties, structures, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social,
economic, political, or architectural history of the United States of America,
the State of Illinois, or the Town;
3. To investigate and recommend to the Planning Commission and to the
President and Board of Trustees the adoption of ordinances designating
properties or structures having special historic, community, or architectural
value as “landmarks.”
4. To investigate and recommend to the Planning Commission and to the
President and Board of Trustees the adoption of ordinances designating areas
as having special historic, community, or architectural value as “historic
districts”;
5. To keep a register of all properties and structures that have been designated
as landmarks or historic districts, including all information required for each
designation;
SEC. 15.16-1(Cont.2)
6. To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and
routes leading from one landmark or historic district to another;
7. To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or structures within
historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places;
8. To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National Register of
Historic Places, and to review and comment on any National Register
nominations submitted to the Preservation Commission upon request of the
President or Board of Trustees;
9. To inform and educate the citizens of the Town concerning the historic and
architectural heritage of the Town by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletter, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and
seminars; and to develop and/or encourage the development of an
organization for persons with an interest in historic preservation to allow for
the sharing of information and building material;
10. To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition affecting proposed or designated
landmarks or structures within historic districts and issue or deny Certificates
of Appropriateness for such actions. Applicants may be required to submit
plans, drawings, elevations, specifications, and other information as may be
necessary to make decisions;
11. To consider applications for Certificates of Economic Hardship that would
allow the performance of work for which a Certificate of Appropriateness
has been denied;
12. To develop specific design guidelines for the alteration, construction, or
removal of landmarks or property and structures within historic districts;
13. To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use
permits, applications for zoning variances, site plans and P.U.D.
amendments and subdivisions, that affect proposed or designated landmarks
and historic districts. The Town Clerk shall send applications to the
Preservation Commission for comment prior to the date of the hearing by the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals;
14. To monitor the administration of any property or full or partial interest in
real property, including easements, that the Town may have or accept as a
gift or otherwise, upon authorization and approval by the Town Council;
SEC. 15.16-1(Cont.3)
15. To accept and monitor through the Office of the Director of Finance on
behalf of the Town the administration of such gifts, grants, and money as
may be appropriate for the purposes of Section 15.6-13(A) of this Code.
Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures or for
hiring staff persons or consultants or performing other appropriate functions
for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the Preservation
Commission and the purposes of Section 15.6-13(A) of this Code;
16. To request from the City Manager that Town staff members as well as other
experts be made available for technical advice;
17. To retain such specialists or consultants with the permission of the Town
Council or to appoint such citizen advisory committees as may be required
from time to time;
18. To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant property, structures, and areas;
19. To confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or property or
structures within historic districts by means of certificates, plaques, or
markers;
20. To develop a preservation component in the Official Comprehensive Plan
and to recommend it to the Planning Commission and to the President and
Board of Trustees;
21. To periodically review the Town Zoning Code and to recommend to the
Planning Commission and the President and Board of Trustees any
amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks
or property and structures within historic districts; and
22. To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the
implementation of its powers and duties or to implementation of the purpose
of this Code.
F. Surveys and Research. The Preservation Commission shall, with Council approval
and when appropriate, undertake surveys and research efforts in the town to identify
neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community,
architectural, or aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the
Preservation Commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by
any unit of government or private organizations and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. The Preservation Commission shall
systematically identify potential landmarks and adopt procedures to nominate them
in groups based upon the following criteria:
SEC. 15.16-1(Cont.4)
1. The potential landmarks in one identifiable neighborhood or distinct
geographical area of the Town;
2. The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event, or
historical period;
3. The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or school, or of a
particular architect, engineer, builder, designer, or craftsman;
4. Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Preservation Commission to
assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential landmarks within
the Town.
SEC. 15.16-2 NOMINATION PROCESS.
A. Nomination of Landmarks. Nominations for landmark designation shall be made to
the Historic Preservation Commission on a form prepared by the Commission.
Nominations for landmarks can only be made by the property owner of record of the
nominated property or structure, the Historic Preservation Commission or the
President and Board of Trustees. In the case of a nomination other than by the
owner of record of the property nominated, the Town Clerk shall send a notice of the
Preservation Commission's meeting on such nomination to the owner of record of
such nominated property at least seven (7) days prior to such meeting.
B. Nomination of Historic District. Nominations for historic district designation shall
be made to the Historic Preservation Commission on a form prepared by the
Commission. Nominations for historic district designation shall include the physical
boundaries of the area to be designated. Any property owner within a proposed
historic district, the Historic Preservation Commission or the President and Board of
Trustees, can make nominations for historic district. Nominations made by a
property owner within a proposed district must be accompanied by signatures of
owners of property representing at least twenty percent (20%) of the total lineal
street frontage in the proposed district, unless the proposed district includes property
owners without any street frontage in the proposed district, in which case
nominations made by a property owner within a proposed district must be
accompanied by signatures of owners of property representing at least twenty
percent (20%) of the total area within the proposed district. The Town Clerk shall
send a notice of the Preservation Commission's meeting on such nomination to the
owner of record of all properties within the proposed district at least seven (7) days
prior to such meeting. (Amended 1/22/02 by Ord. No. 4764)
C. Criteria for Consideration of Nomination. The Preservation Commission shall, upon
such investigation as it deems necessary, make a determination as to whether a
nominated property, structures, or area meets one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.1)
1. Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or
cultural characteristics of the Town, County of McLean, State of Illinois or
the United States of America (the Nation);
2. Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state, or national event;
3. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to
the development of the Town, County of McLean, State of Illinois, or the
Nation;
4. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
5. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect, or
landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development
of the Town, County of McLean, State of Illinois, or the Nation;
6. Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant;
7. Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally
innovative;
8. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an
established or familiar visual feature;
9. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of an utilitarian
structure, including, but not limited to farmhouses, gas stations, or other
commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance; and/or
10. Its suitability for preservation or restoration;
11. The geographic area which is the subject of the petition has definable
boundaries in the form of natural features or existing physical improvements;
or a visual sense of history within the proposed boundaries; and the
buildings, places or areas within the proposed district, by their inclusion
therein, are of sufficient historic significance to be worthy of rehabilitation,
restoration and preservation because either:
a. The proposed district contains within definable geographic
boundaries one or more landmarks along with such other buildings,
places or areas, which, while not such historic significance to be
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.2)
designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the
district; or
b. The proposed district contains within definable geographic
boundaries such buildings, places or areas which while not such
individual significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless,
as an aggregate, possess historic significance establishing a sense of
time and place unique to the Town of Normal.
D. Report and Recommendation of Preservation Commission. The Preservation
Commission shall within forty-five (45) days from receipt of a completed
nomination in proper form adopt by resolution, a recommendation that the
nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for
designation in Paragraph C of this Section 15.16-2. The resolution shall be
accompanied by a report to the Planning Commission containing the following
information:
1. Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the nominated
landmark or historic district as it relates to the criteria for designation;
2. Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated landmark or
historic district;
3. In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for
designation:
a. The significant exterior architectural features of the nominated
landmark that should be protected;
b. The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other
than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that it should be
reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of SEC.
15.16-5.
4. In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet the criteria for
designation:
a. The types of significant exterior architectural features of the
structures within the nominated historic district that should be
protected;
b. The types of alterations and demolitions that should be reviewed for
appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of SEC. 15.16-5.
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.3)
5. Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of
Certificates of Appropriateness to the nominated landmark or historic
district.
6. The relationship of the nominated landmark or historic district to the ongoing
effort of the Preservation Commission to identify and nominate all potential
areas and structures that meeting the criteria for designation.
7. Recommendations as to appropriate permitted uses, special uses, height and
area regulations, minimum dwelling size, floor area, sign regulations, and
parking regulations necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the
nominated landmark or historic district.
8. A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and the boundaries
of the nominated historic district.
The recommendations and report of the Preservation Commission shall be sent to
the Planning Commission within seven (7) days following the vote on the resolution
and shall be available to the public in the office of the Town Clerk.
E. Design Guidelines. Design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of
Certificates of Appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the following
architectural criteria for existing structures and new construction:
1. Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be
compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with
contributing structures in a historic district;
2. Proportions of Windows and Doors. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows on facades visible from the street should be
compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark and
with contributing structures within a historic district;
3. Relationship of Building Masses and Spaces. The relationship of a structure
within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures
should be compatible;
4. Roof Shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and contributing structures
in a historic district;
5. Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or partial
demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and character
and with contributing structures in historic districts;
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.4)
6. Directional Expression. Facades in historic districts should blend with other
structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a historic
district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures. The directional expression of a
landmark after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be
compatible with its original architectural style and character;
7. Garages and Driveways. Garages should be situated in a manner compatible
with garages located on contributing properties within a district. If attached,
the garage should be set back to the rear face of the home.
8. Architectural Details. Architectural details including materials, colors (paint
or stain color on any surface that has not been previously painted or stained
shall comply with design guidelines), and textures should be treated so as to
make a landmark compatible with its original architectural style and
character and to preserve and enhance the architectural style or character of a
landmark or historic district;
a. Materials. Approved historic building materials include wood
siding, brick, stone, and stucco. The Historic Preservation
Commission may approve cement fiberboard siding in dimensions
appropriate for the structure and historic district; however, vinyl
siding will not be approved. The Commission will review newly
developed materials as they become available and are deemed
appropriate.
b. Trim. Window and door trim must be compatible with the
dimensions of the trim found elsewhere on the landmark structure or
found on contributing structures within the district. The Historic
Preservation Commission may approve newly developed
replacement materials, so long as they can be turned, custom cut, and
painted.
c. Muntins. Window muntins must have appropriate dimensions and
depth to be compatible with windows found elsewhere on the
landmark or within the historic district. This may require the
adherence of muntins to both the exterior and interior of the window,
as the Historic Preservation Commission deems appropriate,
however, muntins between the glass panes will not be approved.
d. Eaves. Eave widths and slopes must be comparable to those found
on contributing structures elsewhere in the district and must be
compatible with the structure’s architectural style.
e. Architectural style. Although no particular architectural style is
required, new construction must use a consistent style throughout the
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.5)
structure. The Commission may approve a combination of styles if
such combination is supported by the styles of contributing structures
elsewhere in the historic district.
f. Porches. Porches must be designed to match the architectural style
of the home.
g. Shutters. Shutters are allowed if appropriate to the architectural style
of the house and must be in correct proportion to the window, even if
they are not operable.
h. Front Door. The front door must be of a style appropriate to the rest
of the structure’s architecture.
F. Notification of Nomination. The Planning Commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the nomination within thirty (30) days following receipt of a report and
recommendation from the Preservation Commission that a nominated landmark or
historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation. Notice shall be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the street address and
legal description of a nominated landmark and the boundaries of a nominated
historic district and the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. Notices
shall also be sent by regular mail to the owner(s) of record of the nominated
landmark or historic district. Courtesy notices may also be provided to property
owners or residents residing within 400 feet of a nominated landmark or historic
district.
G. Public Hearing. Oral or written testimony concerning the significance of the
nominated landmark or historic district shall be taken at the public hearing from any
person concerning the nomination. The Preservation Commission may present
expert testimony or present its own evidence regarding the compliance of the
nominated landmark or historic district with the criteria for consideration of a
nomination set forth in Paragraph C of this SEC. 15.16-2. The hearing shall be
closed upon completion of testimony.
H. Recommendation by Planning Commission. Within thirty (30) days following close
of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation upon
the evidence whether the nominated landmark or historic district does or does not
meet the criteria for designation. Such a recommendation shall be passed by
resolution of the Planning Commission and shall be accompanied by a report stating
the findings of the Planning Commission concerning the relationship between the
criteria for designation in Paragraph C of this SEC. 15.16-2 and the nominated
landmark or historic district and all other information required by SEC. 15.16-2.
I. Notification of Recommendation. Notice of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, including a copy of the report, shall be sent by regular mail to the
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.6)
owner of record of a nominated landmark and of all owners of record of property
within a nominated historic district within seven (7) days following adoption of the
recommendation. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the President and Board of Trustees for final action.
J. Action by the President and Board of Trustees.
1. The President and Board of Trustees shall, as an exercise of its legislative
discretion, within sixty (60) days after receiving the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, either reject the recommendation by formal
resolution or designate the landmark or historic district by ordinance.
2. Public Hearing. The Corporate Authority may hold a public hearing before
enacting the resolution or ordinance and provide notice and take testimony in
the same manner as provided in Paragraphs (F) and (G) of SEC. 15.16-2.
3. Protest. In case a valid written protest is filed with the Town Clerk, the
designation ordinance cannot be pursued except upon the favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Town Council who are eligible to
vote. In order to constitute a valid protest it must:
a. be signed and acknowledged by the owners of property representing
at least twenty percent (20%) of the total lineal street frontage in the
proposed district, however, in those cases where the property to be
designated includes owners of parcels without any street frontage,
then the written protest must be signed and acknowledged by the
owners of property representing at least twenty percent (20%) of the
total area of property to be designated; and
b. unless waived by Council action, the protest must be filed with the
Town Clerk at least seven (7) days prior to consideration of the
proposed designation by the Town Council.
(Entire SEC. 15.16-2(J)(3) Amended by Ord. No. 4764 on 1/22/02)
4. Delay. If an application for a proposed designation is not acted upon finally
by the President and Board of Trustees within sixty (60) days of the date
upon which such application is received, it shall be deemed to have been
denied unless extended by an agreement of the applicant and President and
Board of Trustees reflected in the minutes of the Town Council.
5. One Year Bar. No application for a designation which has been denied
wholly or in part by the President and Board of Trustees, shall be
resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of denial,
except on grounds of error in the original proceedings, or change of
condition in either case found to be valid by the President and Board of
Trustees.
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.7)
6. Notice of Decision. The Town Clerk shall provide written notification of the
action of the President and Board of Trustees by regular mail to the owner(s)
of record of the nominated landmark or all owners of record of property
within a nominated historic district. The notice shall include a copy of the
designation ordinance or resolution passed by the Town Council and shall be
sent within seven (7) days of the Town Council’s action. A copy of each
designation ordinance shall be sent to the Preservation Commission, the
Planning Commission, and the Zoning Administrator. The Town Clerk shall
also file with the McLean County Recorder of Deeds a certified copy of the
designation ordinance.
K. The Designation Ordinance. Upon designation, the historic district shall be
classified as a “S-3 Historic and Cultural District” juxtaposed over one (1) or more
of the other districts established in Division 6 of this Code. The designating
ordinance may prescribe the significant exterior architectural features; the types of
construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other than those requiring a
building or demolition permit that should be reviewed for appropriateness; the
design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of appropriateness; and sign
regulations. The official zoning map of the Town shall be amended to show the
location of the “S-3 Historic and Cultural District.”
SEC. 15.16-3 INTERIM CONTROL.
A. Moratorium on Demolition Permits. No demolition permit shall be issued by the
Building Commissioner for demolition, relocation, or removal of any structure
within the Town of Normal unless the Historic Preservation Commission, either
meeting as a whole or through executive committee, determines that such structure
is not worthy of historic preservation pursuant to the standards set forth in this
historic preservation ordinance. The Historic Preservation Committee or its
executive committee shall render its decision in writing to the Building
Commissioner within thirty (30) days of application for a demolition permit. In the
event the Historic Preservation Commission or its executive committee determines
that the structure is worthy of historic preservation, the Building Commissioner shall
further delay issuance of a demolition permit for an additional thirty (30) day period
in order to give the property owner or the Normal Town Council an opportunity to
nominate the structure for historic landmark status.
B. Post Nomination Moratorium. Upon nomination of any structure for landmark status
or any property for historic district status, an Interim Control period starts. This
period ends when a final decision has been made by the Town Council on the
nomination. During this period, no alteration, removal, demolition, or other exterior
change shall be made by any person to the structure or property so nominated until
final disposition of the nomination by the Town Council unless such alteration,
removal, demolition, or exterior change is authorized by formal resolution of the
Town Council as necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. This applies only to
changes that would ordinarily require a Certificate of Appropriateness, as if the
SEC. 15.16-2(Cont.8)
Historic Preservation Commission and Town Council already approved the
proposed landmark or historic district designation. In no event shall the delay be for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SEC. 15.16-4 AMENDMENT AND RESCISSION OF DESIGNATION. Designation
may be amended or rescinded upon petition to the Preservation Commission and compliance with
the same procedure and according to the same criteria set forth herein for designation.
SEC. 15.16-5 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
A. Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required
before the following actions affecting the exterior architectural appearance of any
landmark or property within a historic district may be undertaken.
1. Any exterior construction, alteration, or removal requiring a building permit
from the Town.
2. Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a permit from the Town.
3. Any exterior construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district.
4. Any painting or staining of a previously unpainted or unstained surface.
5. The construction, removal, or placement on any lot of any structure or
fixture not requiring a building permit which is readily visible from a public
street including, but not limited to, fences, walls, gazebos, and sheds.
Exceptions:
1. The following fixture(s) will not require a Certificate of Appropriateness:
gazing balls, statuary, bird baths, dog houses, dog runs, rabbit hutches,
basketball goals, swing sets, playground equipment, forts, tree houses,
landscaping and landscape structures, pools, clothes lines, poles, satellite
dishes, antennas, and fired cooking pits.
2. Projects not visible from a public right-of-way.
B. Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness. Every application for a demolition
or a building permit, including the accompanying plans and specifications, affecting
the exterior architectural appearance of a designated landmark or of a property
within a designated historic district shall be forwarded by the Building
Commissioner to the Preservation Commission within seven (7) days following the
receipt of the application by the Building Commissioner. The Building
Commissioner shall not issue the building or demolition permit until the
SEC. 15.16-5(Cont.1)
Preservation Commission has issued a Certificate of Appropriateness. A preapplication
meeting with Town Staff is required for applicants proposing new
construction in a historic district. Any applicant may request a meeting with the
Preservation Commission before the Building Commissioner sends the application
to the Preservation Commission or during the review of the application. Application
for review of construction, alteration, demolition, or removal not requiring a
building permit for which a Certificate of Appropriateness is required shall be made
on a form prepared by the Preservation Commission and available at the office of the
Building Commissioner. The Preservation Commission shall consider the
completed application at its next regular meeting.
C. Expedited Review Process. The Chairman or his/her designee may upon the
concurrence of the Town Building Commissioner and the Town Planner (or their
designees) issue a Certificate of Appropriateness without submitting the matter to
the full Commission in the following circumstances:
1. The application pertains to a non-contributing structure;
2. The application pertains to replacement of materials with like materials and
no other changes are proposed; or
3. Submission to the full Commission would result in unnecessary delay and
create an unreasonable hardship on the applicant.
D. Determination by Preservation Commission. The Preservation Commission shall
review the application for a building or demolition permit or for a Certificate of
Appropriateness and issue or deny the Certificate of Appropriateness within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the application. Written notice of the approval or denial of
the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be provided the applicant
and the Building Commissioner within seven (7) days following the determination
and shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Appropriateness in the case of an
approval. Unless otherwise specified by the Commission, any order or the decision
of the Commission authorizing a certificate of appropriateness will expire if the
applicant fails to obtain a building permit within one year from the date of the
decision.
E. Denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness. A statement of the reasons shall
accompany a denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Preservation
Commission shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if
any, in the proposed action that would cause the Preservation Commission to
reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as
quickly as possible the differences between the owner and the Preservation
Commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a
building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of
the Preservation Commission.
SEC. 15.16-5(Cont.2)
F. Standards for Review. In considering an application for a building or demolition
permit or for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Preservation Commission shall be
guided by the following general standards in addition to any design guidelines in the
ordinance designating the landmark or historic district.
1. Every reasonable and practical effort shall be made to provide a compatible
use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure,
or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
2. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or
site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of
any historic material or distinctive architectural feature should be avoided
when possible and reasonable.
3. All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their
own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to create an
earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
4. Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the
history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment.
These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected.
5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that
characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
6. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced,
wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color (paint
or stain, on any surface that has not been previously painted or stained shall
comply with Standards for Review), texture, and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on
accurate duplication of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or
pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of
different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
7. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest
means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage
the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
8. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological
resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
9. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall
not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy
SEC. 15.16-5(Cont.3)
significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such design is
compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property,
neighborhood, or environment.
10. The relocation of a landmark shall be considered only if the Commission
determines that such action represents the only reasonable means by which
the landmark will be preserved.
11. Building improvements, including additions, and interior modernization are
encouraged provided that they are compatible with and do not significantly
alter the style and character of the original architecture of the landmark or
the historic district;
SEC. 15.16-6 CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
A. Certificate of Economic Hardship. Application for a Certificate of Economic
Hardship shall be made on a form prepared by the Preservation Commission. The
applicant shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of the evidence that
denial of the certificate shall deprive the owner of reasonable use or a reasonable
return on the property. Any financial information submitted by the applicant shall
be considered confidential and shall not be subject to public disclosure except upon
consent of the applicant and except if any appeal is taken of the determination by the
Preservation Commission on a Certificate of Economic Hardship. The information
shall be reviewed only by the City Manager or his/her designee and upon his/her
determination make a recommendation to the Commission.
The applicant for a Certificate of Economic Hardship may make submissions
concerning any or all of the following information in order to assist the Commission
in making a determination on the application.
1. Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or
removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to
comply with the recommendations of the Preservation Commission for
changes necessary for the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
2. A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property
and their suitability for rehabilitation.
3. Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after
completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal;
after any changes recommended by the Preservation Commission; and, in the
case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for
continued use.
SEC. 15.16-6(Cont.1)
4. In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation
or reuse of the existing structure on the property.
5. Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from
whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between
the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was
purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer.
6. If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the
property for the previous two (2) years; itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years; and depreciation deduction and
annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same
period.
7. Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years.
8. All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or
applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the
property.
9. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if
any, within the previous two (2) years.
10. Assessed value of the property according to the two (2) most recent
assessments.
11. Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years.
12. Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship,
for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or
other.
13. Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the owner,
applicant, or principal investors in the property in order to assist the
Preservation Commission in making a determination as to whether the
property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.
B. Determination of Economic Hardship. The Preservation Commission shall review
all the evidence and information submitted by an applicant for a Certificate of
Economic Hardship and make a determination within forty-five (45) days of receipt
of the application whether the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness has
deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property of reasonable use of, or a
SEC. 15.16-6(Cont.2)
reasonable economic return on, the property. Written notice of the determination
shall be provided in the same manner as required by Paragraph (E) of this SEC.
15.16-5.
SEC. 15.16-7 APPEALS.
A, Appeals. Any determination by the Preservation Commission that an application for
a Certificate of Appropriateness or for a Certificate of Economic Hardship be
approved or denied shall be an administrative decision reviewable by the President
and Board of Trustees. Appeals shall be filed with the Town Clerk within ten (10)
days following the Preservation Commission’s decision and may be filed only by the
following:
1. the owner of record of the property in question;
2. any owner of record of property in a historic district;
3. the owner of record of property within 400 feet of the property in question.
A determination by the President and Board of Trustees shall be a final administrative
decision reviewable as provided by Illinois law.
(Added 8/20/90 by Ord. No. 3925 as Subsection (E) of Section 15.12-1)(Comprehensively
Amended 5/21/01 by Ord. No. 4723 - Transferring to SEC. 15.16)(Comprehensively Amended
6/20/05 by Ord. No. 5012)
SEC. 15.17-1
DIVISION 17 - DESIGN REVIEW IN B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SEC. 15.17-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the general purpose and intent of this
Division to foster the use and development of land in an orderly manner by both private and
public interests with special consideration given to the appearance of the community as a result
of such development. It is recognized that the appearance of property has a direct bearing on the
economic value of such property and also the economic value of adjacent and surrounding
property. The appearance of a single property affects not only surrounding property, but the
cumulative affect is to enhance or diminish the beauty of the entire Town and consequently the
values of property within the Town. It is further recognized that the appearance of property not
only has economic effects, but also affects the general welfare, health and safety of Town
citizens. An aesthetically pleasing environment is a clean, healthy and safe environment.
The B-2 Central Business District is distinguished by the charm of its buildings, its quaint
specialty shops and its pedestrian scale. The Central Business District developed at the leisurely
pace of a small Town around the turn of the century. The subsequent visual diversity of the
buildings in the Central Business District is attributable to development occurring slowly over
the period of many years. The Community recognizes the significance of the Central Business
District as an important cultural and commercial resource. The Central Business District
contains common building elements such as load-bearing brick walls, second story bay windows,
decorative brickwork, and cast iron thresholds.
This Division provides a procedure by which development of property within the Central
Business District may be reviewed and modified in order to enhance the aesthetic beauty of the
Central Business District and maintain the desirable qualities of the District through clear
architectural and appearance standards and consequently the economic value of property and the
general welfare of the citizens.
SEC. 15.17-2 APPLICATION. This Division shall apply to all exterior building
renovation, new construction or other exterior alterations to property in the B-2 Central Business
District whether or not a permit is required by the Town, including painting. No exterior work
may be initiated except upon approval of a development plan in conformance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this Division.
SEC. 15.17-3 COORDINATION WITH OTHER CODES. In the event the
substantive provisions of this Division conflict with any other codes or regulations governing
construction or development in the B-2 Central Business District, the provisions of this Division
shall control. In no event shall this Division undermine the purposes set forth in any Town
health and safety codes.
SEC. 15.17-4 SEVERABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town
Council of the Town of Normal that the several provisions of this Division are separable in
accordance with the following:
SEC. 15.17-4(Cont.1)
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Division
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Code not
specifically included in such judgment order.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Division
to be invalid as to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment
shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or
structure not specifically included in such judgment order.
SEC. 15.17-5 SPECIFIC PURPOSES. In addition to the general purposes and intent
expressed above, this Division is further intended to give effect to the following specific
purposes:
A. To provide for the orderly and functional arrangement of land uses and buildings.
B. To establish standards for the orderly development or redevelopment within the
Central Business Zoning District.
C. To permit public involvement in the planning of private land uses which have the
potential for significant impact on the use and enjoyment of surrounding property
or on the public resources and facilities of the Community.
D. To conserve and protect the taxable value of land and buildings in the Central
Business District.
E. To protect the air, water and land resources within Normal from the hazards of
pollution and misuse.
F. To protect land and buildings from natural hazards including flooding, erosion
and fire.
G. To preserve and protect the visual diversity of buildings in the Central Business
District and its pedestrian scale.
H. To preserve, protect and encourage the development of buildings, groups of
buildings and development sites of distinguished architectural character and
appearance.
I. To promote the Uptown Development Plan adopted by the Town of Normal and
coordinate said Plan with site development and building construction in the
Central Business District.
J. To make recommendations on permanent public improvements prior to
implementation of such improvements.
SEC. 15.17-6
SEC. 15.17-6 DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION.
A. The Uptown Design Review Commission of the Town of Normal created
pursuant to Chapter 10 of the Town of Normal Municipal Code shall have
authority to apply this Division in a manner that will foster and promote high
quality, attractive development and rehabilitation within the B-2 Central Business
District.
B. Meetings, Hearings, Rules and Procedures.
1. Meetings.
a. Regular Meetings. All Regular Meetings of the Uptown Design
Review Commission shall be held at 4:00 p.m. on the second
Monday of each month at such place as the Commission may
determine.
b. Special Meetings. Special Meetings may be called by the
Chairperson or a majority of the Commission members upon at
least 48-hours notice or by announcement of the time and place of
the special meeting at a Regular, Special or Adjourned Meeting.
c. Meetings Open to the Public. All Regular, Special, Adjourned,
Study or Workshop Meetings of the Uptown Design Review
Commission shall be open to the public.
d. Quorum. A majority of the Uptown Design Review Commission
members shall constitute a quorum for purposes of transacting
business.
e. Rules and Procedure. Except as otherwise provided in this
Division, all Meeting of the Uptown Design Review Commission
shall be conducted pursuant to Robert Rules of Order Newly
Revised 1990 Edition published by Scott Forsman and Company;
copies of which have been and remain on file in the Office of the
Town Clerk.
2. Administrative Public Hearings.
a. All Administrative Public Hearings shall be regularly scheduled or
properly called meetings of the Uptown Design Review
Commission.
b. Legal Notices.
(1) Legal notice of an Administrative Public Hearing shall be
given not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30)
SEC. 15.17-6(Cont.1)
days before said Hearing by publishing a notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town.
(2) Courtesy notices may be given by the mailing of a Notice
of Hearing to the owners of any land within 400 feet from
the parcel on which action is proposed.
c. Administrative Public Hearing Procedure.
(1) Appearances. Any person may appear and testify at an
Administrative Public Hearing either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
(2) Oath. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths.
(3) Compelling the Appearance of Witnesses. The Chairman,
or in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may compel the
attendance of witnesses by mailing to such persons a notice
compelling attendance not less than five (5) days before the
Public Hearing. Failure of a person to appear in response to
such a notice shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
d. Record Keeping. The Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member, upon each question
or if absent or failing to vote indicates such fact.
e. Verbatim Transcripts. In the event any person desires a verbatim
transcript of the Administrative Public Hearing, a written request
therefore shall be filed with the Chairperson of the Uptown Design
Review Commission not less than three (3) weeks before the
hearing date. Costs of taking such a transcript shall be paid by the
person requesting the presence of the reporter at the Administrative
Public Hearing. Any person desiring a written transcript of the
proceedings shall pay applicable transcription or copying costs.
f. Notification of Decisions. Copies of decisions and
recommendations of the Commission shall be served by mailing a
copy thereof to all persons requesting the same.
SEC. 15.17-7 DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms whenever they occur in
this division shall be interpreted as herein defined:
A. Accent. An area covering no more than 10% of a building’s surface area visible
to the public.
SEC. 15.17-7(Cont.1)
B. Architectural Element. Part of a building’s fabric, structures and associated
services, such as a window.
C. Architectural Feature. A prominent or significant part or element of a building,
structure, or site.
D. Architectural Style. The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a
particular historic period.
E. Awning. A sloped projection made of canvas or other non-rigid material,
stretched over a frame and extended over a doorway or window. The awning is
supported entirely from the exterior wall of the building and provides protection
from the weather.
F. Bargeboard. A highly ornamented or pierced board placed on the incline of the
gable.
G. Block Face. The entire expanse of buildings from one intersection to another
along a given street.
H. Bracket. Projecting support placed under eaves or other overhangs.
I. Canopy. Flat projection from a building façade.
J. Column. A supporting pillar, especially one consisting of a usually round shaft, a
capital, and a base.
K. Cornice. An ornamental topping that crowns the structure it is on.
L. Entryway. A place of entrance.
M. Façade. A face or elevation of a building.
N. Fascia. The exposed vertical edge of a roof.
O. Frieze. The plain or decorative band or board located just below the storefront
cornice.
P. Fully shielded light fixture. A light fixture shielded or constructed so that no light
rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as
certified by a photometric test report.
Q. Harmony. A quality which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in
arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements.
R. Luminaire. A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
SEC. 15.17-7(Cont.2)
S. Mechanical Hardware and Equipment. Equipment, devices, and accessories, the
use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and similar purposes.
T. Molding. A decorative wood or stone contour or band, used in exterior and
interior architectural elements.
U. Operable Shutters. Shutters capable of being closed over the window opening.
V. Operable Windows. Windows capable of being opened and closed.
W. Outdoor light fixture. Outdoor, electrically powered illuminating devices,
outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently
installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement
X. Pier. An upright structure of masonry to serve as a principal support, whether
isolated or part of a wall.
Y. Portico. A roofed entrance porch, often supported by columns or pillars.
Z. Projecting Sign. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects more
than 18 inches from a building face or wall.
AA. Site Hardware. Includes but is not limited to street furniture, lighting standards,
mailboxes, control boxes, newspaper boxes, roadway signs, and fire hydrants.
BB. Storefront. Street-facing façade area below the floor plane of the second floor.
CC. Street Hardware. Objects other than buildings, structures, and plantings, located
in streets and public ways and outside of buildings. Examples are lamp posts,
utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting
containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.
DD. Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way
composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving,
planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
EE. Transom. A window above an opening such as a door or window built on a
horizontal crossbar; often hinged on the top to swing open for ventilation.
FF. Upper Façade. Above the storefront. Displays the structure’s essential
architectural style.
GG. Wall Sign. A sign that is in any manner affixed to or painted onto any exterior
wall of a building or structure or etched into exterior glass of a building or
structure and that projects not more than 18 inches from the building or structure,
including signs affixed to architectural projections from a building provided the
SEC. 15.17-7(Cont.3)
copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building
façade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
HH. Window. An opening in the wall of a building that is made of transparent
material.
SEC. 15.17-8 GENERAL PROHIBITION. No exterior building painting, renovation,
new construction or other exterior alterations to property in the B-2 Central Business District,
whether or not a permit is requested, shall be started until the property owner and/or developer
obtains a Certificate of Compliance or a Conditional Certificate of Compliance from the Uptown
Design Review Commission.
SEC. 15.17-9 PROCEDURE.
A. Submission. Any person desiring to renovate or repair the exterior of any
building, construct a new building or structure or make any other exterior
alterations or improvements to property in the B-2 Central Business District shall
submit all information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of
an owner or developer to provide this information in the form required shall be
sufficient grounds for the Uptown Design Review Commission to refuse to accept
the filing or reject the application at any stage in the review and approval process
and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of this Code.
B. The owner or developer of property, subject to this Division, shall file with the
Town Clerk a completed Application for Certificate of Compliance, ten (10)
copies of a Site Plan that includes site layout, landscape, and building elevations
for each façade, and a filing fee in the amount of $150.00. Applications for
expedited review require no fee. The Site Plan shall contain:
1. Survey maps and drawings indicating existing conditions prepared by a
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer
showing the boundary lines, the location and perimeter of any area
designated as a special flood hazard area as defined in Chapter 28 of the
Municipal Code. Specific identification, location and dimensions, if
applicable, of the following located within or within fifty (50) feet of the
area included in the Construction Plan; rights-of-way, lots of record,
streets, roadways, drainageways whether improved or unimproved,
walkways, sidewalks, public easements, private easements, railroad rightsof-
way, section lines, corporate limit lines, public parks, schools and other
public lands, buildings and structures to remain on the property, and
buildings and structures to be removed.
2. Surveys, maps, plans, and drawings of proposed development. A
Registered Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer or
Registered Professional Architect shall prepare graphic presentations of
the following: rights-of-way, interior and exterior streets, interior and
exterior roadways, street and roadway names, alleys, walkways,
SEC 15.17-9(Cont.1)
sidewalks, public easements, private easements, lots, outlots, setback lines,
public parks or areas to be designated as common public space, other areas
proposed for dedication or reservation to the public, railroad crossings and
rights-of-way, bridges, size, location, type of construction and proposed
use of all proposed buildings and structures, location and composition of
all landscaping material and screening material, general landscaping plan,
general parking plan and direction of traffic flow, location and dimension
of curb cuts, sign plan, lighting plan, preliminary drainage plan, detailed
elevation drawings of all sides of the proposed construction or renovation,
and a list of building materials and color samples for both the building
exterior and for all signs.
C. Construction Plan. The Construction Plan shall be prepared by a professional
engineer and/or architect and shall contain the name and seal of such professional
engineer and/or architect. The Construction Plan shall be drawn to scale (1/4” =
1’0” or 1/8” = 1’0”) and contain at a minimum the following:
1. Legal description of all property included in the Construction Plan.
2. Name, address and phone number of the owner or owners of record of all
property described in the Construction Plan.
3. Name, address and phone number of the developer of the property
described in the Construction Plan.
4. Name, address and phone number of the registered professional engineer
and/or architect preparing any part of the Construction Plan or supporting
material.
5. Name, address and phone number of attorneys representing the owners
and/or developers.
6. The parcel identification number for the property described in the
Construction Plan.
D. The Uptown Design Review Commission chairperson or his or her designee shall
have authority to waive submittal of any of the previously listed elements for
projects only involving the renovation of existing structures.
E. Scheduling and Notification of Review. Upon receipt of a completed application
for Certificate of Compliance, payment of the appropriate filing fee and
submission of the complete Plans, the Town Clerk shall schedule and give notice
of an Administrative Public Hearing with the Uptown Design Review
Commission. Notice shall consist of personal notice or notice by regular mail to
the applicant, posting of the property described in the application and public
notice as provided in this Division.
SEC. 15.17-9(Cont.2)
F. Distribution of Plans. The Town Clerk shall route one or more copies of the
application and Plans to members of the Uptown Design Review Commission.
G. Administrative Public Hearing. Upon receipt of the application and Plans the
Uptown Design Review Commission shall conduct an Administrative Public
Hearing on the proposed development plan. The Uptown Design Review
Commission shall take testimony from the applicant, from Normal Town Staff
and from any other interested person appearing at the Administrative Public
Hearing. In reviewing the proposed development plan, the Commission shall
apply the design guidelines set forth in this Division. If the Commission finds
that the applicant has complied with all of the design guidelines, the Commission
shall issue a Certificate of Compliance. If the Commission finds that the
applicant has not complied with all of the design guidelines, the Commission may
take one of the following actions:
1. Issue a Conditional Certificate of Compliance in which the applicant
agrees to implement all additional design elements and to remove all
rejected design elements as required by the Commission;
2. Issue a Conditional Certificate of Compliance in which the applicant must,
prior to beginning the project, obtain waivers from the Town Council
through the waiver procedures established in this Division; or
3. Deny the application entirely.
In the event the Uptown Design Review Commission requires additional
documentation or material in order to conduct its review, the Uptown Design
Review Commission may continue the Administrative Public Hearing or its
consideration of the application for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days
without the consent of the applicant.
H. Decisions of the Uptown Design Review Commission. Within five (5) days of
the close of review by the Uptown Design Review Commission, the Commission
shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision regarding the proposed
development plan.
I. Appeal or Request for Waiver. Any applicant, the Town Staff or any person
owning property within four hundred (400) feet of the property subject to the
Certificate of Compliance application, may appeal a decision of the Uptown
Design Review Commission to the Normal Town Council or request waivers in
accordance with a Conditional Certificate of Compliance from the Normal Town
Council. Such appeal or request for waiver shall be filed in the Office of the
Town Clerk within five (5) days of the written decision of the Uptown Design
Review Commission and shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee in the
amount of $100.00.
SEC. 15.17-9(Cont.3)
J. Review by the Normal Town Council. The Town Council in reviewing an appeal
or request for waiver may consider the material presented at the Uptown Design
Review Commission as well as any additional material presented before the
Normal Town Council.
K. Decision by the Normal Town Council. Unless extended by agreement the Town
Council shall render a decision on the appeal of the decision of the Uptown
Design Review Commission or on the granting of a Conditional Certificate of
Compliance requiring waivers no later than at its next regularly scheduled
meeting following presentation by the appellant to the Council. The Town
Council in reviewing the appeal or request for waiver shall be guided by the
design standards contained in this Division; however, the Council may depart
from these standards when the Council deems such a departure to be in the public
interest or to further the purposes of the design standards. The Town Council
may approve the plan as presented, approve the plan conditioned upon
modification, approve the plan and grant waivers, reject the plan entirely or
remand the plan to the Uptown Design Review Committee for further review.
Unless agreed to by the applicant, no applicant shall be remanded to the Uptown
Design Review Committee by the Town Council more than once.
L. Appeal of Council Decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town
Council may appeal such decision as provided by law.
M. Minor Changes. Minor changes in the location, siting, height, and design of
structures or landscaping may be authorized by the Uptown Design Review
Commission Chairperson; however, no such change may involve a change in the
character of the project or a substantial alteration to the design or landscaping.
SEC. 15.17-10 EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS.
A. Qualifying Projects. Notwithstanding the procedures set forth above, an applicant
may seek expedited review for the following:
1. Construction or other exterior alteration less than $5,000.00 in value.
(Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
2. Repair or rehabilitation work in which like materials will be used, unless
such materials are prohibited in this Division.
3. Emergency situations in order to protect persons and/or property from
significant injury or damage.
B. Application and Notice. Upon receipt of an expedited review application, the
Town Clerk shall immediately forward such application to the Chairperson of the
Uptown Design Review Commission. The Chairperson and the City Manager, or
SEC. 15.17-10(Cont.1)
his designee, shall meet as soon as possible to review the application. Notice of
such meeting shall be given immediately to the applicant either in person, by
telephone or ordinary mail.
C. Expedited review. When conducting an expedited review the two-member panel
of the Uptown Design Review Commission shall be governed by the design
guidelines in this Division and shall determine whether or not the proposed
construction permanently and significantly alters the exterior appearance of a
structure. If in the opinion of the two-member panel, the exterior appearance of
the structure is significantly and permanently altered, the panel shall refer the
applicant to the full Uptown Design Review Commission and the process for full
review shall apply. As used herein significantly and permanently altered means a
repair that results in a change in fifty (50%) percent or more of the exterior of a
structure or a change in less than fifty (50%) percent of the exterior of a structure
but such change results in a design appearance which should be avoided as
provided in the design review standards and either change is expected to last more
than ninety (90) days.
D. Expedited Decision. If the Expedited Review Panel determines that the proposed
construction activity does not significantly and permanently alter the exterior of
the structure, and the proposed alteration does not violate the design standards set
forth in this Division, the Chairperson shall note his approval on the application
and issue any appropriate expedited Certificate of Compliance. If the Expedited
Review Panel determines that the proposed alteration violates any design standard
set forth in this Division, the application for Certificate of Appropriateness must
go before the entire Uptown Design Review Commission for review. The
Commission will then prepare a recommendation for the Town Council in the
event that the applicant seeks a waiver from the Council.
SEC. 15.17-11 STANDARDS FOR DESIGN. The purpose of these standards is to
establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of the Central Business District.
Pertinent to design are the site layout, building and structure components, lighting, signs, street
hardware, public space, stormwater management facilities, scale of design, color and other
objects observable from public ways.
These standards are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather
to assist in focusing on design principles that allow creativity with a satisfactory visual
appearance while promoting the purpose and intent of this Division. Waivers may be obtained
for design elements that do not comply with the ordinance. See SEC. 15.17-9(H) for waiver
provisions.
In addition, these standards are not comprehensive but provide guidance on specific
design elements. Any design elements not addressed in this Division must still be approved by
the Commission for the purpose of only approving designs that complement the historic
character of the B-2 District and further the goals of the uptown renewal effort.
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.1)
A. For all new construction, the following guidelines apply:
1. Building Components and Design.
a. Architectural style. No particular architectural style is mandated.
Buildings designed under the guidelines of a particular
architectural style should be consistent with that style.
b. Entryways. Entryways must be recessed to a depth that does not
allow a door to swing onto the sidewalk and have a strong design
consistent with the architecture of the rest of the building.
Elements of strong entryway design include canopies, awnings,
porticos, arcades, raised cornice parapets over the door, peaked
roof forms, arches, large windows, or architectural details such as
tile work and mouldings that are integrated into the building
structure and design.
c. Windows.
(1) Coverage and operability. Windows must cover no less
than 50% nor more than 75% of the storefront area;
windows must cover no less than 30% nor more than 50%
on the upper façade. All windows on the second and higher
floors must appear operable.
(2) Orientation and Placement. Windows must be vertical,
with no less than a 2:1 ratio of height to width. Window
separation into vertical orientation must be accomplished
with a prominent architectural element. See also SEC.
15.17-11(A)(1)(c)(4). Storefront windows must start
between two and three feet above the sidewalk.
(3) Window signs. No more than 25% of the storefront
windows may be covered by signs. This restriction does
not apply to signs permanently painted on or etched into the
window to serve as the business’ primary sign.
(4) Framing. All windows must include an architectural
element that frames the window. See also SEC. 15.17-
11(A)(1)(c)(2).
(5) Shutters. All window shutters must have the dimensions of
operable shutters and hardware that makes the shutters
appear to be operable even if the shutters are permanently
fixed in an open position.
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.2)
d. Cornice and Fascia.
(1) At roofline. All buildings must have a well-defined cornice
or fascia that creates a strong roofline and visually caps the
building, giving the building a finished appearance and
unifying the building with existing structures in the B-2
District. This requirement is particularly important when
the upper façade has little architectural distinction.
(2) At storefront. All buildings must have a storefront cornice
occurring between 9 and 14 feet above the sidewalk in
order to complement the average height of storefront
cornices on existing buildings.
e. Roof styles. The shape of the roof is not limited, however, all
buildings must have a parapet that conceals the roof plane.
f. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware. On buildings not
located on a corner, all mechanical equipment or other utility
hardware must be located on the roof or in the rear yard and must
be screened from view with materials harmonious with the
building. Such equipment or hardware on a corner building must
be located on the roof and screened from view or located at ground
level and screened to the extent possible with materials and colors
harmonious with the buildings. Such equipment or hardware shall
not be located closer than 6 feet from any residential windows.
(Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
g. Side and rear building faces. All exterior surfaces visible from the
street or the alley must present an attractive appearance and must
include architectural components found on the building façade in
order to tie the building together. Rear entrances are encouraged.
h. Anti-Monotony. New construction must avoid excessive
monotony in design by having no more than 15 feet of blank wall
length without an interruption by at least two of the following:
change in plane, change in texture or masonry pattern, windows,
trellises with vines, or an equivalent.
2. Color. Exterior colors in the B-2 District are limited to Low to Medium
saturated chroma, as explained in the Munsell System of Color Notation
for primary building colors. Highly saturated colors may be used for
accent or trim.
3. Permitted Building Materials. The materials on the following list are
permitted on the building exteriors visible from the street or alley:
architectural metal panels, stone, marble, face brick, decorative wood trim
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.3)
(e.g. Bargeboard or Gingerbread), and copper. The Uptown Design
Review Commission may permit other nonlisted materials of similar
quality and appearance. (Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
4. Prohibited Building Materials. The materials on the following list are
generally prohibited on the building exterior visible from the street or
alley: cement board panels, cement board siding, rustic materials, such as
wood shake shingles and barn wood, corrugated metal, corrugated
fiberglass, aluminum siding, imitation rock work, mirror or metalized
reflective glass, plywood, masonite, structure and chip board siding,
exterior insulated finish system (EIFS), vinyl siding, metal siding other
than copper, cinder block, split-face block or pre-cast panels. The Uptown
Design Review Commission may also reject other exterior materials that
do not complement the historic character of the B-2 District or that do not
further the spirit of the uptown renewal effort. (Amended 12/18/17 by
Ord. No. 5725)
5. Awnings and Canopies. Awnings and canopies are permitted with the
following restrictions:
a. All awnings must be made of cloth fabric or a cloth composite that
has the appearance of cloth. Awning materials may not have a
shiny synthetic appearance, which would conflict with the historic
appearance of the B-2 District. Canopies must be made of
materials that complement the overall historic character of the B-2
District.
b. Interior lighting within awnings or canopies is restricted to
downlighting with no more than five footcandles at grade
permitted. (Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
c. Awnings and canopies must be mounted no higher than 12 inches
below the storefront cornice. All awnings and canopies must have
a minimum vertical clearance of 7’6” above the sidewalk.
d. Awnings and canopies must be attached directly to the building
without requiring poles or sidewalk support.
e. On buildings wider than 25 feet, awnings and canopies must be
segmented to articulate each display window and to provide a
better sense of proportion to the façade.
f. Awnings and canopies may not cover more than 25% of storefront
windows.
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.4)
6. Exterior lighting. In order to promote the goals of improved aesthetics,
greater energy efficiency, and safety, the following lighting standards
apply to all nonexempt outdoor lighting:
a. All light fixtures must be harmonious with the overall building
design.
b. Mounting of light fixtures is limited to the first floor.
c. Lights may not move or flash.
d. Prohibited lighting includes fluorescent, high-pressure sodium,
laser, floodlights, mercury vapor and searchlights. The prohibition
against fluorescent does not apply when the fluorescent luminaire
has a color rendition similar to tungsten.
e. All bulbs and fixtures must be non-glare and cutoff. Fixtures must
be positioned in a way that the cutoff effect is maximized. Tilt
arms are prohibited.
f. Recessed entryways must be illuminated but may not exceed an
average of 5 footcandles at grade.
g. Building lighting, including wallpacks and arcade lighting, may
not exceed a light level of 5 footcandles at grade.
h. Parking lot lighting must comply with SEC. 15.14-7(H) of the
Code.
i. Exempt outdoor lighting includes terraces, signs, and outdoor
gathering spaces.
The foregoing lighting standards shall not apply to any structure listed on the
National Registry of Historic Buildings.
7. Signs. All signs must be designed by a sign professional. A nonprofessional
may be used if such person can demonstrate adequate
qualifications and samples of previous work. Signs should related in
placement and size to the other elements of the building. Individual shop
signs in a single storefront should relate to each other in design, size,
color, and placement on the building and lettering style.
a. Location. Only monument signs, wall signs, banner signs and
projecting signs are permitted. Inflatable signs are prohibited.
Temporary signs shall be regulated by Section 15 Division 13, of
the Town Sign Code, however, the maximum size of such
temporary signs shall be 1 square foot per lineal foot of storefront.
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.5)
In addition, the following rules apply to signs: (Amended 12/18/17
by Ord. No. 5725)
(1) Signs may not cover any architectural details, cornices, or
windows, with the exception of signs painted on or etched
into storefront windows.
(2) Wall signs are generally limited to the storefront; however,
up to 25% of the sign may project onto the upper façade as
long as no other rules are violated, such as covering a
window.
(3) Projecting signs may not project more than 60 inches from
the building or to the back side of the curb, whichever is a
lesser distance.
(4) Projecting signs must be at least eight feet above the
sidewalk.
(5) New buildings must provide a sign frieze in order to define
a strong boundary between the storefront and upper façade.
(6) Each lot may have no more than one monument sign.
(7) Banner signs may be located on all stories. Banners may
project no more than 60 inches from the face of the
building, and their size is limited by the overall sign square
footage for the property. Banner materials are not
restricted. (Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
b. Size. Every property may display signage in an amount not to
exceed one square foot of signage per lineal foot of building
frontage adjacent to a street, including rear building facades
adjacent to an alley, with additional restrictions stated as follows:
(Amended 12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
(1) Sign size must be in proportion to the storefront and
building as a whole. For wall signs, a ratio of one square
foot of sign area per each linear foot of storefront
determines the maximum signable area; however, all
buildings shall have a minimum signable area of 25 square
feet.
(2) Non-permanent window signs may not obscure more than
25% of the storefront window area. A window sign that
serves as the business’ primary business sign does not
factor into this calculation; however, such a window sign
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.6)
may not itself obscure more than 25% of the storefront
window area. See SEC. 15.17-11(A)(1)(c) for more
window provisions.
(3) Projecting signs may be no larger than 12 square feet.
(4) Monument signs may be no more than 6 feet tall. A ratio
of one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of storefront
determines the maximum signable area; however, no
monument sign may exceed 50 square feet of signable area.
Every monument sign may have at least 25 square foot of
signable area, regardless of the amount of lineal feet of
storefront.
c. Lighting. The only interior lighting permitted for signs is internal
lighting of individual letters and internal lighting on a sign in
which the light only shines through the lettering and/or logo. Signs
may not flash or move, with the exception of signs on buildings
listed on the National Registry of Historic Buildings. (Amended
12/18/17 by Ord. No. 5725)
d. Materials. The following materials are encouraged for signs:
wood, paint on wall, paint/goldleaf on glass, masonry relief, etched
glass, structural pigmented glass, decals, fabric awnings, banners,
leaded or stained glass transoms, tile, terrazzo, porcelain enamel,
sheet metal, adhesive vinyl. All sign material must be of exterior
quality and must be durable.
e. Mounting. Sign mounting must protect the integrity of the façade
materials and façade design.
8. Scale of Design. All new construction must be at least two stories in
height, with the first floor between 12 and 15 feet in height and upper
stories between 9 and 12 feet in height. Buildings may be no more than 2
stories taller than any adjacent buildings, and may in no case be more than
4 stories tall; however, this standard does not apply to buildings adjacent
to the traffic roundabout, which may be six stories in height.
9. Corner Buildings. Both street-facing sides of corner buildings will be
treated like the storefront façade, therefore, all storefront façade
requirements apply to both street-facing sides.
B. Building Design for Exterior Renovation of Existing Structures. All of the
guidelines from SEC. 15.17-11(A) apply to the exterior alterations made to
existing structures unless waived by the Town Council. The Town of Normal
recommends that the renovation of existing structures recreate the original façade.
Recommendations include the following:
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.7)
1. Windows. Restore and reglaze original window openings into original
shapes and sizes. Windows may not be permanently filled or decreased in
size.
2. Surface Materials. Remove nonoriginal surface materials from the
original wall surface, when the original wall surface still exists.
3. Piers. Restore piers to original status when such piers have been
eliminated or reduced in size.
C. Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping
1. Applicability. The parking lot perimeter landscaping requirements shall
apply to all new private and public off-street parking lots or expansion of
existing lots of more than 25 per cent of existing spaces. Existing parking
lots with more than 5 spaces shall comply with these requirements no later
than January 1, 2011.
2. Minimum Dimensional Standards. All parking lots shall be screened from
public streets and sidewalks, with at least a 5-foot wide landscaped area
and wheel stops that prevent any car overhang into the landscaped area.
However, such screening must not create a safety hazard for users of the
parking lots. Where a solid fence/wall is utilized, plant materials must be
on the street-side of the fence/wall.
3. Fencing/Wall Specifications. All fencing or walls utilized shall meet the
following specifications:
a. Only ornamental metal fencing, wood fencing, or masonry walls
shall be allowed. Chain link fencing and non-commercial grade
solid wood stockade fencing are prohibited.
b. Fencing shall be a minimum of three feet high and shall not exceed
4 feet in height. Masonry walls shall be a minimum of 30 inches in
height and shall not exceed 4 feet in height.
4. Minimum Plant Quantity. Where perimeter areas are to be landscaped, the
following minimum plant materials shall be provided:
a. One tree for every 25 lineal feet of perimeter area. Trees may be
spaced evenly or grouped.
b. A diverse combination of shrubs, ornamental grasses, and flowers
throughout the landscaped area.
SEC. 15.17-11(Cont.8)
5. Plant Species. The selection of plant materials shall be based on the Town
of Normal’s climate and site conditions with a goal of promoting
xeriscaping principles. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its
structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are
indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the
design, and of good appearance shall be used. Plant diversity is required for
the health of the overall landscaped area.
6. Plant Quality and Landscape Design. All plants shall be A-Grade or No. 1
Grade and free of defects. All plants shall be normal health, height, leaf
density, and spread as defined by the American Standard for Nursery Stock,
ANSI Z60.1 latest available edition, or the American Association of
Nurserymen. Plants shall have full, even, well-developed branching and a
dense, fibrous, and vigorous root system. All landscape plans shall be
designed by a landscape professional.
7. Plant Sizes and Specifications. The following minimum sizes shall be
required:
a. Canopy Shade Tree: 2.5-inch caliper measured 6 inches above
ground, balled, and burlapped, or equivalent.
b. Ornamental Tree: 2-inch caliper, balled and burlapped or equivalent
or 7 feet for a multi-stemmed tree.
c. Evergreen Tree: 6 feet high, balled, and burlapped or equivalent.
d. Shrubs: 24-inch balled and burlapped or 3-gallon minimum
container size.
8. Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to sound
horticultural practices in a manner designed to encourage quick
establishment and healthy growth. All landscaping in each phase shall either
be installed or the installation shall be secured with a letter of credit,
escrow, performance bond for 125 per cent of the value of the landscaping
or other surety satisfactory to the Town prior to the issuance of a
development approval or building permit.
D. Site Landscaping. SEC. 15.14-7(D)(3) of the Community Design Standards will
apply to the lineal street frontage of any greenspace provided, excluding the
greenspace provided to screen the parking area. The minimum installation sizes
set forth in SEC. 15.14-7(E)(3) shall also apply.
SEC. 15.17-12 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS. Maintenance standards in this
Division apply to all properties in the B-2 District. All exterior façade materials must be
maintained in sound and attractive condition. Any rotten, broken, or otherwise deteriorated
materials shall be repaired or replaced in kind. Peeling and/or chalking painted surfaces shall be
SEC. 15.17-12(Cont.1)
repainted or otherwise refinished. Permanent boarding or filling in of windows on any side of
the building is prohibited. All surfaces shall be kept free of debris, such as tape and staples. All
other Town code maintenance provisions also apply.
SEC. 15.17-13 STREETSCAPE PROVISIONS. Business owners in the B-2 District
may temporarily place items on the sidewalk in the public right-of-way, directly next to the
building under the following conditions: Such items may not unreasonably interfere with the
flow of pedestrian traffic, items may not obstruct the entryway, and items must be stable and not
prone to toppling or blowing away.
SEC. 15.17-14 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE DESIGN. The Town mandates
that all new construction with more than 7,500 square feet at the ground level in the B-2 District
at least achieve enough LEED points to attain LEED “Certified” status. This requirement does
not apply to stand-alone parking decks nor to portions of a building that are a parking deck. As
used herein, LEED means the most current version of the Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design rating systems published by the United States Green Building Council. A
copy of the most current versions of such publication shall be kept on file in the Office of the
Town Clerk. (Amended 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5258)
SEC. 15.17-15 PENALTIES. Property owners who fail to comply with the procedures
set forth in this Division may be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per each day of
noncompliance. Failure to comply includes, among other actions, failing to obtain a Certificate
of Compliance and failing to comply with conditions set forth in a Conditional Certificate of
Compliance. The Town may file for injunctive relief where the Town Council determines it to
be in the public interest.
(Entire Division 17 Added 3/18/02 by Ord. No. 4784)(Entire Division 17 Amended 7/15/02 by
Ord. No. 4806)(Entire Division 17 Amended 10/21/02 by Ord. No. 4825)(Entire Division
Amended 7/18/05 by Ord. No. 5018)
SEC. 15.17
APPENDIX A
SEC. 15.17
APPENDIX B
SEC. 15.17
APPENDIX C
SEC. 15.18-1
DIVISION 18 - TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 15.18-1 SCOPE OF CHAPTER. This chapter regulates the design and
development of a Traditional Neighborhood Zoning District.
SEC. 15.18-2 PURPOSE AND DESIGN.
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Traditional Neighborhood District is to encourage
mixed-use, compact development that is sensitive to the environmental
characteristics of the land and facilitates the efficient use of services. This type of
development is consistent with the recommendations of the McLean County
Regional Comprehensive Plan and community visioning efforts completed for the
City of Bloomington, Town of Normal, and County of McLean. A Traditional
Neighborhood District diversifies and integrates land uses within close proximity
to each other, and it provides for the daily recreational and shopping needs of the
residents. A Traditional Neighborhood District is a sustainable, long-term
community that provides economic opportunity and environmental and social
equity for the residents.
B. Design. A Traditional Neighborhood District is designed to ensure the
development of land as a traditional neighborhood. Its design adopts the urban
conventions which were the norm in the United States from colonial times until
the 1940's. A Traditional Neighborhood District is characterized by the following
design elements:
1. neighborhoods that are limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian
activity;
2. variety of housing types, jobs, shopping, services, and public facilities;
3. residences, shops, workplaces, and civic buildings interwoven within the
neighborhood, all within close proximity;
4. a network of interconnecting streets and blocks that maintains respect for
the natural landscape;
5. natural features and undisturbed areas that are incorporated into the open
space of the neighborhood;
6. a coordinated transportation system with a hierarchy of appropriately
designed facilities for pedestrians, bicycles, public transit, and automotive
vehicles;
7. well-configured squares, plazas, greens, landscaped streets, preserves,
greenways, and parks woven into the pattern of the neighborhood and
SEC. 15.18-2(Cont.1)
dedicated to the collective social activity, recreation, and visual enjoyment
of the populace;
8. civic buildings, open spaces, and other visual features that act as
landmarks, symbols, and focal points for community identity;
9. compatibility of buildings and other improvements as determined by their
arrangement, bulk, form, character, and landscaping to establish a livable,
harmonious, and diverse environment;
10. private buildings that form a consistent, distinct edge and define the border
between the public street space and the private block interior; and
11. Midwestern architecture and landscape that respond to the unique
character of the region.
SEC. 15.18-3 OVERVIEW.
A. Size. A Traditional Neighborhood District should consist of an area of not less
than 40 contiguous acres and not more than 250 contiguous acres. The maximum
size of a traditional neighborhood is specified at 250 acres to help assure that all
lots are within reasonable walking distance of a neighborhood center. Multiple
neighborhood centers are required for a TND that is more than 250 contiguous
acres. Projects smaller than 40 acres may be approved if developed in conjunction
with a contiguous site if the resulting development of the combined sites meets
the requirements of this ordinance. In this chapter, property is considered
contiguous even if separated by a public roadway.
B. Areas within the Traditional Neighborhood District. A Traditional Neighborhood
District is divided into at least two types of Areas, and each type of Area has
different land use and site development regulations. A Traditional Neighborhood
District must have one Neighborhood Center Area and at least one Mixed
Residential Area for each 250 acres of the TND. A Traditional Neighborhood
District may also have a Neighborhood Edge Area, a Workshop Area, or an
Employment Center Area.
1. Neighborhood Center Area. A Neighborhood Center Area serves as the
focal point of a Traditional Neighborhood District, containing retail,
commercial, civic, and public services to meet the daily needs of
community residents. A Neighborhood Center is pedestrian-oriented, and
it is designed to encourage pedestrian movement between a Mixed
Residential Area and a Neighborhood Center Area. A square is required in
a Neighborhood Center Area. Retail and commercial uses should generally
be located adjacent to a square. Neighborhood Center Area uses include
retail shops, restaurants, offices, banks, hotels, post office, governmental
offices, churches, community centers, and attached residential dwellings.
SEC. 15.18-3(Cont.1)
2. Mixed Residential Area. A Mixed Residential Area includes a variety of
residential land uses including single-family residential, duplex,
townhouse, and multi-family as well as, offices, restaurants, neighborhood
scale retail, and civic uses. Residential scale retail and commercial uses
are permitted within a Mixed Residential area with strict architectural and
land use controls. Retail and commercial uses in a Mixed Residential area
are required to blend into the residential character of the neighborhood. A
Mixed Residential area includes open spaces including small squares,
pocket parks, community parks, and greenways. A Mixed Residential
Area promotes pedestrian activity through well designed and varied
streetscapes that also provide for the safe and efficient movement of
vehicular traffic.
3. Neighborhood Edge Area. A Neighborhood Edge Area is the least dense
portion of a Traditional Neighborhood District, with larger lots and greater
setbacks than the rest of the neighborhood. Alleys are not required, and
direct vehicular access to the street is permitted. Only single-family
residential dwellings are permitted. A Neighborhood Edge Area is
appropriate along the perimeter of the neighborhood. A portion of a
Traditional Neighborhood District that adjoins existing or platted
conventional low-density housing must be designated as a Neighborhood
Edge Area.
4. Workshop and Employment Center Areas. A Traditional Neighborhood
District may have a Workshop Area, an Employment Center Area, or both.
Commercial and light industrial uses that are not appropriate for a
Neighborhood Center Area or a Mixed Residential Area but which serve
the local residents may be located in a Workshop Area. Large office and
low-impact manufacturing uses may be located within an Employment
Center Area. The scale and architectural conventions of a Traditional
Neighborhood District apply to a Workshop area and an Employment
Center Area.
5. Civic Uses. Civic uses that are oriented to the general public are permitted
in a Neighborhood Center Area and a Mixed Residential Area. These uses
are essential components of the social and physical fabric of a Traditional
Neighborhood District. Special attention should be paid to the location of
government offices, libraries, museums, schools, churches, and other
prominent public buildings to create focal points and landmarks for the
community. The locations of these major public civic uses are designated
on the Development Plan at the time of zoning approval.
6. Open Space. Open space is a significant part of a Traditional
Neighborhood District design. Formal and informal open spaces are
required. These serve as areas for community gatherings, landmarks, and
as organizing elements for the neighborhood. Open space includes
squares, plazas, greens, preserves, parks, and greenways.
SEC. 15.18-3(Cont.2)
7. Streets and Alleys. A Traditional Neighborhood District is designed to be
pedestrian oriented. To accomplish this goal, street pattern and design is
used to reduce vehicle travel speeds and encourage pedestrian activity. An
interconnected network of streets and alleys is required. Streets may be
smaller than in conventional development and more varied in size and
form to control traffic and give character to the neighborhood.
SEC. 15.18-4 DEFINITIONS. The definitions in Chapters 15 and 16 of the Town of
Normal Municipal Code and the other chapters of the Land Development Code apply to this
chapter. The following additional definitions apply to this chapter:
A. Community Parking Facility. An off-site parking lot or garage that provides
required parking for some or all of the uses within a Neighborhood Center Area.
B. Criteria Manual. A manual containing administrative rules adopted in accordance
with this Ordinance.
C. Employment Center Area. An area for large office and low-impact manufacturing
uses.
D. Frontage Buildout. The length of a front building facade compared to the length
of the front lot line, expressed as a percentage.
E. Green. An open space available for unstructured recreation, its landscaping
consisting of grassy areas and trees.
F. Greenway. A series of connected green spaces that may follow natural features
such as ravines, creeks, or other corridors.
G. Major Civic Use. Includes Administrative and Business Offices used by a
governmental entity, College and University Facilities use, Cultural Services use,
Postal Facilities use, Private Primary Educational Facilities use, Private
Secondary Educational Facilities use, Public Primary Educational Facilities use,
Public Secondary Educational Facilities use, Religious Assembly use, Safety
Services use, and Public Transportation Terminal use.
H. Major Private Open Space Improvements. Includes improvements such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, sports fields, recreation centers,
community meeting halls, playgrounds, skateboard facilities and other similar
amenities, but excluding neighborhood private parks.
I. Open Space. Includes squares, plazas, greens, preserves, parks, and greenways.
J. Park. An open space, available for recreation, its landscape consisting of paved
paths and trails, some open lawn, trees, open shelters, or recreational facilities.
SEC. 15.18-4(Cont.1)
K. Plaza. Open space at the intersection of important streets, set aside for civic
purposes and commercial activity, its landscape consisting of durable pavement
and formal tree plantings.
L. Preserve. Open space that preserves or protects endangered species, a critical
environmental feature, or other natural feature (wetlands, floodplain, steep slope,
etc.).
M. Private Open Space. Open space that is owned and maintained by a Property
Owners’ Association or an individual property owner.
N. Public Open Space. Open space that is owned and maintained by a public entity.
O. Square. Open space that may encompass an entire block, is located at the
intersection of important streets, and is set aside for civic purposes, with
landscape consisting of paved walks, lawns, trees, and civic buildings.
P. Streetscape. The area within a street right of way that contains sidewalks, street
furniture, landscaping, or trees.
Q. Workshop Area. An area for commercial and light industrial uses that are not
appropriate for a Neighborhood Center Area or Mixed Residential Area but which
serve the local residents.
R. Zero Lot Line House. A dwelling built adjacent to an interior side lot line with a
yard adjacent to the opposite side lot line.
SEC. 15.18-5 CODE APPLICABILITY. The requirements of this chapter supersede
any inconsistent provisions of Chapter 7 WATER & SEWER, Chapter 8 STREETS, Chapter 15
ZONING and Chapter 16 SUBDIVISION of the Town Code.
SEC. 15.18-6 ZONING.
A. Zoning Procedure. A Traditional Neighborhood District is a zoning district that is
created in the same manner as other zoning districts. The procedures for zoning
designation in Chapter 15 of the Town Code shall apply to a Traditional
Neighborhood zoning district. Additional requirements are described in this
article.
B. Presubmittal Meeting. Prior to filing an application for zoning or rezoning to a
Traditional Neighborhood District, an applicant shall meet with the Town’s staff.
The purpose of the meeting is to acquaint the Town staff with the proposed
development, provide the applicant with preliminary staff comments, and identify
major concerns or the need for additional data. The discussion topics at this
meeting must include the requirements of a Traditional Neighborhood District as
outlined in the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual, including
transportation, the environment, drainage, land use, and civic design concepts.
SEC. 15.18-6(Cont.1)
Following this meeting, the applicant is required to submit for staff review and
comments, a Concept Plan which generally describes the project. Upon review of
the Concept Plan from Staff, the applicant may proceed with development of a
Preliminary Plan.
C. Preliminary Plan Submission Process. An applicant for a Traditional
Neighborhood District shall follow the same plan approval process outlined in
Chapter 16 of the Town of Normal Municipal Code. A development plan or
concept plan shall be submitted as part of an Annexation Agreement or
Redevelopment Agreement. A preliminary development plan in a Traditional
Neighborhood District shall include the following:
1. Land use allocation map.
2. Locations and sizes of the Neighborhood Center Area, Mixed Residential
Area, and, if applicable, Neighborhood Edge Area, Workshop Area, and
Employment Center Area.
3. Locations of major civic uses.
4. Locations of commercial uses in Mixed Residential Areas.
5. Layout of the transportation network for all modes of travel.
6. A construction phasing plan for major private open space improvements.
7. locations and types of environmental features such as wetlands, tree cover,
greenways in greenways plan, wellhead protection zones, steep slopes,
streams and creeks.
8. A tree protection plan, including an aerial photograph, that demonstrates
that the design of the Traditional Neighborhood District will result in the
reasonable preservation of tree clusters.
9. Preliminary design standards that are consistent with the design objectives
of this chapter.
10. All additional information required by the Town to demonstrate
compliance with the Traditional Neighborhood District concept.
D. TND Environmental Protection Process. TNDs must comply with the sediment
and erosion control guidelines as outlined in the Town of Normal Subdivision
Code and the Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the
Town of Normal except as otherwise provided in the TND Design Criteria
Manual.
SEC. 15.18-6(Cont.2)
E. Architectural Standards. Developers shall establish architectural standards for
inclusion in the subdivision covenants, conditions, and restrictions developed as
part of a homeowner’s association bylaws and such standards and restrictions
shall be submitted as part of the preliminary TND plan for the Town approval.
SEC. 15.18-7 MAJOR LAND USE IN A TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD
DISTRICT.
A. Workshop Area and Employment Center Area Uses.
1. A Workshop Area is for commercial and light industrial uses that are not
appropriate for a Neighborhood Center Area or Mixed Residential Area
but which serve the local residents.
2. An Employment Center Area is for large office and low-impact
manufacturing uses.
B. Neighborhood Edge Area Uses.
1. Single family residential use is permitted in a Neighborhood Edge Area.
2. A major civic use is permitted in a Neighborhood Edge Area if shown on
the Preliminary Plan.
3. All other uses are prohibited in a Neighborhood Edge Area.
C. Neighborhood Center Area and Mixed Residential Area Uses. The table below
lists the permitted uses within a Neighborhood Center Area and a Mixed
Residential Area of a Traditional Neighborhood District. "MRA" means Mixed
Residential Area, "NCA" means Neighborhood Center area, "P" means that a use
is permitted, "P*" means that a use is permitted but subject to additional
regulations for Neighborhood Center Area, and "X" means that a use is not
permitted. Uses not listed in the table are not permitted.
SEC. 15.18-7(Cont.1)
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
Residential Uses MRA NCA
Condominiums P P*
Duplex Residential P X
Group Residential P P*
Lodging House Residential P P*
Multi-Family Residential P P*
Retirement House (Large Site) X P*
Retirement Housing (Small Site) P P*
Single Family Residential P X
Townhouse Residential P P*
Commercial Uses MRA NCA
Administrative and Business Office P P
Art and Craft Studio (General) X P
Art and Craft Studio (Limited) P P
Automotive Rentals X P*
Automotive Repair Services X P*
Building Maintenance Services X P
Business or Trade School X P
Business Support Services X P
Cocktail Lounge P P
Commercial Blood Plasma Center X P
Commercial Off-Street Parking X P*
Communication Services X P
Consumer Convenience Services P P
Consumer Repair Services P P
Drop-Off Recycling Collection Facility X P
Electronic Prototype Assembly X P
Exterminating Services X P
Financial Services X P
Food Sales P P
General Retail Sales (Convenience) P P
General Retail Sales (General) X P
Hotel-Motel X P
Indoor Entertainment X P
Indoor Sport and Recreation X P
Kennels X P*
Liquor Sales X P
Medical Offices P P
Off-site Accessory Parking X P
Outdoor Sports and Recreation P P
Pawn Shop Services X P
Personal Improvement Services P P
Personal Services P P
SEC. 15.18-7(Cont.2)
Pet Services P P
Professional Office P P
Research Assembly Services X P
Restaurant (Drive In, Fast Food) 1 X P
Restaurant (General) P P
Restaurant (Limited) P P
Service Station X P*
Software Development P P
Theater X P
Industrial Uses MRA NCA
Custom Manufacturing X P
Civic Uses MRA NCA
Club or Lodge P P
College and University Facilities X P
Communication Service Facilities P P
Community Recreation (Private) P P
Community Recreation (Public) P P
Congregate Living X P
Convalescent Services X P
Cultural Services P P
Day Care Services (Commercial) X P
Day Care Services (General) P P
Day Care Services (Limited) P P
Family Home P P
Group Home, Class I (General) P P
Group Home, Class I (Limited) P P
Group Home, Class II P P
Guidance Services X P
Hospital Services (Limited) X P
Local Utility Services P P
Major Utility Facilities P P
Park and Recreation Services (General) P P
Park and Recreation Services (Special) P P
Postal Facilities X P
Private Primary Educational Facilities P P
Private Secondary Educational Facilities P P
Public Primary Educational Facilities P P
Public Secondary Educational Facilities P P
Religious Assembly P P
Safety Services P P
Telecommunications Tower X X
Transportation Terminal X P
SEC. 15.18-8
SEC. 15.18-8 SUBDIVISION.
A. Subdivision Procedure. The subdivision procedures in Chapter 16 apply to the
Traditional Neighborhood District, except as follows:
1. All property within a Traditional Neighborhood District must be
subdivided under this Chapter. Any previously approved preliminary
subdivision plan must be amended.
2. The Traditional Neighborhood District shall be on one preliminary
subdivision plan.
3. A final subdivision plat with private common elements or private utilities
may not be approved unless a Property Owners’ Association has been
created to maintain such common elements or private utilities.
B. Subdivision Layout Requirements. The following are requirements for a
Traditional Neighborhood Development District in addition to those in Section 16
of the Subdivision Code and Manual of Practice.
1. Utility and Drainage Easements. Easements for public utilities and
enclosed or open drainage ways shall be retained in all subdivisions in the
width and locations deemed necessary by the Manual of Practice for the
Design of Public Improvements. To the extent practicable, the easements
for water lines, wastewater lines, and storm sewers shall be located in the
street rights-of-way, and the easements for all other utilities shall be
located in the alley rights-of-way. All the easements shall be dedicated to
public use for the named purpose and shall be aligned to minimize
construction cost.
2. Lots Abut Streets. Each lot in a subdivision, except a lot that fronts on a
plaza and abuts an alley, shall front onto or abut a dedicated public street.
3. Lots Abut Alleys. Except in a Neighborhood Edge Area, each lot in a
subdivision shall abut an alley unless the Town determines that good
cause exists to omit an alley or portion of an alley.
4. Street Network. An interconnected network of streets is required unless
the Town determines that good cause exists to require a different street
pattern.
5. Street, Alley and Pedestrian Path Design. Streets, alleys, and pedestrian
paths shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this chapter,
the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual and the Manual of
Practice.
SEC. 15.18-8(Cont.1)
6. Street Intersections. Street intersections, whether public or private streets,
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of the Traditional
Neighborhood District Criteria Manual.
7. Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited unless the Town
determines that the most desirable plan requires laying out a dead-end
street. A dead-end street shall terminate in a courtyard designed in
accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual,
unless the Town determines that topography, density, adequate circulation,
or other unusual conditions require a deviation from the design criteria in
the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual.
8. Block Sizes. Block length may not exceed 600 feet. Block width may not
exceed 300 feet. The Town may approve a block width of not more than
400 feet or a block length of not more than 1000 feet if required because
of topography or existing street layout, but a block longer than 800 feet
must be traversed by a pedestrian path near the midpoint.
9. Lot Dimensions. Minimum lot size, maximum lot size, and minimum lot
width are specified in the site development regulations contained in this
chapter for a Neighborhood Center Area, a Mixed Residential Area, a
Neighborhood Edge Area, a Workshop Area, and an Employment Center
Area. Outlots must comply with the dimensional requirements of this
chapter.
10. Townhouse Lots. Townhouse lots may be created where each townhouse
lot is to be served by a public sewage system, subject to the following
conditions in addition to those applicable to all other subdivisions:
a. All common areas shall be clearly identified on the plat and
adequate provisions made for maintenance and taxation.
b. There may be not less than two and not more than eight units in a
townhouse group.
c. A legal document by an attorney licensed to practice law in the
state, accurately describing and defining the rights and duties of
the owners, the legal status of common areas and facilities, and
provisions for taxation and maintenance of the common areas,
must accompany each subdivision with townhouse lots.
SEC. 15.18-9 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Community Meeting Hall.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.1)
1. A community meeting hall for the use of the neighborhood residents is
required within 1,500 feet of the center of the TND if another building
with community meeting space is not available.
2. A community meeting hall must be located so that it is easily accessible to
the residents. It may be placed in a square, park, or other suitable open
space location.
B. Civic Design Criteria. Civic design criteria, as described in Chapter 3 of the TND
Criterial Manual, shall achieve the following objectives, in accordance with the
Traditional Neighborhood Development Criteria Manual.
1. architectural compatibility;
2. human scale design;
3. integration of uses;
4. encouragement of pedestrian activity;
5. buildings that relate to and are oriented toward the street and surrounding
buildings;
6. residential scale buildings in Mixed Residential Areas;
7. buildings that contain special architectural features to signify entrances to
the Neighborhood Center Area and important street intersections; and
8. Neighborhood Center Area buildings that focus activity on the
neighborhood square; and
9. avoid repetitiveness of design and use of materials
C. Land Use Allocations.
1. Allocations. Each lot within a Traditional Neighborhood District must be
allocated to a particular land use category.
2. Amounts. The amounts of land that shall be allocated to particular land
use categories, excluding streets, alleys, open spaces, drainage controls,
and water quality controls, are as follows:
a. For a Neighborhood Center Area.
(1) Townhouse, condominium, and multi-family uses shall be
allocated not less than 20% of the land area.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.2)
(2) Commercial uses shall be allocated not less than 20% of the
land area.
(3) Civic use shall be allocated not less than 5% of the land
area, or one-half acre, whichever is greater.
b. For a Mixed Residential Area.
(1) Single family residential use shall be allocated not less than
50% and not more than 80% of the land area.
(2) Duplex or Townhouse use shall be allocated not less than
10% of the land area.
(3) Multi-family uses shall be allocated not less than 10% of
the land area.
(4) Commercial uses shall not be allocated to more than 2% of
the land area.
(5) Civic uses shall be allocated not less than 2% of the land
area.
c. For Open Space.
(1) Not less than 20% of the gross land area of the Traditional
Neighborhood District must be open space.
(2) Public open space shall conform to the plans, goals, and
standards of the Town and must be approved by the Town
(3) The Town shall be consulted regarding the locations and
types of private open space.
(4) The portions of drainage and water quality facilities that are
usable by the public for recreational purposes, as
determined by the Town may be designated as parks or
greenways, but may not be included as part of the public
park dedication requirement.
d. Workshop Area.
(1) The aggregate size of all Workshop Areas and Employment
Center Areas within a Traditional Neighborhood District
may not exceed 10% of the gross land area.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.3)
3. Preliminary Subdivision Plan Approval. A preliminary subdivision plan
shall include a Land Use Allocation Map, submitted by the owner, that
allocates a particular land use category to each lot on the preliminary
subdivision plan.
4. Compliance. Development and use shall comply with the Land Use
Allocation Map.
5. Revisions. The City Manager may approve a minor revision to a Land Use
Allocation Map if he/she finds that (a) the revised land uses are
appropriate, and (b) the revision does not adversely affect land owners
within 200 feet of the boundary line of a revised area and (c) the revision
is not more than 5% of the TND gross area.
D. Parkland and School Land Dedication.
1. Open Space. The following open space requirements apply within a
Traditional Neighborhood District:
a. At least one square shall be located in the Neighborhood Center
Area. The required square shall be at least one-half acre in size in a
Traditional Neighborhood District of 100 acres or less, and the
required square shall be at least one acre in size in a Traditional
Neighborhood District that is larger than 100 acres. Squares three
acres or less shall be maintained by the property owner’s
association.
b. A square must adjoin streets along at least 75% of its perimeter.
c. A plaza must adjoin building lots along at least 50% of its
perimeter.
d. At least one green that is not less than one acre in size must be
located within 600 feet of the geographic center of the Traditional
Neighborhood District. Greens less than three acres shall be
maintained by the property owner’s association.
e. A publicly maintained park may be not less than three acres.
Private parks shall be not less than 10,000 square feet in size and
may not apply toward the public parkland dedication requirement.
f. A greenway in a TND shall not be located behind dwellings. The
Town may permit exceptions where topography, existing street
layout, or other good reasons that make this restriction impractical.
If a greenway is located behind dwellings, access shall be provided
in accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood Criteria Manual
standards.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.4)
g. A greenway must have an average width of not less than 200 feet.
A greenway may be not less than 50 feet wide. Not more than 10%
of the uninterrupted length of a greenway may be the minimum 50
feet width. A greenway shall have not less than 25% of its
boundary abutting a street except there is a good reason.
h. At least 90% of the lots in a Mixed Residential Area must be
within 1000 feet of a square, plaza, green, or park.
2. Parkland Dedication. The following parkland dedication provisions of the
Town apply to a Traditional Neighborhood District:
a. The amount of land required to be dedicated for parkland and
school land shall comply with Chapter 16 of the Town Subdivision
Code.
b. Land to be dedicated as parkland and school land shall be shown
on the Preliminary Plan.
c. At the time of the filing of the final plat, the Town shall require
one of the following:
(1) dedication by the subdivider of all or part of the required
amount of parkland and school land;
(2) payment in lieu of dedicated parkland or school land by the
subdivider; or
(3) a combination of (a) and (b).
E. Drainage.
1. Applicable Drainage Provisions. The drainage provisions of the Town
Subdivision Code and Manual of Practice apply to development in a
Traditional Neighborhood District, except as provided in this section.
2. Planning and Engineering. Drainage planning and engineering for a
Traditional Neighborhood District shall be for the district as a whole.
3. Design. In designing drainage facilities, impervious cover calculations
shall assume maximum impervious cover for each lot within the
Traditional Neighborhood District.
4. Maintenance. Drainage facilities, if privately owned, shall have
easements granted to the Town, and maintained for functionality by the
Town, unless other arrangements are made.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.5)
F. Storm Water Quality.
1. Impervious cover limits. Impervious cover limits in a Traditional
Neighborhood District are as follows:
a. Overall impervious cover for a Traditional Neighborhood District
is limited to 65% of gross site area.
b. A Neighborhood Center Area lot, except an open space lot, is
limited to impervious cover of not more than 90% of gross site
area.
c. A Mixed Residential Area lot, except a commercial lot or an open
space lot, is limited to impervious cover of not more than 65% of
gross site area. A commercial lot is limited to impervious cover of
not more than 90% of gross site area.
d. A Neighborhood Edge Area lot, except an open space lot, is
limited to impervious cover of not more than 65% of gross site
area.
e. A Workshop Area lot or Employment Center Area lot, except an
open space lot, is limited to impervious cover of not more than
80% of gross site area.
2. Open space impervious cover limits are as follows:
a. An open space lot that is a plaza or square is limited to impervious
cover of not more than 90% of gross site area.
b. Greenways, preserves, parks, and greens are limited to impervious
cover of not more than 10% of gross site area overall.
c. Impervious coverage for greenways, preserves, parks, and greens
classified as public open space shall be calculated and enforced
separately from those classified as private open space.
G. Landscaping. The landscaping requirements of Chapter 15 of the Town Code
apply to development within a Traditional Neighborhood District.
H. Roadway Design.
1. The roadway designs used within the different areas of the Traditional
Neighborhood District may vary depending on the proposed function of
the roadway, the anticipated adjacent land uses, and the anticipated traffic
load. The Town encourages the use of a variety of designs to lend
character to the neighborhood.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.6)
2. Roadway designs that may be used in a Traditional Neighborhood District
are in the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual.
3. The Town may approve the use of innovative roadway designs that are not
listed in the Traditional Neighborhood District Criteria Manual.
I. Vehicular Access.
1. Access to Alleys. Direct vehicular access from a lot to an alley in the
Traditional Neighborhood District is permitted and preferred. Direct
vehicular access from a lot to a street is not permitted, except as provided
in this section.
2. Exceptions.
a. Direct vehicular access from a lot to a street is permitted in a
Neighborhood Edge Area or if a lot does not abut an alley.
b. The Town may grant vehicular access from a lot to a street if the
Town determines it is warranted by exceptional circumstances.
3. Joint Access Driveways. If adjacent lots have direct vehicular access to a
street, the Town may require that the access be through a common or joint
driveway.
J. Parking.
1. The following parking regulations apply in a Traditional Neighborhood
District:
a. A parking lot or garage may not be adjacent to a square or adjacent
to a street intersection.
b. A parking lot shall be located at the rear or side of a building. If
located at the side, screening shall be provided at the lot line by
landscaping or decorative walls or fences as required in Chapter 15
of the Town Code.
c. There is no off-street loading requirement for a building with less
than 10,000 square feet of gross building area. The Town shall
determine the location, number, and dimensions of the off-street
loading for a larger building.
d. Except as approved by the Town, parking in alleys is prohibited.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.7)
e. All nonresidential parking lots or garages must provide not less
than one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking
spaces.
f. All nonresidential buildings shall include an area for parking
bicycles. This area may be a designated parking space within the
parking lot near the building or an area outside the parking lot
adjacent to the building. The bike parking area must include at
least one bike rack with locking area.
2. The following parking regulations apply in a Neighborhood Center Area:
a. The required parking for a use may be located on site or within 500
feet in the Neighborhood Center Area. Community parking
facilities are encouraged.
b. Not more than 125% of the required parking for a use may be
provided on-site.
c. A commercial or a multi-family use, with the Town approval, may
apply adjacent on-street parking toward the minimum parking
requirements.
3. In a Mixed Residential Area or Neighborhood Edge Area, the required
parking for a use must be provided on-site.
K. Parking Area Design and Construction Standards.
1. Areas used for primary circulation, for frequent idling of vehicle engines,
or for loading activities shall be designed and located to minimize impacts
on adjoining properties, including provisions for screening or baffling.
2. All parking and loading facilities shall be maintained to assure desirability
and usefulness of the facility. The facilities shall be maintained free of
refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall at all times be
available for the off-street parking or loading for which they are required
or intended.
L. Compatibility Standards.
1. Lighting. Exterior lighting standards shall comply with existing codes and
ordinances.
2. Noise. In accordance with SEC. 17.5-2 of the Town of Normal Code, it
shall be unlawful to use or operate a sound amplifying device, so that the
device produces loud and raucous sounds at a distance greater than 50 feet
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.8)
from said device unless one has obtained a permit to do so from the Chief
of Police or his designee(s).
3. Reflective Surfaces. The use of highly reflective surfaces, including
reflective glass and reflective metal roofs with a pitch of more than a run
of seven to a rise of 12, is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to
solar panels and copper or painted metal roofs.
4. Dumpsters. Dumpsters and permanently placed refuse receptacles must be
located at least 20 feet from adjacent residential uses. The location of and
access to dumpsters or any other refuse receptacles must comply with the
zoning code.
5. Screening. Yards, fences, vegetative screening, or berms shall be provided
to screen off-street parking areas, mechanical equipment, storage areas,
and areas for refuse collection in commercial, multi-family, and
condominium areas. If fences are used for screening, the height may not
exceed six feet unless otherwise permitted in the zoning code. The
property owner is responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of fences,
berms, and vegetative screening. Additional screening shall comply with
Chapter 15 Zoning Code requirements.
M. Additional Regulations for all Development.
1. Entrances. A principal building must have its main entrance from a street
or plaza.
2. Drive-through Facilities. Drive-through facilities and other facilities that
allow people to remain in vehicles while receiving products or services are
prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to the fueling facilities of a
service station.
3. Residential Uses in Commercial Buildings. A residential use may be
located above the first floor of a commercial building.
4. Stoops, Porches and Balconies. A stoop, open porch, or balcony may
extend into the front setback not more than one-half of the setback
requirement. Stoops, porches, or balconies may not extend into any
easement.
5. Townhouse. A townhouse must have a private rear yard not less than 200
square feet in size. A townhouse must have a finished first floor elevation
not less than eighteen inches above the elevation of the sidewalk at the
front lot line.
SEC. 15.18-9(Cont.9)
N. Accessory Uses.
1. Applicable Regulations. The accessory use regulations of this Chapter
apply except as provided in this section.
2. Commercial Accessory Uses. Notwithstanding Chapter 15 of the Town
Code (Accessory Uses: Commercial Use Types), commercial uses may
include the following as accessory uses, activities, and structures on the
same site or lot:
a. Any other commercial use type not listed as a permitted use in the
same district, and which complies with all of the following criteria:
(1) Is operated primarily for the convenience of employees,
clients, or customers of the principal use;
(2) Occupies less than 10% of the total floor area of the use;
and
(3) Is located and operated as an integral part of the principal
use and does not comprise a separate business use or
activity.
O. Major Civic Use Site Development Regulations. Civic site developments are
subject to site plan review. The following site development regulations do not
apply to a major civic use:
1. maximum front yard setback
2. minimum front yard setback
3. minimum street side yard setback
4. minimum interior yard setback
5. minimum rear yard setback
6. maximum building coverage
7. maximum building footprint
8. maximum height
SEC. 15.18-10 NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER AREA DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS.
A. Applicable Neighborhood Center Area. This article applies to the design and
development of a Neighborhood Center Area.
B. Size of Neighborhood Center Area. A Neighborhood Center Area must contain
not less than 5% of the gross land area of the Traditional Neighborhood District.
C. Location of Neighborhood Center Area. A Neighborhood Center must be easily
accessible by pedestrians from all parts of the Mixed Residential Areas. At least
SEC. 15.18-10(Cont.1)
90% of the lots in the Mixed Residential Areas must be within 1,500 linear feet of
a Neighborhood Center Area boundary.
D. Site Development Regulations for Neighborhood Center Area. The following
table lists the site development regulations for a Neighborhood Center Area.
REGULATION TOWNHOUSE COMMERCIAL
MULTIFAMILY
CIVIC1
Minimum Lot Size
2,000 SF
2500 SF on
corner lot
3,600 SF
4,000 SF on
corner lot
3,600 SF
4,000 SF on
corner lot
Maximum Lot Size
4,000 SF 43,560 SF 43,560 SF
Minimum Lot Width2
20 FT
25 FT on
corner lot
40 FT
45 FT on
corner lot
40 FT
45 FT on
corner lot
Maximum Site
Area
20,000 SF 43,560 SF 43,560 SF
Minimum Frontage
Buildout 3
80% 80% 60%
Maximum
Height
35 FT 60 FT 60 FT
Maximum Front Yard
Setback
5 FT 5 FT 5 FT
Minimum Front Yard
Setback
0 0 0
Minimum Street Side
Yard Setback
5 FT 5 FT 5 FT
Minimum Interior Side
Yard Setback
0 0 0
Minimum Rear Yard
Setback4
10 FT 10 10 FT
Maximum Building
Coverage
70% 70% 70%
Maximum Impervious
Cover
90% 90% 90%
1See Section 13-9-58 for Major Civic Use site development regulations
2On a courtyard or curved street, the minimum lot width between the front lot line and the minimum front yard setback is 15 feet
for a townhouse and 30 feet for other lots.
3The Director may reduce the minimum frontage buildout to accommodate a protected tree or significant tree cluster.
4No rear yard setback is required between a neighborhood center civic lot and a parking lot
SEC. 15.18-10(Cont.2)
E. Additional Regulations for Neighborhood Center Area.
1. Automotive Rental. An Automotive Rental use may keep not more than 20
vehicles on site.
2. Automotive Repair Services. An Automotive Repair Services use may not
exceed 2400 square feet of gross building area.
3. Building Height on Square. A building that is adjacent to a square may be
not less than two stories high.
4. Colonnades, Balconies and Awnings. No permanent improvement may
extend over a utility easement, sidewalk, or public right-of-way with a
utility. An awning or walkway covering with a minimum clearance of
eight feet above finished grade may extend five feet over a public
sidewalk.
5. Commercial Off-Street Parking. A Commercial Off-street Parking Use
may not exceed one acre in site size. Not more than one Commercial Offstreet
Parking Use site may be located in a block. A site must be screened
from the street by low hedges or walls not less than three feet and not
more than four feet in height.
6. Kennels. A Kennel use must be conducted entirely within an enclosed
structure.
7. Residential. A residential use with street level living space must have a
finished floor elevation not less than eighteen inches above the elevation
of the sidewalk at the front lot line. A residential use may not front at
ground level on a square.
8. Service Station. A Service Station use may have the capability of fueling
not more than eight vehicles at one time.
9. Telecommunications Tower. A Telecommunication tower is not
permitted in Traditional Neighborhood District.
SEC. 15.18-11 MIXED RESIDENTIAL AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Applicable to Mixed Residential Area. This article applies to the design and
development of a Mixed Residential Area.
B. Site Development Regulations for Mixed Residential Area. The following table
lists the site development regulations for a Mixed Residential Area:
SEC. 15.18-11(Cont.1)
REGULATION SINGLEFAMILY
DUPLEX
TOWNHOUSE COMMERCIAL
MULTIFAMILY
CIVIC 1
Minimum Lot Size 3,600 SF 2
4,000 SF on
corner lot 2
2,000 SF
2,500 SF on corner
lot
3,000 SF
4,000 SF on corner lot
3,600 SF
4,000 SF on corner
lot
Maximum Lot Size None 4,000 SF 20,000 SF 20,000 SF
Minimum Lot
Width 3
40 FT 2
45 FT on corner
lot 2
20 FT
25 FT on
corner lot
40 FT
4 FT on
corner lot
40 FT
45 FT on corner
lot
Maximum Site
Area
None 20,000 SF 20,000 SF 20,000 SF
Maximum
Height
35 FT 35 FT 35 FT 35 FT
Maximum Front
Yard Setback
15 FT 10 FT 10 FT 10 FT
Minimum Front
Yard Setback
10 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT
Minimum Street
Side Yard Setback
10 FT 10 FT 10 FT 10 FT
Minimum Interior
Side Yard Setback
5 FT 2 0 FT 5 FT 5 FT
Minimum Rear
Yard Setback
10 FT 10 FT 10 FT 10 FT
Maximum Building
Coverage
55% 55% 55% 55%
Maximum Building
Footprint
5,000 SF 5,000 SF 5,000 SF 5,000 SF 4
Maximum
Impervious Cover
65% 65% 65% 5 65%
1 See Section 13-9-58 for Major Civic Use site development regulations.
2 See Section 13-9-73, Zero lot line Houses.
3 On a courtyard or curved street, the minimum lost width between the front lot line and the minimum front yard setback is 15
feet for a townhouse lot and 30 feet for other lots.
4 A community meeting hall may exceed this limitation.
5 Maximum impervious cover for a commercial use is 90%.
C. Zero-Lot Line Houses.
1. A zero-lot line house is permitted on a lot if the following requirements
are met:
a. The lot is in a Mixed Residential Area that has been designated as
single family residential on a Land Use Allocation Map; and
SEC. 15.18-11(Cont.2)
b. All the lots in the same block and fronting on the same street
comply with this subsection.
2. An owner of a lot must impose the following limitations on the lot by the
filing of appropriate deed restrictions:
a. A structure may be erected adjacent to an interior side lot line. The
wall of a structure erected adjacent to an interior side lot line must
be solid and opaque with no openings of any kind. The eaves of a
structure may extend across the interior side lot line not more than
three feet.
b. Except for a patio or patio cover, the minimum distance between
structures on adjoining lots is twelve feet. The minimum distance
between a patio or patio cover and a structure on an adjoining lot is
six feet.
c. An easement is required on each lot that abuts a lot with a structure
adjacent to a common interior side lot line. The easement is for the
purpose of construction and maintenance of the structure and
drainage. The easement must be not less than five feet wide and
extend the full length of the interior side lot line.
3. If a lot is subject to this section, the following site development
regulations apply:
a. The minimum interior side yard setback is zero feet.
b. The minimum required side yard between structures is 12 feet.
c. The minimum lot width is 30 feet, or 35 feet on a corner lot.
d. The minimum lot size is 2400 square feet, or 2800 square feet on a
corner lot.
D. Additional Regulations for Mixed Residential Area.
1. Similar land uses should face across streets, and dissimilar land uses
should abut at rear lot lines or across alleys.
2. A commercial use may only be located on the first floor of a building. Up
to 20% of the second floor may be used for accessory uses that are not
open to the public.
3. Commercial uses are limited to corner locations that are designated on the
Development Plan.
4. A commercial use may not be open to the public between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except restaurants.
SEC. 15.18-11(Cont.3)
5. There may be not more than eight dwelling units in a single structure.
6. There may be not more than one principal structure on a lot.
7. There may be not more than one accessory dwelling unit on a lot.
8. A garage entry may not face the street unless it is at least 20 feet behind
the front building face of the principal structure.
9. A front porch or stoop is required on a single family residential or duplex
structure.
SEC. 15.18-12 NEIGHBORHOOD EDGE AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Applicable to Neighborhood Edge Area. This article applies to the design and
development of a Neighborhood Edge Area.
B. Location of Neighborhood Edge Area.
1. A Neighborhood Edge Area may be designated along the perimeter of a
Traditional Neighborhood District. Unless there is a park, green,
greenway, or preserve at least 100 feet wide, a Neighborhood Edge Area
must be designated for those portions of a Traditional Neighborhood
District that abut:
a. land zoned Single Family Residence District;
b. land used for any use permitted in Single Family Residence
District;
c. land included in an approved preliminary subdivision plan or final
subdivision plat that is designated on the plan or plat for any use
permitted in an or more restrictive district.
2. The minimum width of a Neighborhood Edge Area is 100 feet. The
maximum width of a Neighborhood Edge Area is 250 feet, but if the 250
foot width line falls within a block, the width may be extended to the
nearest block edge.
C. Site Development Regulations for Neighborhood Edge. The site development
regulations for a Neighborhood Edge Area are as follows:
1. Minimum lot size: 5,750 square feet
2. Minimum lot width: 50 feet
3. Maximum height: 35 feet
4. Minimum front setback: 25 feet
5. Minimum street side yard setback: 15 feet
SEC. 15.18-12(Cont.1)
6. Minimum interior side yard setback: 5 feet
7. Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet, or match existing adjacent minimum
rear yard setback
8. Maximum building coverage: 55%
9. Maximum impervious cover: 65%
D. Additional Regulations for Neighborhood Edge Area.
1. There may be no more than one principal structure on a lot.
2. A garage entry may not face the street unless it is at least 20 feet behind
the front building face of the principal structure.
SEC. 15.18-13 WORKSHOP AREA AND EMPLOYMENT CENTER AREA
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Applicable to Workshop Area and Employment Center Area. This article applies
to the design and development of a Workshop Area or an Employment Center
Area.
B. Site Development Regulations for Workshop Area and Employment Center Area.
The site development regulations for the Workshop Area and Employment Center
Area are as follows:
1. Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet
2. Maximum lot size:
a. In Workshop Area: 5 acres
b. In Employment Center Area: 10 acres
3. Minimum lot width: 50 feet
4. Minimum frontage buildout: 80%
5. Maximum height: 60 feet
6. Minimum front yard setback: 0 feet
7. Maximum front yard setback: 10 feet
8. Minimum side setback: 10 feet
9. Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet
10. Maximum building coverage: 65%
11. Maximum impervious coverage: 80%
12. Maximum floor-to-area ratio: 1:1
13. Buildings prohibited within easements
SEC. 15.18-14 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
A. Site Plan. Site plan requirements for a traditional neighborhood district are the
same as under the existing building code.
B. Permits. Permitting requirements for a traditional neighborhood district are the
same as under existing codes.
SEC. 15.18-14(Cont.1)
C. Signs. All signs in a traditional neighborhood district are subject to discretionary
legislative review by the Town. The following guidelines shall assist in the
development of a sign plan:
1. A sign may be a wall sign, an awning sign, a berm sign, or a hanging sign.
2. The area of a hanging sign may not exceed eight square feet, and there
must be not less than eight feet clearance between the bottom of the sign
and the finished grade.
3. A building in a Neighborhood Center Area of a Traditional Neighborhood
District may have not more than three signs with a total sign area of not
more than 24 square feet.
4. A commercial building in a Mixed Residential Area of a Traditional
Neighborhood sign district may have not more than two signs with a total
sign area of not more than 12 square feet.
5. A townhouse, condominium, or multi-family building within a Mixed
Residential Area of a Traditional Neighborhood sign district may have not
more than two signs with a total sign area of not more than eight square
feet.
6. Spotlights on signs and exterior lighting of signs shall be concealed from
view and shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and roadways.
7. Internal lighting of signs is prohibited, except where the internal lighting is
only of individual letters.
(Entire Division 18 Added 10/21/02 by Ord. No. 4822)
APPENDIX A
TABLE OF AUTHORIZED PRINCIPAL USES
A-1
TABLE OF AUTHORIZED PRINCIPAL USES
Adult Hotels/Motels (B1)
Adult Lingerie Modeling Studios (B1)
Adult Media Stores (B1)
Adult Modeling Shops (B1)
Adult Motion Picture Theater (B1)
Agricultural Implement, Sales and Repair (B1, M1)
Agricultural Products and Storage (M2)
Agricultural Supply Store (B1, M1)
Agriculture (All Districts)
Agriculture Fairs, Displays, Shows, Exhibits (Special Use - A)
Aircraft Manufacture and Assembly (M2)
Airport, Heliport (S2)
Ambulance Service (B1, M1)
Amusement Center (C3, B1, B2)
Appliance Repair Shop (C3, B1, B2)
Appliance Store (C3, B1, B2)
Arena, Stadium (S1, S2, B1)
Art and School Supply Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Art Gallery, Museum (S1, S2, C1, C3, B1, B2)
Asphalt Batch Plant (Special Use - M2)
Athletic Club, Indoor (B1, B2)
Auction House (B1, M1)
Auditorium (S1, S2)
Automobile Service Station (B1, M1)
Automobile, Truck Sales (B1, M1)
Bagged Mineral Products (M1, M2)
Bakery Production (B1, M1, M2)
Bakery and Donut Shop Retail Only (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Ballroom, Dance Hall (B1, B2)
Bank (C1, C2, C3, B1, B2)
Barber, Beauty Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Barber, Beauty Shop in Office Building (C1)
Bed & Breakfast (Special Use B, R)
Bicycle Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Bicycle Shop (B1, B2)
Birthing Center (C1)
Boat Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Boat Sales (B1, M1)
Book, Stationary Store (S1, C1, C2, C3, B1, B2)
Bowling, Billiard Center (S1, C3, B1, B2)
A-2
Bus Passenger Terminal (B1, B2)
Business School (S1, C1, B1, B2)
Candy and Ice Cream Shops (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Car Wash (B1, M1, C2)
Cemeteries (Special Use - A, R1AA, R1A, R1B, R4)
Churches (S1, S2, B1, B2, M1)
Churches (Special Use – R1AA, R1A, R1B, R3A, R3B)
Clothing, Stores (C3, B1, B2)
Clubs, Private (B1, B2, M1)
Coal Storage (Special Use – M1, M2)
College, University Classroom (S1, S2 and Special Use R3B)
Computer Data Processing Center (S1, C1, B1, B2)
Community Center (S2)
Concrete Batch Plant (M2, Special Use M1)
Contractor's Shop (B1, M1, M2 except in the P-1 Corridor)
Convenience Established in Multi-Family Building (Special Use - R3B)
Convention Center (S2)
Cordage, Rope, Twine and Net Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Correctional Institutions, Detention (S2)
Cotton; Spinning & Weaving (M2)
Country Clubs, Private Golf Courses (Special Use - A, R1AA, R1A, R1B, R3A, M2)
Dairy Products Manufacturer (M2)
Dairy Store (C2, C3, B1)
Dairy Store in Office Building (C1)
Dance Studio (S1, C2, C3, B1, B2)
Day Care Center (R3B, S1, C1, B1, B2and by Special Use - R2, R3A)
Day Care, in a Church (Special Use – R1AA, R1A, R1B, R4)
Day Care Homes (R1AA, R1A, R1B, R2, R3A, R3B, R4)
Delicatessen (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Delicatessen in Office Building (C1)
Department Store (C3, B1, B2)
Detention Centers, Correctional (S2)
Diagnostic Imaging, Lab Testing Facility (C1)
Distillery, Rectifying, Blending Spirits (M2)
Dormitory, Residence Hall (S1, S2)
Drug Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Drug Store in an Office Building (C1)
Drugs, Pharmaceutical Manufacturer (M2)
Dry Cleaners (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Dry Cleaner in Office Building (C1)
Dry Goods Store (C3, B1)
Dwelling Units above First Floor (C1, B1, B2)
Dwelling, Multiple-Family (R3A, R3B)
Dwelling, Multiple-Family Age Restricted 55+ (S2)
A-3
Dwelling, Two-Family (R2, R3A)
Dwellings, Mobile Home (R4, Special Use B1)
Dwellings, Single-Family (R1AA, R1A, R1B, R2)
Educational Facilities (S1, S2, B1, B2)
Electronic Equipment Sales & Service (B1, B2)
Electrical Power Plants, Sub-Stations (S2)
Electrical Machinery Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Electrical Appliance Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Exhibition-Exposition Hall (S1, B1, B2)
Extraction, Storage, Washing, Handling of Materials (Special Use - A, M1, M2)
Farm (A, S1)
Field House (S1, S2)
Fire Station (S2)
Fleet Fueling Depot (M1)
Florist Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Food Locker Plants (B1, M1, M2)
Footwear Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Funeral Parlor (B1, B2)
Fur Store (C3, B1, B2)
Furniture Repair Store (C3, B1, B2)
Furniture Store (C3, B1, B2)
Furniture, Fixture, Bedding Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Garden Supply Store (C3, B1, B2)
Gas Company Plant, Facilities (S2)
Gift Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Glass Manufacturer (M2)
Golf Course, Public (S1, S2)
Grain Elevator (M2)
Greenhouse (A, S1)
Gymnasium (S2, B1)
Hardware Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Health Club (C1, C2, C3, B1, B2)
Heating, Physical Plant (S1)
High-Rise Building (Special Use - R3B, C1, C3, B1, B2)
Hobby, Toy Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Hospital (S2)
Hotel/Motel/Conference Center (B1, B2, C3)
Household Goods, Sales, Repair (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Ice Rink (S1, S2, C3, B1)
Indoor Tennis Club (B1, M1)
Instrument Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Jewelry Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Jewelry Store (C3, B1, B2)
Junior College Classroom (Special Use R3B) (Permitted S1, S2)
A-4
Kennels (M1, M2 or by Special Use B1)
Knitting Mills, Fabric Absent Dye Process (M1)
Knitting Mills, All Fibers (M2)
Laboratory (S1)
Laundry (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Leather Goods Shop (C3, B1, B2)
Legislative Hall (S2)
Library (S1, S2, B2)
Linen Supply House (B2, M1)
Liner Housing (B2)
Liquor Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Lumber Yard (B1, M1, M2)
Machinery Manufacturer (M2)
Mail Order Store (C3, B1, B2)
Manufacture of Grain Mill Products (M2)
Manufacture of Products; Cork or Wood (M1, M2)
Manufacture of Products; Plastic (M1, M2)
Manufacture of Products; Processed Fur (M1, M2)
Manufacture of Products; Processed Leather (M2)
Manufacture of Transport Equipment, Components (M2)
Market, Grocery (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Market, Grocery in Office Building (C1)
Memorial Structures, Monuments (S3)
Metal Products Manufacturer (M2)
Miniature Golf Course (B1)
Mobile Home Park (Special Use - B1)
Mobile Home, RV Rental or Sales (B1, M1)
Motion Picture Theatre (C3, B1, B2)
Motor Vehicle Manufacture, Assembly (M2)
Motor Vehicle Parts, Accessory Sales (C3, B1)
Motor Vehicle Repairs, Paint Shop (B1, M1)
Motor Vehicle Sales (B1, M1)
Motor Vehicle Storage (B1, M1, M2)
Motor, Small Engine Repair, Service and Sales (M2)
Music Store (C3, B1, B2)
Musical Instrument Manufacturer (M1)
News Stand (C2, C3, B1, B2)
News Stand (Office Building) (C1)
Newspaper, Magazine Printing/Publishing (B1, B2, M1, M2)
Night Club (B1, B2)
Nurseries & Greenhouses (Special Use - A) (Permitted B1, M1)
Nursery School (C1, B1, B2)
Nursing & Retirement Home (S2 and by Special Use - R3A)
Office Building (S1, S2, C1, C2, C3, B1, B2 and Special Use R3B)
A-5
Office Use (M1)
Optical Goods Sales (C3, B1, B2)
Park (S1, S2)
Parking Lot (S1, S2, B1, B2, and Special Use R3)
Pet Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Photographic Studio (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Photographic Supply Sales (C3, B1, B2)
Photographic, Optical Goods Manufacturer (M1, M2)
Planetarium (S1)
Police Station (S1, S2)
Pottery, China, Earth Ware Manufacture (M1, M2)
Post Surgical Recovery Unit (C1)
Post Office (B2)
Print Shop (B1, B2, M1)
Professional Service Office (B1, B2, C1)
Public Transit Garages (S2)
Radio Radar Site (M1, M2)
Radio, TV Station (S1, S2, C1, B1, B2)
Rail Terminal (M2)
Recreation Center (S1, S2, B1, B2)
RV Sales (B1, M1)
Restaurant Supplies & Services (B1)
Restaurant (Office Building) (C1)
Restaurants (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Retail Lumber Sales (B1, M1, M2)
Riding Stables (Special Use - A)
Roadside Stands for Agricultural Products (A)
Roller Rink (C3, B1)
Rooming Houses (S1, R3B and by Special Use - R3A)
Rubber Products Manufacturer (M2)
Rug, Floor Covering Store (C3, B1, B2)
Salon, Spa (B2)
Sanitary Landfill (S2)
School Administrative Offices (S2)
School Bus Garage, Repair Shops (S2)
School System Warehouses (S2)
Schools, excluding Vocational (S1, S2)
Sex Shops (B1)
Sexually Oriented Business (B1)
Shoe Repair Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Shoe Repair in Office Building (C1)
Shoe Store (C3, B1, B2)
Shooting Range (Special Use B1, M1)
Snack Food Manufacture (M1, M2)
A-6
Soft Drink, Carbonated Water Industry (M1, M2)
Specialty Food Store (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Specialty Food Store Office Building (C1)
Specialty School (S1, C1, B1)
Sporting Goods Manufacture (M1, M2)
Sporting Goods Sales (C3, B1, B2)
Storage; Canned or Bottled Food-Drink (M1, M2)
Storage; Government Warehouse (S2)
Storage Petroleum Products (M2)
Storage; Fiber Products (M1, M2)
Storage; Flour, Sugar, Starch (M1, M2)
Storage; Heavy Machinery & Equipment (M1, M2)
Storage; Ice (M1, M2)
Storage; Loose or Bagged Agricultural Products (M2)
Storage; Loose or Bagged Processed Food (M1)
Storage; Metal Products (M1, M2)
Storage; Non-hazardous Chemical, Plastic (M1, M2)
Storage; Packaged Foodstuff (M1, M2)
Storage; Packaged Mineral Products (M1, M2)
Storage; Packaged Tobacco Products (M1, M2)
Storage; Paper Products (M1, M2)
Storage; Rolled Paper (M1, M2)
Storage; Seeds, Beans, Nuts, Silage (M2)
Storage; Wood Products, Furniture (M1, M2)
Student Residence Hall (S1, S2)
Supper Club (B1, B2)
Swimming Facility (S1, S2, B1, C1 PUD)
Tailor, Dress Maker (C2, C3, B1, B2)
Taproom in Brewery Holding a Class P Liquor License (M1)
Taxidermist Shop (B1, M1)
Telecommunication & Antenna (S1, S2 and Special Use C, B, M)
Telephone Exchange (S2)
Textile Manufacture, absent Dye Process (M1, M2)
Theatre (S1, C3, B1, B2)
Therapeutic Care Home (R3B, and by Special Use - R3A)
Tobacco Shop (C2, C3, B1, B2 and C1 in an Office Building)
Tourist Cabins, RV or Tourist Camps (Special Use – B1)
Toys & Sporting Goods Manufacture (M1, M2)
Trailer Rental & Sales (B1, M1)
Transportation Terminal (B2)
Travel Bureau (C1, C2, C3, B1, B2)
Truck Freight Terminal (B1, M1, M2 and except in P-1 Corridor)
Truck Stop (B1)
Variety Store (C3, B1, B2)
A-7
Veterinary Hospitals (B1, and by Special Use - A)
Video Rental, Sales (B1, B2)
Vocational School (C1, C3, B1, B2)
Wallpaper, Paint Store (C3, B1, B2)
Warehouse; General (M1, M2)
Warehouse; Mini (B1, M1, M2 and except in the P-1 Corridor)
Watch, Clock Manufacture (M1, M2)
Water Treatment Plants (S2)
Wearing Apparel Manufacture (M1, M2)
Welfare Agency (S2)
Wholesale Distributors (B1, M1, M2)
Wooden Cone Container Manufacture (M1, M2)
Wool, Worsted; Spinning & Weaving (M2)
Zoo (S2)
APPENDIX B
ILLUSTRATIONS OF YARD REQUIREMENTS
B-1
APPENDIX C
METRIC CONVERSIONS
C-1
METRIC CONVERSIONS
Length
1 inch = 2.54 centimeters
1 centimeter = .3937 inches
1 foot = .3048 meters
1 yard = .9144 meters
1 meter = 3.281 feet
Area
1 sq. ft. = 144.00 sq. inches
1 sq. ft. = .0929 sq. meters
1 sq. meter = 10.76 sq. ft.
1 sq. inch = 6.452 sq. centimeters
1 sq. centimeter = .155 sq. inches
1 acre = .4 hectacre
1 hectacre = 2.47 acres
APPENDIX D
FORMS
(Added 9/19/83)
D-1
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND
WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY CORPORATE SURETY
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ________________________________
(owner and/or developer of the property)
hereinafter called the Principal, and __________________________________________________
(the corporation serving as surety and
_____________________________________ hereinafter called Surety, are held guaranteeing the
obligation to the Principal)
and firmly bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called the
Obligee, in the penal sum of $_______________________(amount of bond) lawful money of the
United States, for which ___he___ hereby bind themselves to be truly made by them, their heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this ________ day of _____________________________, ______, at
Normal, McLean County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Normal for the acceptance of a Planned Unit Development to the Town of Normal under the name
and title of ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________ (name of Planned Unit Development), McLean County, Illinois, per plan
of ________________________________________ (name of Registered Land Surveyor)
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. ________, consisting of _________________________
(number of lots in Planned Unit Development) lots and streets, dated ______________________
(date of final plan) and the plan of which has received preliminary approval by the Planning
Commission of the Town of Normal and the Board of Trustees, and which Plan will be finalized
upon the Principals meeting the further requirements of the Planned Unit Development of the Town
of Normal.
The legal description of the property which sought to be developed, and for which a final
plan will be presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is described as follows, to-wit:
(Legal Description of the property in the Planned Unit Development)
D-2
Page 2
WHEREAS said developer is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to provide
sanitary sewer and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm water
conduits, street signs, pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and provide
a complete and accurate set of as built plans, all of which said work is to be done per exact
specifications and plans as provided by said ordinance and as heretofore established by the Town of
Normal; and
WHEREAS, said developer's promise and guarantee that all construction on said proposed
improvements shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the ordinances of the
Town of Normal, and subject at all times to the inspection and approval by said Obligee and its
authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or before
______________________________ (two years after the date of Council approval of the Final
Planned Unit Development Plan and upon further guarantee that all damage or liability is caused or
results from the construction, operation or repairs made by the said Principal to said streets, utility
conduits, etc. pursuant to the terms of said plans and specifications, will be repaired and the Obligee
herein, its officers or employees saved harmless from any and all claims whatsoever arising from
the operations of the Principal for and during the period from the acceptance of this bond by said
Obligee and for one year after the completion and acceptance by said Obligee of all matters and
things required by said ordinance and herein bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded
developer shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and
things in said plans and specifications, the resolution approving the Final Planned Unit
Development Plan, this bond or the Planned Unit Development ordinance of the Town of Normal
required and set forth and specified to be done by said developer and performed by said developer at
the time and in the manner in said documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse
and save the above-named Obligee harmless from all loss and damages which said Obligee may
sustain by reason of failure or default on the part of said developer so to do, then this obligation
shall be null and void; otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
_________________________________
_________________________________
SURETY:
_________________________________
(Appropriate Notary Certificate for Principal and Surety)
D-3
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND
WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY CASH ESCROW
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ________________________________
_________________________________ (owner and/or developer of the property) hereinafter
called the Principal, is/are held and firmly bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal
Corporation, hereafter called the Obligee, in the penal sum of ______________________________
(amount of bond) lawful money of the United States, for which ___he___ hereby bind
____________________________________ (himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made by
________________________ (them) their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns,
jointly and severally, by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this _______________ day of ______________________, _______, at
Normal, McLean County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Normal for the acceptance of a Planned Unit Development to the Town of Normal under the name
and title of _____________________________________________ (named of Planned Unit
Development), McLean County, Illinois, per plan of _____________________________________
(name of Registered Land Surveyor) Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. _______, consisting of
__________________ (number of lots in Planned Unit Development) lots and streets, dated
______________________________ (date of final plan and the plan of which has received
preliminary approval by the Planning Commission of the Town of Normal and the Board of
Trustees, and which Plan will be finalized upon the Principal's meeting and the further requirements
of the Planned Unit Development Code of the Town of Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be developed, and for which a final plan will
be presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is described as follows, to wit:
(Legal Description of the property in the Development)
D-4
Page 2
WHEREAS said developer is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to provide
sanitary sewer and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm water
conduits, street signs, pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and provide
a complete accurate set of as built plans, all of which said work is to be done per exact
specifications and plans as provided by said ordinance and as heretofore established by the Town of
Normal; and
WHEREAS said developer's promise and guarantee that all construction on said proposed
improvements shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the ordinances of the
Town of Normal, said subject at all times to the inspection and approval of said Obligee and its
authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or before
___________________________________ (two years after the date of Council approval of the
Final Planned Unit Development Plan and upon further guarantee that all damage or liability is
caused or results from the construction, operation or repairs made by the said Principal to said
streets, utility conducts, etc., pursuant to the terms of said plans and specifications, will be repaired
and the Obligee herein, its officers or employees saved harmless from any and all claims
whatsoever arising from the operations of the Principal for and during the period from the
acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and for one year after the completion and acceptance by
said Obligee of all matters and things required by said ordinance and herein bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded
developer shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and
things in said plans and specifications, the resolution approving the Final Planned Unit
Development Plan, this bond or the Planned Unit Development ordinance of the Town of Normal
required and set forth and specified to be done by said developer and performed by said developer
,at the time and in the manner in said documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse
and save the above-named Obligee harmless from all loss and damages which said Obligee may
sustain by reason of failure or default on the part of said developer so to do, then this obligation
shall be null and void; otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
___________________________________
___________________________________
(Appropriate Notary's Certificate for the Principal)
D-5
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT
PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND
ESCROW RECEIPT
The undersigned bank or savings and loan association by its duly authorized officers and
agents, acknowledges and certifies to the undersigned developer or Owner, and to the Town of
Normal, McLean County, Illinois, effective the ________day of ___________________________,
_________ as follows:
1. That it maintains a regular office for the transaction of its business in McLean
County, Illinois.
2. That it has received and now holds in escrow, pursuant to the terms hereof, the sum
of _____________________________________________________ received from the undersigned
developer(s).
3. That this escrow account has been established by the undersigned developer as
security on said developer's Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship bond for
_________________________________________________ (name of Planned Unit Development)
as provided in _________________________ of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
McLean County, Illinois, 1969, as amended, to the date thereof, and shall be held and disbursed in
accordance with said Bond, said Ordinance and as follows:
(a) The account, plus interest earned thereon, shall be held by the undersigned,
conditioned upon performance by the Principal on its Planned Unit Development
Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond furnished to the Town
of Normal for the improvement required as shown on the Final Plan of the above
mentioned Planned Unit Development, the preparation of as built plans and the
payment of inspection and testing fees.
(b) All withdrawals of principal from the account shall be made subject to the release of
the Town of Normal by the Town Engineer, and the same may be paid as work
progresses and it completed, subject also to the said Engineer's approval.
(c) At, or at any time after the expiration of the two-year performance period specified
in said Bond and upon certification by the Town Engineer that the principal has
failed to perform in accordance with the terms and requirements of said Bond or the
Town's Planned Unit Development Ordinance, which said certification shall contain
an enumeration of such failures and deficiencies, all funds remaining on deposit or
such portion thereof as the Town Engineer deems necessary
D-6
Page 2
to complete, repair or replace the public improvements within the Planned Unit
Development or portions thereof, prepare such as built plans, pay such inspection
and testing fees and take or perform any other actions necessary to guarantee that the
Planned Unit Development will conform in every respect with its approved Final
Plan and the applicable codes, ordinances and requirements of the Town of Normal
shall be paid over to the Town of Normal.
(d) Upon the completion of the improvements and total approval and final acceptance
for maintenance of all Planned Unit Developments within said Planned Unit
Development by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town,
$_________________________ shall remain upon deposit in the escrow account as
a workmanship guarantee until expiration of one year after the approval and
acceptance by the Town of Normal or until such later date as any written claim by
the Town against the escrow account is finally resolved.
____________________________________
BY:
____________________________________
Its __________________________________
ATTEST:
_____________________________________
Its _________________________________
D-7
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND
WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ________________________________
________________________________________ (owner and/or developer of the property)
hereinafter called the Principal, is/are held and firmly bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal
Corporation, hereinafter called the Obligee, in the penal sum of $_________________________
(amount of bond) lawful money of the United States, for which ___he___ hereby bind
_______________________________________(himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made
by ___________________________(them) their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and
assigns, jointly and severally, by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this __________ day of ___________________________________,
______, at Normal, McLean County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Normal for the acceptance of a Planned Unit Development to the Town of Normal under the name
and title of __________________________________________________ (name of Planned Unit
Development), McLean County, Illinois, per plat of ______________________________________
(name of Registered Land Surveyor) Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. ______________,
consisting of ______________ (number of lots in Planned Unit Development) lots and streets, dated
____________________ (date of final plan) and the plan of which has received preliminary
approval by the Planning Commission of the Town of Normal and the Board of Trustees, and which
plan will be finalized upon the principals meeting the further requirements of the Planned Unit
Development Code of the Town of Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be developed, and for which a final plan will
be presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is described as follow, to-wit:
(Legal Description of the property in the Planned Unit Development)
D-8
Page 2
WHEREAS said developer is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to provide
sanitary sewer and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm water
conduits, street signs, pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and provide
a complete and accurate set of as built plans, all of which said work is to be done per exact
specifications and plans as provided by said ordinance and as heretofore established by the Town of
Normal; and
WHEREAS said developer's promise and guarantee that all construction on said proposed
improvements shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the ordinances of the
Town of Normal, and subject all times to the inspection and approval of said Obligee and its
authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or before
_______________________________________________ (two years after the date of Council
approval of the Final Planned Unit Development Plan) and upon further guarantee that all damage
or liability is caused or results from the construction, operation or repairs made by the said Principal
to said streets, utility conduits, etc., pursuant to the terms of said plans and specifications, will be
repaired and the Obligee herein, its officers or employees saved harmless from any and all claims
whatsoever arising from the operations of the Principal for and during the period from the
acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and for one year after the completion and acceptance by
said Obligee of all matters and things required by said ordinance and herein bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded
developer shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and
things in said plans and specifications, the resolution approving the Final Planned Unit
Development Plan, this bond or the Planned Unit Development ordinance of the Town of Normal
required and set forth and specified to be done by said developer and performed by said developer at
the time and in the manner in said documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse
and save the above-named Obligee harmless from all loss and damages which said Obligee may
sustain by reason of failure or default on the part of said developer so to do, then this obligation
shall be null and void; otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
____________________________________
____________________________________
(Appropriate Notary's Certificate for the Principal)
D-9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
THE ____________________________________________________________________
(Name of Financial Institution)
DATE: _____________________________
TO: The Town of Normal
We hereby authorize you to draw from our financial institution up to an aggregate amount of
________________________________________________($______________) United States
Dollars (amount of security required) from the account of ________________________________
______________________________ (name of developer) in connection with _____________
______________________________ (name of the Planned Unit Development).
This Letter of Credit is available to you upon your presentation of a request for payment,
accompanied by: a signed statement by the Engineer of the Town of Normal that
_________________________________________ (name of developer) has failed to complete the
required construction of on or off-site public improvements for the
_______________________________________________ Planned Unit Development in
accordance with the Town's Planned Unit Development Code and the Developer's Planned Unit
Development Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond dated the
______ day of ___________________________, _______.
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this
letter, if and when duly presented at this office in ___________________, Illinois, until the
expiration of one year after the approval and acceptance by the Town of all required improvements
within said Planned Unit Development, or until such later date as any written claim by the Town
against the Developer or his financial institution is finally resolved.
____________________________________
BY:
____________________________________
Its __________________________________
ATTEST:
______________________________________
Its __________________________________
Main Street Corridor
Optional Form-Based Overlay District
June, 2011, As Amended
Town of Normal, Illinois
2
Table of Contents
Section One—Introduction
1. Intent
2. Application of Overlay District
3. Code Definitions
4. How to Use This Code
Section Two—Districts / Regulating Plan
1. Establishment of Districts
2. Regulating Plan
3. District Regulations
Figure 2-2.A: Regulating Plan
Section Three—Uses
1. General Requirements
2. Residential Uses
3. Lodging and Housing Uses
4. Civic and Institutional Uses
Table 3-1.A: Use Table
5. Retail Uses
6. Service Uses
7. Office Uses
8. Infrastructure Uses
9. Development Standards for Uses
10. Accessory Uses and Structures
Section Four—Building Type Standards
1. General Requirements
2. Building Type Descriptions
3. Base Types
4. Cap Types
5. Transparency, Height, and Coverage
6. Commercial Building
7. Cottage Commercial Building
8. Auto-Oriented Building
9. Corridor Building
10. Iconic Building
11. Rowhouse
12. Manor Multifamily
13. Manor
14. House
Section Five—Parking & Access Standards
1. General Requirements
2. Off-Street Parking Requirements
3. Access Standards
Section Six—Landscape Standards
1. General Requirements
2. Frontage Buffer
3. Side and Rear Landscape Buffer
4. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
5. Screening of Open Storage, Refuse
Areas, and Utility Appurtenances
3
1. Introduction
1. Intent.
The intent of this code overlay is to implement the goals and objectives outlined in the Main
Street Redevelopment Plan: A Call for Investment document, adopted by the Town of Normal
(hereafter referred to as the “Town”) Town Council on December 17, 2007.
2. Application of Overlay District.
A. Those within the Main Street Corridor who elect to use the Form-Based Code must comply
both with this overlay code and all other regulations of the Town, as applicable. However,
the other regulations of the Town will only apply to the extent that such regulations
do not conflict with this overlay, or address issues not regulated by this overlay.
3. Code Definitions.
A. Lists of Examples. Lists of examples prefaced by “including the following,” “such as,” or
other similar preface shall not be construed as exclusive and shall not preclude an interpretation
of the list including other similar and non-mentioned examples by the Town Zoning
Code Administrator.
B. Text, Tables, and Graphics. The graphics, tables, and text used throughout this overlay are
regulatory. In case of a conflict, text shall control over tables or graphics; tables shall control
over graphics.
C. Definitions. These definitions are specific to the regulations outlined for the Main Street
Corridor and are in addition to the definitions included in the Zoning Code, Section 15.3-2
Definitions. The defined terms will appear with the first letter(s) capitalized throughout the
code.
1. Base Type. The permitted treatment types of the Ground Floor Façade of a structure.
2. Building Coverage. The percentage of a lot covered by structure(s), principal or accessory.
3. Building Type. A structure defined by the combination of configuration, form, and
function.
4. Build-to Zone. An area in which the front or side Facade of a building shall be placed;
it may or may not be located directly adjacent to a property line. The zone dictates the
minimum and maximum distance a structure may be placed from a property line.
5. Cap Type. The detail at the top of a building that finishes a Facade, including, but not
limited to, a pitched roof with various permitted slopes, parapet, and tower.
6. Corner Building. A building constructed on the corner lot of a block to hold the spatial
definition of an intersection, often referred to as “holding the corner.”
7. Courtyard. An outdoor area enclosed by building on at least three (3) sides that is open
to the sky.
4
8. Coverage, Impervious Site. The percentage of a lot covered by buildings, pavement,
and other Impervious Surfaces. The calculation is determined using lot area.
9. Critical Root Zone. The area of soil and roots within the radius beneath a tree’s canopy,
within the dripline, or within a circular area of soil and roots with a radius out from the
trunk a distance of one (1) foot for every inch of a tree’s width (measured at four and a
half (4 1/2) feet above the mean grade of the tree’s trunk).
10. Entrance, Primary. Also referred to as main or principal entrance. The principal point
of access for pedestrians into a building is typically located on the front and/or corner
side Facade.
11. Expression Line. An architectural feature. A decorative, three-dimensional, linear element,
horizontal or vertical, protruding or indented at least a quarter (1/4) inch from
the exterior Facade of a building. Element typically delineates the floors or stories of a
building.
12. Façade. The exterior face of a building, including, but not limited to, the wall, windows,
window sills, doorways, and design elements such as Expression Lines, cornices,
and parapets. The Front Facade is defined as any building face adjacent to the
Front Property Line.
13. Front Property Line. The boundary abutting a public right-of-way, other than an alley,
from which the required setback or Build-to Zone is measured.
a. On corner lots, this line is typically the narrower of the two (2) lot lines along the vehicular
right-of-way.
b. Corner or through lots with frontage along Main Street shall treat the frontage along
Main Street as the Front Property Line.
c. Lots with frontage along Kingsley or Center Street (but not Main Street) shall treat the
frontage along Kingsley or Center Street as the Front Property Line.
14. Gross Square Footage. The total area of all floors as measured between the outside surfaces
of all exterior walls.
15. Ground Floor. Also called ground story. The first floor of a building that is level to or
slightly elevated above the sidewalk, excluding basements and cellars.
16. Impervious Surface. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not absorb or retain
water, including, but not limited to, building roofs, parking, driveways, and other
paved areas.
17. Pervious Surface. An area maintained in its natural condition or covered by a material
that permits the infiltration or percolation into the ground of at least eighty (80) percent
of water.
18. Regulating Plan. A plan that identifies the districts and the standards by which a lot
may be developed.
19. Semi-Pervious Surface. A material that allows at least forty (40) percent absorption of
water into the ground or plant material, such as pervious pavers, permeable asphalt or
concrete, or green roofs.
20. Street Termini. At a three-way or “T” intersection, it is the location where one street
terminates at another street.
5
4. How to Use This Code.
Each lot within the Main Street Corridor has been assigned a district that allows the development
of at least one (1) Building Type. To determine which standards are applicable to a lot,
follow these steps:
A. Determine District Designation. Using the Regulating Plan (Figure 2-2.A), determine the
lot’s district designation. The district designation will determine which Building Types
may be constructed and which uses are permitted on the lot (refer to Section 2 for information
on Districts).
B. Permitted Building Types. Refer to Section 4 Building Type Standards for information on
Building Types.
C. Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 3 for information on permitted uses. Table 3-1.A is organized
by district. A permitted use within the district can be developed within any of the
district’s permitted Building Types.
D. Other Standards. Sections 5 and 6 outline the additional requirements for parking and access
and landscaping, which apply to all lots within the Main Street Corridor.
End of Section 1
6
2. Districts & Regulating Plan
1. Establishment of Districts.
To regulate the location of Building Types and Uses, the Main Street Corridor is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts. Refer to Table 2-1.A. Districts and Building Types Summary
Table for a summary of which Building Types are permitted in each of the zoning districts.
A. Mixed Use and Commercial Districts.
1. MS1. This district allows for the development of only the Commercial Building Type.
MS1 is meant to produce small, intense nodes of pedestrian-friendly mixed use and
commercial activity.
2. MS2. MS2 is similar to MS1, with the Commercial and Iconic Building Types allowed.
The inclusion of the Iconic Building Type results in a commercial node that is
slightly less intense than MS1, as the Iconic building has a larger setback and less impervious
coverage allowed than the Commercial building.
3. MS3. This district allows for the development of the Commercial, Cottage Commercial,
and Iconic Building Types. It is intended to create mixed use, pedestrian-friendly
neighborhood centers. MS3 permits the Auto-Oriented Building Type for vehicular
service station use only, with development conditions (refer to Section 3-9(I) Development
Standards for Uses).
4. MS4. This district includes the Auto-Oriented, Corridor, and Iconic Building Types
and is designed to serve the greater community by offering commercial and office uses
on a larger, more auto-oriented scale. Of the mixed use and commercial districts, MS4
permits the greatest range of uses.
B. Civic Districts.
1. MS5. MS5 allows for the development of the Corridor and Iconic Building Types.
This district permits the development of civic, institutional, and office uses.
2. MSU. MSU allows for the same Building Types and uses as MS5, including the Corridor
and Iconic Building Types, but is designed to be utilized around Illinois State University.
Unlike MS5, in MSU multifamily uses are permitted by-right.
C. Residential Districts.
1. MS6. MS6 allows for the development of the more intense residential Building Types,
including Corridor, Manor Multifamily, and Rowhouse, in addition to the Iconic
Building Type.
2. MS7. MS7 allows for the development of the Manor Multifamily, Manor, and Iconic
Building Types. This district seeks to preserve the character of existing residential
structures along the Corridor while providing the option of adding multifamily dwelling
units with the Manor Multifamily Building Type.
3. MS8. This district allows the development of the House and Iconic Building Types. It
is the least intense of the three residential districts due to the predominance of the
House Building Type, which has a setback instead of a Build-to Zone and a low permitted
building coverage.
7
2. Regulating Plan.
The areas and boundaries of the districts listed in 2-1(1). Establishment of Districts are established
to scale as shown on the Main Street Corridor Regulating Plan (refer to Figure 2-2.A)
and referred to herein as “Regulating Plan.”
3. District Regulations.
The regulations outlining the permitted uses and Building Types within each district are set
forth in Sections 3 and 4.
Table 2-1.A. Districts and Building Types Summary Table
8
Figure 2-2.A. Main Street Corridor Regulating Plan—North and Center Section
9
Figure 2-2.A. Main Street Corridor Regulating Plan—South Section
End of Section 2
10
3. Uses
1. General Requirements.
The following pertains to uses permitted on the Main Street Corridor.
A. Use Table. Table 3-1.A Use Table outlines the permitted uses. Each use is given one of the
following designations. A use may not be designated the same across the zoning districts.
1. Permitted (full circle). These uses are permitted by-right in the districts in which they
are listed.
2. Permitted in Upper Stories Only (circle-top half filled in). These uses are permitted byright
in the districts in which they are listed, provided that the uses are located in the
upper stories of a structure or not in the Ground Floor adjacent to the Front Facade (the
space considered the storefront display area).
3. Permitted with Development Standards (circle-left half filled in). These uses are permitted
by-right in the districts in which they are listed, provided that they are developed
utilizing the standards detailed in Section 3-9 Development Standards for Uses.
4. Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle). These uses require the approval of a Special
Use Permit (refer to Section 15.10. Special Use Regulations) to occur in the districts
in which they are listed. These Uses must also follow any development standards
outlined in Section 3-9 Development Standards for Uses.
B. General Provisions and Organization. The uses are grouped into general categories, which
may contain lists of additional uses or clusters of uses.
1. Number of Uses. A parcel of land may contain more than one (1) use.
2. Unlisted Similar Use. If a use is not listed, but is similar in nature and impact to a permitted
use, the Town Zoning Code Administrator may interpret the use as permitted.
a. Applicable Development Standards. The unlisted similar use will be subject to any
development standards applicable to the similar use, as defined by Section 3-9 Development
Standards for Uses.
b. Special Use Standards. If the unlisted use is similar in nature and impact to a listed
use that requires the approval of a Special Use Permit, the Town Zoning Code Administrator
may interpret the use as requiring the approval of a Special Use Permit.
3. Utilize Permitted Building Type. Each use shall be located within a permitted Building
Type, as detailed in Section 4 Building Type Standards, unless otherwise specified.
C. Home Occupations. Home occupations are subject to the standards detailed in the Zoning
Code, Section 15.4-4(D).
11
2. Residential Uses.
A category of uses that include several residence types.
A. Single Family. One (1) dwelling unit located within the principal structure of a lot.
B. Two Family. A structure containing two (2) dwelling units.
C. Multifamily. Three (3) or more dwelling units located in the principal structure of a lot in
which the units may or may not share a common wall with the adjacent (horizontally or
vertically) unit(s) or have individual entrances from the outside.
3. Lodging and Housing Uses.
A use that provides furnished rooms for temporary or permanent accommodations.
A. Bed and Breakfast. Refer to the Zoning Code, Section 15.3-2 Definitions.
B. Fraternity/Sorority. A building used as group living quarters by a college or university fraternity
or sorority typically containing sleeping rooms and a central kitchen maintained
exclusively for members of the fraternity or sorority.
C. Hospice.
D. Hotel/Motel.
E. Independent, Assisted Living, and Nursing Home.
F. Therapeutic Group Home.
12
4. Civic and Institutional Uses.
A category that includes uses which focus on improving the quality of day-to-day community
life by providing a location for assembly, discourse, worship, education, healing,
and entertainment.
A. Assembly. A facility that has organized services, meetings, or programs to benefit,
educate, entertain, or promote discourse amongst the residents of the community in a
public or private setting. Assembly includes such uses as a community center, house
of worship, and private clubs and lodges.
B. Hospital. A licensed institution providing medical care and health services to the
community. These services may be located in one (1) building or clustered in several
buildings and typically include laboratories, in- and out-patient facilities, training
facilities, medical offices, staff residences, food service, and gift shop.
C. Library/Museum.
D. Park.
E. Police and Fire.
F. Post Office.
G. School: Pre-Kindergarten through Junior High. An education facility for prekindergarten
through eighth (8) grade, including associated facilities such as ball
fields, ball courts, gymnasium, and theatre.
H. School: High School. An education facility for grades nine (9) through twelve (12),
including associated facilities such as ball fields, ball courts, gymnasium, and theatre.
I. School: Higher Education. An education facility offering post-secondary school educational
activities and programs, which may or may not be tied to a degree program;
may also include associated facilities such as ball fields, ball courts, gymnasium, and
theatre.
5. Retail Uses.
A category of uses that involves the selling of goods or merchandise to the general public
for personal or household consumption.
A. Neighborhood Retail. A retail use involving the small scale sale of goods or merchandise
to neighborhood residents living within walking distance. A use in this category
typically occupies an area of less than 5,000 square feet. Neighborhood Retail
includes such uses as:
1. Antique Shop
2. Apparel, Shoe, and Accessory Store
3. Art, Craft, and Education Supplies
4. Book, Magazine, and Newspaper Store
5. Camera and Photo Supply Store
6. Convenience Store
7. Drug Store/Pharmacy
8. Flower Shop
9. Gift, Novelty, and Souvenir Shop
13
10. Grocery Store (Neighborhood Retail Continued)
11. Hardware Store
12. Hobby and Toy Shops
13. Jewelry Sales and Repair
14. Luggage and Leather Goods
15. Specialty Food Market (Bakery, Butcher, Fish Market, Produce, Dairy, etc.)
16. Sporting Goods Sales and Rental
17. Music Store
18. Office Supply
19. Optical Goods Shop
20. Pet Grooming and Supplies Shop
21. Tobacco Shop
22. Video Sales
23. Wine and Liquor Shop, subject to the restrictions set forth in Sec. 4-7 of the Town of
Normal Municipal Code
B. General Retail. A retail use involving the sale of goods or merchandise to residents living
in the community, many of whom will access the store by vehicle. A use in this category
typically occupies an area between 5,000 and 30,000 square feet. General Retail includes
such uses as:
1. Neighborhood Retail Uses
2. Appliance and Electronic Sales and Service
3. Computer Software Sales and Leasing
4. Department Store
5. Home Furnishings and Accessories Sales and Rentals
6. Medical Supply Store and Rental
7. Pawn Shop
8. Vehicle Supply Shop (no service)
C. Large Scale Retail. A retail use involving the large scale sale of goods to residents living
within the region. These uses are almost exclusively accessed by automobile and therefore
additional consideration should be given to parking and traffic issues when developing this
use. The goods or merchandise sold may be of the same type or a variety of types and typically
occupy an area greater than 30,000 square feet. This includes such uses as:
1. General Retail Uses
2. Commercial Equipment and Supply. A retail use involving the large scale sale of
goods marketed primarily to commercial or industrial businesses, but available to the
general public. This use may include bulk sales, outdoor storage, and frequent commercial
vehicle and consumer traffic. Commercial Equipment and Supply include such
uses as:
a. Building Materials
b. Machine Sales and Rental
14
3. Outdoor Sales Lot. A retail Use where a significant portion of the goods are stored or
displayed either temporarily or permanently outdoors. Outdoor Sales Lots include such
Uses as:
a. Sales and Rental
b. Farm Supply and Machinery Sales
c. Nursery and Garden Center
d. Vehicle Sales and Rental
6. Service Uses.
A category of uses that provide patrons with services and limited retail products related to those
services. Visibility and accessibility are important to these Uses, as many customers do not utilize
scheduled appointments.
A. Neighborhood Personal Services. A Service Use that offers daily conveniences to residents
in adjacent neighborhoods. A use in this category typically occupies an area of less than
5,000 square feet and includes such uses as:
1. Arcade
2. Bank
3. Barber Shop, Beauty Salon, and Spa
4. Billiard Hall
5. Bowling Alley
6. Dry Cleaning, Laundry, and Laundromat
7. Eating and Drinking Establishments
8. Fitness, Dance Studio, and Gym
9. Locksmith
10. Mailing Services
11. Photocopying and Printing
12. Photography Studio and Supplies (on-site processing permitted)
13. Tailor, Seamstress, or Shoe Repair
14. Tanning Salon
15. Training Center
16. Travel Agency and Tour Operator
17. Video Rental
18. Real Estate Rental and Tenant Services (Added 7/21/2014 by Ord. No. 5551)
19. Electronic Service and Repair (Added 7/21/2014 by Ord. No. 5551)
B. General Services. A Service Use offering daily conveniences to residents living in the
community. A use in this category typically occupies an area between 5,000 and 30,000
square feet and includes such uses as:
1. Neighborhood Personal Services
2. Amusement Center
3. Catering
4. Currency Exchange
5. Funeral Home
6. Repair of Small Goods & Electronics
7. Tattoo/Piercing Parlor
8. Theatre
15
C. Arena. A large facility, partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators,
that is used for sporting events or other assembly purposes.
D. Day Care Center. A premises licensed by the State of Illinois and receiving more than
eight (8) children for care during all or part of a day or night, not including the children of
the operator of the Day Care Center.
E. Vehicular Service. A business involving the servicing of vehicles and/or the storage and
distribution of gasoline. A convenience store may also be included as a secondary use, as
well as the sales of propane and kerosene. Vehicular Service includes such uses as:
1. Vehicular Service Station
2. Automotive Repair
3. Car Wash, Automatic or Self Service
4. Tire Sales and Mounting
7. Office Uses.
A category of uses for businesses that involve the transaction of affairs of a profession, service,
industry, or government. Patrons of these businesses usually have set appointments or meeting
times; the businesses do not typically rely on walk-in customers.
A. Neighborhood Office. An Office Use that typically occupies an area of less than 5,000
square feet and involves twenty (20) or fewer employees at a given location.
B. General Office. An Office Use that typically occupies an area of greater than 5,000 square
feet and more than twenty (20) employees at a given location.
8. Infrastructure Uses.
A. Parking Lot. A lot that does not contain a permitted Building Type and is solely used for
the temporary parking of vehicles.
B. Utility and Infrastructure. Land utilized for the Town’s utility and infrastructure needs.
C. Telecommunication Antenna Facility. A use of land that includes buildings, cabinets,
structures, and facilities, including generating and switching stations, repeaters, antennas,
transmitters, receivers, towers, and all other buildings and structures relating to low-power
mobile voice transmission, data transmission, video transmission and radio transmission,
or wireless transmission.
16
Table 3.-1.A. Use Table.
17
9. Development Standards for Uses.
The following development standards apply to uses designated as Permitted with Development
Standards (circle-left half filled in) or Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle) in Table 3-
1.A Use Table.
A. Bed and Breakfast. Where a Bed and Breakfast Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle),
refer to the Zoning Code, Section 15.10-4. Special Use Regulations.
B. Hospice. Where a Hospice is Permitted with Development Standards (circle-left half filled
in), the following apply:
1. Number of Patients. A maximum of six (6) patients are permitted.
2. Physical Appearance. The appearance of the structure shall conform to the residential
character of the area.
C. Therapeutic Group Home. Where Therapeutic Group Home requires a Special Use Permit
(open circle), refer to the Zoning Code, Section 15.10-4. Special Use Regulations.
D. Assembly. Where Assembly Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle), the following
apply:
1. Location. In MS6, MS7, and MS8, Assembly uses may only be located on a corner
parcel.
E. Arena. Where Arena Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle), the following apply:
1. Location. Arena uses are only permitted on Main and Kingsley Streets between
Bowles and Hovey-Beaufort Streets in MSU.
F. Day Care Center. Where Day Care Center Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle), the
following apply:
1. Side and Rear Buffers. Regardless of adjacent Building Types, light side and rear buffers
shall be installed per the requirements of Section 6-3(E) Light Landscape Screening
Requirement.
2. License Requirement. All Day Care Centers shall comply with the licensing requirements
set forth by the State of Illinois.
18
I. Vehicular Service. Where Vehicular Service Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle),
the following apply:
1. Canopies. Canopies shall be developed
according to the following:
a. Canopies shall be no taller than fifteen
(15) feet.
b. Canopy roof structures shall match the
roof structure of the principal structure
on the lot.
2. Pump Islands. The pump islands shall be
located behind the principal structure, in
the rear of the lot, as illustrated.
3. MS3 District Specific Standards. The following
apply to Vehicular Service uses located in MS3 with approval of a Special Use
Permit.
a. Use Limitations. The only permitted use is Vehicular Service Station.
b. Permitted Building Types. Vehicular Service Station is required to be constructed
in compliance with the Commercial, Cottage Commercial, or Auto-Oriented Building
Types, as specified in Sections 4-6 through 4-8. The Auto-Oriented Building
Type may only be utilized in MS3 with a Vehicular Service use.
c. Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred and forty (140)
feet.
d. Location. Vehicular Service Station may only be located on a corner parcel.
4. MS4 District Specific Standards. The following apply to Vehicular Service uses located
in MS4 with approval of a Special Use Permit.
a. Service Bays. Vehicular service bays, including garages and car wash bays, shall
be not be located on the front Facade.
b. Outdoor Storage. Disabled or inoperable vehicles and those awaiting pick-up may
be stored in a parking lot with the following conditions:
(1) The vehicles are not stored for more than two (2) days.
(2) The vehicles are stored in the rear yard, screened from view of the Front Property
Line.
(3) The storage area is screened using the Heavy Side or Rear Yard Buffer outlined
in Section 6-3(D) regardless of the adjacent land uses.
c. Outdoor Activities.
(1) All repairs or washing activities must occur inside a building.
(2) Vacuuming activities must be screened from view from the front and corner
side property lines.
(3) Temporary outdoor display of seasonal items, such as windshield wiper fluid
or salt, is permitted during business hours under the canopy and adjacent to the
principal structure.
19
J. Parking Lot. Where a Parking Lot Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle), the
following apply:
1. Adjacent Parking Lots. Two (2) lots utilized solely for parking cannot be located
directly adjacent to one another, as illustrated in Figure 3-9.B.
2. Associated Use. Parking Lots must be associated with a non-residential use(s).
K. Telecommunication Antenna Facility. Where a Telecommunication Antenna Facility
Requires a Special Use Permit (open circle), refer to the Zoning Code, Section 15.15.
20
10. Accessory Uses and Structures.
Accessory uses and structures shall follow the standards of the existing Zoning Code, Section
15.4-4. Accessory Buildings and Uses, as supplemented by the following provisions.
A. Location on Lot. An accessory structure shall conform to the following location
requirements.
1. Permitted Location. Accessory structures are permitted in the side or rear yards.
2. Location on Corner Lots. Accessory structures are permitted in the corner side yard
Build-to Zone, but may not extend closer to the corner side property line than the
principal structure.
3. Setback. The minimum setback for all accessory structures shall be three (3) feet from
all property lines with the following exceptions:
a. Two Stories. Any accessory structure with a height of two (2) stories shall be set
back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines.
b. Through Lots. The minimum setback along the vehicular right-of-way for
accessory structures located in the rear yard of a through lot is ten (10) feet.
B. Height. Maximum height of an accessory structure is two (2) stories. An accessory
structure shall not exceed the height of the principal building. Refer to Section 4-5.
Measuring Height.
C. Coverage Requirements. The development of an accessory structure shall not prevent a lot
from meeting the Building Coverage and Impervious Site Coverage requirements for the
associated Building Type. Refer to Section 4 Building Type Standards for more
information.
End of Section 3
21
4. Building Type Standards
1. General Requirements.
The following provisions pertain to all Building Types developed in the area designated as the
Main Street Corridor.
A. Building Types Summary Table. The requirements for each Building Type are summarized
in Table 4-1.A: Building Types Summary Table.
B. Number of Building Types per Lot. One (1) Building Type shall be permitted per lot.
C. Through-Lot Frontage. Through-lots with frontages on both Main and Kingsley Streets or
Main and Center Streets shall treat the side facing Main Street as the primary frontage.
D. Balconies. Where balconies are permitted per the Building Type requirements, the following
provisions must be met.
1. Each balcony structure may serve only one (1) unit.
2. Balconies must be independently secured, not connected to any other balcony; structural
supports, such as brackets, must be visible.
3. Balconies may be utilized on no more than thirty (30) percent of the front and corner
side Facades.
E. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Each Building Type is given a maximum Impervious
Surface coverage amount; however, in no instance shall the Impervious Surface
Coverage on a site interfere with the site’s ability to meet the requirements of Section 6
Landscape Standards.
F. Transitional Yard and Height. The Building Types are exempt from the requirements of
the existing Zoning Code Sec, 15.4-5(B) Transitional Yard and Building Height Requirements.
2. Building Type Descriptions.
The following describes the Building Types permitted within the Main Street Corridor. Refer to
Table 4-1.A for a summary of the Building Type requirements and the Regulating Plan (Figure
2-2.A) for permitted locations.
A. Commercial Building. This Building Type allows for the development of service and retail
uses on the Ground Floor and office and residential uses on the upper floors. It can range
in height from two (2) to eight (8) stories depending on its location and is constructed
within a small Build-to Zone at the front of the lot with parking located in the rear.
B. Cottage Commercial Building. This Building Type allows for the same general uses as the
Commercial Building, but has a more residential character. The Cottage Commercial
Building has a pitched roof, a larger setback than the Commercial Building, and a lower
height of between one (1) and two and a half (2 1/2) stories.
22
C. Corridor Building. This building can house a single category of uses, such as office or residential,
or a mix of uses. The Corridor Building can range in height between one (1) and
eight (8) stories depending on its location. This building has a variety of configurations possible,
including the inclusion of a private courtyard. Parking is permitted in the rear.
D. Auto-Oriented Building. Though a mix of Uses are encouraged, this Building Type may
house a single category of Uses, such as retail or service. It can range in height between
one (1) and two (2) stories. Unlike the Commercial, Cottage Commercial, and Corridor
Buildings, parking is permitted not only in the rear yard, but also the side yard.
E. Iconic Building. This unique and flexible Building Type is designed to house community,
cultural, civic, educational, or government uses. It ranges in height between one (1) and
four (4) stories and may also include a Tower or Spire Cap Type. The Iconic Building has
a lower requirement for transparency than the other non-residential Building Types due to
its unique nature.
F. Rowhouse. Rowhouses range in height from one and a half (1 1/2) to three (3) stories. The
Building Type is clustered into groups of between two (2) and five (5) units and is commonly
referred to as attached single family houses or townhouses. Parking is limited to the
rear yard or may be internal to the building.
G. Manor Multifamily. Manor Multifamily is similar to the Manor Building Type, but may
contain two (2) or more residential units. This Building Type is typically located on a
slightly larger lot to allow room for tenant or multiple owner parking, which is permitted
in the rear.
H. Manor. This Building Type allows for single family residential uses ranging in height from
one and a half (1 1/2) to two and a half (2 1/2) stories. The Manor is situated within a
small Build-to Zone near the front of the parcel, with parking typically in the rear.
I. House. The House also allows for single-family residential uses, but unlike the Manor
Building Type, includes a small setback rather than a Build-to Zone. It has a height between
one (1) and two and a half (2 1/2) stories.
23
Table 4-1.A. Building Types Summary Table
24
Table 4-1.A. Building Type Summary Table
25
3. Base Types
Base Type standards apply to the base or the Ground Floor Facade of all Building Types detailed
in Section 4.
A. General Provisions. The following provisions apply to all Base Types.
1. Intent. To guide the design of the Ground Floor of all buildings to relate appropriately
to pedestrians on the street. Treatment of upper floors is detailed in each Building
Type standard.
2. Applicability. The entire Ground Floor front Facade of all buildings must meet the
requirements of at least one (1) of the permitted Base Types, unless otherwise stated in
this Section.
3. Measuring Transparency. Refer to 4-5 for information on measuring building transparency.
B. Storefront Base Type. (Refer to Figure 4-3.A). The storefront Base Type is a highly transparent
Ground Floor treatment designed to serve as the display area and Primary Entrance
for retail or service uses.
1. Transparency. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the front Facade between
two (2) and eight (8) feet above the sidewalk must be comprised of transparent, nonreflective
windows into the commercial space.
2. Elevation. Ground Floor elevation must be between zero (0) and one (1) foot above the
sidewalk.
3. Facade Divisions. Use Expression Lines to divide Facade segments.
a. Vertically divide the base Facade into segments no greater than thirty (30) feet in
width.
b. Horizontally define the base Facade from the upper floors.
4. Entrance. All entries shall be recessed.
a. Recess shall be a minimum of three (3) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet deep.
b. Recess shall be no wider than eight (8) feet.
26
C. Shopfront Base Type. (Refer to Figure 4-3.B). The shopfront Base Type treatment is less
transparent than the storefront, while still allowing for those in the building to see out and
those outside to see in, and is combined with a porch or stoop for the entrance.
1. Transparency. A minimum of fifty (50)
percent of the front Facade between
three (3) and nine (9) feet above the
sidewalk must be comprised of
transparent, non-reflective windows
into the commercial space.
2. Elevation. Ground Floor elevation must
be between zero (0) and three (3) feet
above the sidewalk, with or without an
optional visible basement.
3. Facade Divisions. For buildings wider
than fifty (50) feet, divide base Facade
into segments no greater than thirty (30)
feet in width with an Expression Line.
4. Entrance. Porch, enclosed porch, or
stoop entrance required.
D. Arcade Base Type. (Refer to Figure 4-3.C). An arcade Base Type is an arched, covered
pedestrian walkway within the recessed Ground Floor Facade.
1. Arcade. Create an open-air public walkway from the face of the building recessed into
the building a minimum of eight (8) and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.
2. Recessed or Interior Facade. Storefront or shopfront Base Types are required on the
recessed Ground Floor Facade.
3. Column Spacing. Columns shall be
spaced no less than ten (10) feet and no
more than twelve (12) feet apart on
center.
4. Column Width. Columns shall be a
minimum of one foot, eight inches (1’-
8”) and a maximum of two feet, four
inches (2’-4”) in width.
5. Arcade Opening. Opening may not be
flush with interior arcade ceiling and
may be arched or straight.
6. Horizontal Facade Division.
Horizontally define the base Facade
from the upper floors.
27
E. Stoop Base Type. (Refer to Figure 4-3.D). A stoop is an unroofed, open platform.
1. Stoop Size. Stoops shall be a minimum of three (3) feet deep and four (4) feet wide.
2. Transparency. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the entire Ground Floor and visible
basement Facade must be comprised of transparent, non-reflective windows.
a. Residential Building Types (see 4-11 through 4-14) do not have separate ground
and upper floor transparency levels.
3. Elevation. Ground Floor elevation must be located a maximum of two feet, six inches
(2’-6”) above the sidewalk without visible basement and a maximum of four feet, six
inches (4’-6”) above the sidewalk with a visible basement.
4. Facade Divisions. Use Expression Lines to divide Facade segments, except on Residential
Building Types (4-11 through 4-14).
a. Vertically divided base Facade into segments no greater than sixty (60) feet in
width.
b. Horizontally define the base Facade from upper floors.
28
F. Porch Base Type. (Refer to Figure 4-3.E). A porch is a raised, roofed platform that may or
may not be enclosed on all sides.
1. Porch Size. The porch shall be a minimum of five (5) feet deep and eight (8) feet wide.
2. Height. Porch may be two (2) stories to provide a balcony on the second floor.
3. Transparency.
a. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the entire Ground Floor and visible basement
Facade must be comprised of transparent, non-reflective windows.
b. No rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of the Facade per floor may be
blank, without transparency.
c. Residential Building Types do not have separate ground and upper floor transparency
levels. See 4-11 through 4-14 for the minimum transparency level for each
Residential Building Type.
d. If enclosed, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the enclosed porch must be comprised
of transparent, non-reflective windows.
4. Elevation. Ground Floor elevation must be located a maximum of two feet, six inches
(2’-6”) above the sidewalk, without visible basement and a maximum of four feet, six
inches (4’-6”) above the sidewalk with a visible basement.
5. Facade Divisions. Use Expression Lines to divide Facade segments, exception on Residential
Building Types (see 4-11 through 4-14).
a. Vertically divide base Facade into segments no greater than sixty (60) feet in
width.
b. Horizontally define the base Facade from upper floors.
29
4. Cap Types
Cap Type standards apply to the cap of all Building Types detailed in Section 4.
A. General Provisions. The following provisions apply to all Cap Types.
1. Intent. To guide the design of the cap of all buildings where a consistent character is
desired.
2. Applicability. All buildings must meet the requirements of one of the Cap Types permitted
for the Building Type.
3. Measuring Height. Refer to 4-5 for information on measuring building height.
4. Cap Type Requirements. Following are the requirements for each Cap Type.
B. Parapet Cap Type. (Refer to Figure 4-4.A). A parapet is a low wall projecting from the
edge of a building’s roof; it can be utilized with a flat or pitched roof and also serves to
hide roof-top mechanicals from view of the street.
1. Parapet Height. Height is measured from the top of the upper floor to the top of the
parapet.
a. Minimum height is two (2) feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet.
b. Cap shall be high enough to screen the roof and any roof appurtenances from view
of the street(s) and any adjacent building of similar height.
2. Horizontal Expression Lines. Using an Expression Line, define the cap from the upper
floors of the building and also define the top of the cap.
3. Occupied Space. Occupied space may not be incorporated behind this Cap Type.
30
C. Pitched Roof Cap Type. (Refer to Figure 4-4.B and 4-4.C) This Cap Type has a roof that is
sloping or pitched; the pitch or slope is measured with the vertical rise divided by the horizontal
span or run.
1. Pitch Measure. The roof may not be sloped less than six to twelve (6:12) (rise:run) or
more than sixteen to twelve (16:12), with the following exceptions:
a. The roof on the House Building Type may not be sloped less than four to twelve
(4:12).
b. Slopes less than six to twelve (6:12) are only permitted to occur on second story or
higher roofs. (Refer to Figure 4-4.C)
2. Roof Types.
a. Hipped, gabled, and combination of hips and gables with or without dormers are
acceptable.
b. Gambrel and mansard roofs are acceptable. When the ridge runs parallel to the
street, one (1) dormer per fifteen (15) feet of street face is required.
c. Butterfly roofs (inverted hip roof) are acceptable.
3. Roof Height. Roof height may not be greater than the total of all floors below the roof.
For single story sections of the building, roof height may not exceed one and half (1
1/2) times the floor below the roof.
4. Parallel Ridge Line. A gabled end or perpendicular ridge line shall occur at least every
one hundred (100) feet of roof when the ridge line runs parallel to the Front Property
Line.
31
E. Towers. (Refer to Figure 4-4.D). A tower is a rectilinear, vertical element that must be used
with other Cap Types.
1. Quantity. One (1) tower is permitted per
building for all Building Types.
2. Tower Height. Maximum height, measured
from the top of the parapet or eave
to the top of the tower, is the equivalent
of the height of one (1) upper floor of the
building to which the tower is applied.
3. Tower Width. Maximum width along all
Facades is one-third (1/3) the width of the
Front Facade or thirty (30) feet, whichever
is less.
4. Horizontal Expression Lines. Using an
Expression Line, define the tower from
the upper floors, except on Residential
Building Types.
5. Occupied Space. Towers may be occupied
by the same uses allowed in upper
floors of the Building Type to which it is
applied.
6. Application. May be combined with all
other Cap Types.
F. Spire. (Refer to Figure 4-4.E). A spire is a long, tapering, cylindrical design element that
can be attached to a tower or other Cap Type.
1. Permitted Location. Spires are permitted only
on Iconic Building Types.
2. Spire Height. Measured from the base of the
spire to the top, including any decorative elements
atop the apex of the spire, maximum
height is thirty (30) feet.
3. Spire Width. Maximum width, measured at
the spire base is one-third (1/3) the width of
the Front Facade or fifteen (15) feet, whichever
is less.
4. Occupied Space. Spires are a decorative element;
they may not be utilized as occupied
space.
5. Application. May be combined with all other
Cap Types.
32
5. Measuring Height, Transparency, and Coverage
A. Measuring Height. These standards detail how building height is measured. (Refer to Figure
4-5.A Measuring Height)
1. Height in Stories. Each Building Type includes a provision listing the number of permitted
stories, typically in a minimum and maximum range of stories.
2. Half Stories. Half Stories are located either completely within the roof structure or in a
visible basement exposed a maximum of one (1) half-story above grade.
3. Floor Height. Each Building Type includes a permitted range of height in feet for each
story.
a. Floor height is measured in feet between the floor of a story to the floor of the story
above it.
b. For single story buildings and the uppermost story of a multiple story building,
floor to floor height shall be measured from the floor of the story to the tallest
point of the ceiling.
33
B. Measuring Transparency. These parameters outline how to measure the degree to which a
Facade has clear, transparent windows on each story.
1. Arcades, Storefronts, and Shopfronts. (Refer to Figure 4-5.B)
a. Transparency Measured by Floor. On buildings with an arcade, storefront, or shopfront
Base Type, transparency is measured with a separate percentage for the
Ground Floor transparency and the upper story transparency.
b. Ground Floor Transparency. Transparency is measured on the Facade between two
(2) feet and eight (8) feet above sidewalk level on storefronts. Refer to 4-3 Base
Types for the requirements.
c. Upper story. The upper story transparency level is measured by story, from floor to
floor. Refer to 4-6 through 4-14 for the requirements.
2. Porch and Stoop
Build- ings. (Refer to
Figure 4-5.C)
a. Transparency Measured by Facade. On residential buildings with a porch or stoop
Base Type, transparency is measured as a percentage of the entire Facade and not
by story.
b. Ground and Upper Stories. Transparency is
measured along the full Facade, including the
Facade of half stories. Refer to 4-6 through 4-
14 for the requirements.
3. Maximum Area of No Transparency. On front
and corner side Facades of applicable Building
Types, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30)
percent of the each story’s Facade may be blank,
without transparency. This area is measured from
floor to floor of each story.
34
C. Measuring Coverage. The following details how Impervious Surfaces on a lot are measured
(refer to Figure 4-5.D).
1. Building Coverage. The percentage of a lot covered by all structures, both principal
and accessory.
2. Impervious Site Coverage. The percentage of a lot covered by all structures, both principal
and accessory; pavement; and other Impervious Surfaces.
35
6. Building Type Standards: Commercial Building
A. Building Siting. (See
Figure 4-6.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings may be constructed on a single lot provided that all
requirements in 4-6(A)(2) are met.
Street Frontage.
A.2. A minimum of ninety (90) percent of the length of the front Build-to Zone must be
occupied by building, with the following exception:
a. For parcels narrower than one hundred and five (105) feet in width, a minimum of
ninety (90) percent of the length of the front Build-to Zone, minus the driveway where
permitted (see 4-6(A)(12)), must be occupied by building.
A.3. The intersection of the front and corner side Build-to Zones (the corner) must be occupied
by a building.
A.4. Front and corner side building Facades must be constructed within Build-to Zones located
between zero (0) and five (5) feet from the property line.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.5. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of zero (0) feet.
A.6. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.7. Minimum lot width is twenty (20) feet.
A.8. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be 100 percent (see Section 4-1(E)).
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.9. Parking lots are permitted in the rear yard, behind the back Facade of the principal
building.
A.10. Parking is prohibited within the rear setback.
A.11. All loading facilities shall be located on rear Facades.
Driveways & Access
A.12. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
a. If alley access is available, an additional driveway is not permitted.
b. If the lot is a through lot, two (2) driveways are permitted; only one (1) driveway is
permitted on the front property line.
c. Access on corner lots shall be from the corner side property line.
d. Shared driveways are encouraged.
A.13. Driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the front and
corner side property lines of the block.
36
6. Building Type Standards: Commercial Building (continued)
B. Commercial Building Height & Use Requirements. (See Figure 4-6.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of two (2) stories and a maximum of four (4) stories
with the following exceptions:
a. A maximum height of six (6) stories is permitted on Main Street between Bowles and
College Streets.
b. Building height shall be a minimum of three (3) stories and a maximum of eight (8)
stories on Main Street between College and Hovey-Beaufort Streets.
c. Building height may be less than the minimum if it can be demonstrated that required
minimum height combined with required parking will not fit onto the site.
B.2. Allowable Ground Floor height is a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, maximum of thirty (30)
feet. When the Ground Floor is twenty (20) feet or more in height, it shall count as two (2)
stories in terms of measuring the overall building height.
B.3. Allowable upper floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum of fourteen (14)
feet.
Uses.
B.4. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
B.5. Parking is permitted fully below grade or internally in the rear of the building with a minimum
of thirty (30) feet, measured from the front and corner side Facades, occupied by a
permitted use other than parking.
37
6. Building Type Standards: Commercial Building (continued)
C. Facade Requirements. (See Figure 4-6.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the upper story front and corner side Facades, shall
have transparent, non-reflective windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The building’s Primary Entrance must be on the front or corner side Facade. Entrances at
the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
C.4. Provide a minimum of one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) feet of building frontage
on front and corner side Facades and those Facades facing parking lots.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.5. Allowable Cap Types are the parapet, pitched roof, and tower.
C.6. Allowable Base Types are the storefront and arcade.
C.7. Storefront, arcade, shopfront, or stoop treatments are required on the Facade(s) adjacent to
parking lots.
Balconies.
C.8. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
38
7. Building Type Standards: Cottage Commercial Building
A. Build- ing Siting.
(Refer to Figure 4-7.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings on a single lot are not permitted.
Street Frontage.
A.2. A minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the length of the front Build-to Zone must be occupied
by a building.
A.3. The intersection of the front and side Build-to Zones (the corner) must be occupied by
building.
A.4. Front and corner side building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located
between five (5) and fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
A.5. Porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted within two (2) feet of the front and side property
lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setback.
A.6. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.7. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.8. Minimum lot width is forty (40) feet.
A.9. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be seventy (70) percent; an additional ten (10)
percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.10. Parking lots are permitted in the rear yard, behind the back Facade of the principal building.
A.11. Parking is prohibited within the side and rear setbacks.
A.12. Parking lots are permitted to encroach into the front or corner side Build-to Zones, but
may not be located closer to the front or corner side property line than the principal
building Facade.
A.13. All loading facilities shall be located on the rear Facade.
Driveways & Access.
A.14. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
a. If alley access is available, an additional driveway is not permitted.
b. If the lot is a through lot, two (2) driveways are permitted; only one (1) driveway is
permitted on the front property line.
c. Shared driveways are encouraged.
A.15. Driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the front and
side property lines.
39
7. Building Type Standards: Cottage Commercial Building (continued)
B. Height &
Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-7.B).
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of one (1) story and a maximum of two and a half (2.5 )
stories.
B.2. Allowable Ground Floor height is a minimum of ten (10) feet, maximum fifteen (15) feet.
B.3. Allowable upper floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum of fourteen (14) feet.
Uses.
B.4. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
C. Facade
Requirements.
(Refer to Figure 4-7.C).
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the upper story front and corner side Facades shall
have transparent, non-reflective windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of the
Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The building’s Primary Entrance must be on the front or corner side building Facade. Entrances
at the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
C.4. Provide a minimum of one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) feet of building frontage.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.5. Allowable Cap Types are the pitched roof and tower.
C.6. Allowable Base Types are the shopfront, porch, or stoop.
C.7. Shopfront, porch, or stoop treatments are required on the Façade(s) adjacent to parking.
Balconies.
C.8. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Sec. 4-1(E) are met.
40
8. Building Type Standards: Auto-Oriented Building
A. Building
Sit- ing. (See Figure
4-8.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings may be constructed on a single lot provided that all requirements in
4-8(A)(2) are met.
Street Frontage.
A.2. A minimum of forty-five (45) percent of the length of the front Build-to Zone must be occupied
by building.
A.3. The intersection of the front and corner side Build-to Zones (the corner) must be occupied by a
building.
A.4. Front and corner side building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located between
five (5) and fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.5. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.6. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.7. Minimum lot width is fifty (50) feet.
A.8. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be seventy (70) percent; an additional fifteen (15) percent
of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.9. Parking lots are permitted in the rear; a single loaded aisle of parking is permitted in the side
yard.
A.10.Parking is prohibited within the side and rear setbacks.
A.11.Parking lots are permitted to encroach into the front or corner side Build-to Zone, but may not
be located closer to the front or corner side property line than the principal building Facade.
A.12.All loading facilities shall be located on the rear Facade.
Driveways & Access.
A.13.One (1) driveway per street frontage is permitted.
a. If alley access is available, it is strongly recommended that access occur only from the alley.
b. Two (2) driveways per street frontage are permitted if the parcel’s frontage exceeds four hundred
(400) feet.
A.14.On a corner, driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the front
and side property lines.
A.15.Drive-throughs are permitted on the rear and side Facades of a building.
41
8. Building Type Standards: Auto-Oriented Building (continued)
B.
Height & Use Requirements. (See Figure 4-8.B)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of one (1) story and a maximum of two (2) stories.
B.2. Allowable Ground Floor height is a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, maximum twenty-four
(24) feet.
B.3. Allowable upper floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum of fourteen (14)
feet.
B.4. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
C.
Facade Requirements. (See Figure 4-8.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the upper story front and corner side Facades shall
have transparent, non-reflective windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The building’s Primary Entry shall be located on the front or corner side building Façade.
C.4. Provide a minimum of one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) feet of building frontage
on front and corner side Facades and those Facades facing parking lots.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.5. Allowable Cap Types are the parapet, pitched roof, and tower.
C.6. Allowable Base Type is the storefront and arcade.
C.7. Storefront, arcade, or shopfront treatments are required on the Façade(s) adjacent to parking
facilities.
Balconies.
C.8. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
42
9. Building Type Standards: Corridor Building
A. Building
Sit- ing. (Refer
to Figure 4-9.A)
Street Frontage.
A.1. Multiple principal buildings may be constructed on a single lot provided that all requirements in
4-9(A)(2) are met.
A.2. A minimum of seventy (70) percent of the length of the front Build-to Zone must be occupied
by building.
A.3. The intersection of the front and corner side Build-to Zones (the corner) must be occupied by a
building.
A.4. Front and corner side building Facades must be located within Build-to Zones located between
five (5) and fifteen (15) feet from the property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.5. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.6. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.7. Minimum lot width is twenty (20) feet.
A.8. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be seventy (70) percent; an additional fifteen (15)
percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.9. Parking is prohibited within the courtyard and setbacks.
A.10. Parking lots are permitted in the rear; a single loaded aisle of parking is permitted in the side
yard in the MS4 District.
A.11. Parking lots are permitted to encroach into the front or corner side Build-to Zone, but may not
be located closer to the front or corner side property line than the principal building Facade.
A.12. Structured parking is permitted internally and in rear. All loading facilities and vehicular
garage doors shall be located on the rear Facade.
A.13. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per street frontage is permitted.
a. If alley access is available, it is strongly recommended that access occur only from the alley.
Driveways & Access.
A.14. On a corner, driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the front
and side property lines.
A.15. On a corner, driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the front
and side property lines.
43
9. Building Type Standards: Corridor Building (continued)
B. Height & Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-9.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of one (1) story and a maximum of four (4) stories
with the following exceptions:
a. Maximum of six (6) stories is permitted on Main Street between Bowles and College
Streets.
b. Building height shall be a minimum of three (3) stories and a maximum of eight (8)
stories on Main Street between College and Hovey Streets.
c. Building height may be less than the minimum if it can be demonstrated that required
minimum height combined with required parking will not fit onto the site.
B.2. Allowable Ground Floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum twenty-four (24)
feet.
B.3. Allowable upper floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum of fourteen (14)
feet.
B.4. Parking garages shall be no taller than the height of the building at the Front Property
Line.
Uses.
B.5. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
B.6. Parking is permitted fully below grade or internally in the rear of the building with a minimum
of thirty (30) feet, measured from the front and corner side Facades, occupied by a
permitted use other than parking.
44
9. Building Type Standards: Corridor Building (continued)
C. Facade Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-9.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the upper story front and corner side Facades shall
have transparent, non-reflective windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The Primary Entrance shall be located on the front or corner side building Facade. Entrances
at the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
C.4. Provide a minimum of one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) feet of building frontage
on the front and corner side Facades and those Facades facing parking lots.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.5. Allowable Cap Types are the parapet, pitched roof, and tower.
C.6. Allowable Base Types are the storefront, arcade, porch, and stoop.
C.7. Arcade, storefront, shopfront, porch, or stoop treatments are required on the Facade(s) adjacent
to parking facilities.
Balconies.
C.8. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
45
10. Building Type Standards: Iconic Building
A. Building
Siting. (See
Figure 4-10.A)
Street Frontage.
A.1. Multiple principal buildings may be constructed on a single lot provided that all requirements
in 4-10(A)(2) are met.
A.2. Front and corner side building Facades must be constructed within Build-to Zones located
between five (5) and fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
A.3. Porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted to within two (2) feet of the front and corner side
property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.4. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.5. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.6. Minimum lot width is fifty (50) feet.
A.7. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be seventy (70) percent; an additional fifteen
(15) percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.8. Parking is permitted in the rear yard; a single loaded aisle of parking is also permitted in
the side yard in MS4.
A.9 All loading facilities shall be located on the side or rear Facades.
Driveways & Access.
A.10. If an alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
A.11. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per street frontage is permitted.
a. At least one (1) access point on corner lots shall be from the corner side property line.
A.12. On a corner, driveway location shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of
the front and corner side property line.
46
10. Building Type Standards: Iconic Building (continued)
B. Height & Use Requirements. (See Figure 4-10.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of one (1) story and a maximum of four (4) stories.
B.2. Allowable floor height is as follows.
a. With a one (1) story building, the Ground Floor height shall be a minimum of fifteen
(15) feet.
b. With a multi-story building, the allowable Ground Floor and upper floor heights shall
be a minimum of nine (9) feet and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.
Uses.
B.3. Only Civic and Institutional uses are permitted in the Iconic Building Type (refer to Section
3 Uses).
C. Facade Requirements. (See Figure 4-10.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the front and corner side Facade shall have nonreflective
windows.
Building Entrance.
C.2. The Primary Entrance must be located on the front or corner side building Facade. Entrances
at the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.3. Allowable Cap Types are the parapet, pitched roof, tower, and spire.
C.4. Allowable Base Type is stoop. Iconic Buildings are exempt from the transparency requirements
associated with a stoop, refer to 4-3.
Balconies.
C.5. Balconies are not permitted.
47
11. Building Type Standards: Rowhouse
A. Building Siting. (Refer to Figure 4-11.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings may be constructed on a single lot provided that all requirements
in Section 4-11 are met for each building.
Street Frontage.
A.2. Front and corner side building Facades must be constructed within Build-to Zones located
between five (5) and fifteen (15) feet into the site from the property lines.
A.3. Unenclosed porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted to encroach to two (2) feet from the
front and corner side property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.4. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
a. A minimum of two (2) and a maximum of five (5) contiguous principal buildings are
permitted without side yard setbacks.
A.5. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.6. Maximum Building Coverage shall be sixty-five (65) percent of site area.
A.7. Minimum lot width is eighteen (18) feet per unit.
A.8. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be eighty (80) percent; an additional ten (10)
percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Parking.
A.9. Surface parking is permitted in the rear yard, behind the back Facade of the principal
building.
A.10. Parking is permitted within the corner side yard Build-to Zone, but may not be located
closer to the corner side property line than the principal building Facade(s).
Driveways & Access.
A.11. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per cluster of up to five (5) units is permitted.
A.12. If an alley exists, an additional driveway is not permitted.
48
11. Building Type Standards: Rowhouse (continued)
B. Height
& Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-11.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Principal building height shall be a minimum of one and a half (1 1/2) stories and a maximum
of three (3) stories.
B.2. Allowable floor height is a minimum of eight (8) feet, maximum of fourteen (14) feet.
Uses.
B.3. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
B.4. Parking is permitted fully below grade or internally in the rear of the building with a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet, measured from the front Facades, occupied by a permitted use
other than parking.
C. Facade
Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-11.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the front Facade shall have transparent, nonreflective
windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The Primary Entrance of each unit must be on the front or corner side Facade. Entrances at
the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.4. Allowable Cap Types are parapet and pitched roof. Towers are permitted on end units or
units at Street Termini.
C.5. Allowable Base Types are stoop, porch, and enclosed porch.
Balconies.
C.6. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
49
12. Building Type Standards: Manor Multifamily
A. Building
Siting. (Refer to Figure 4-12.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings on a single lot are not permitted.
Street Frontage.
A.2. The intersection of the front and corner side Build-to Zones (the corner) must be occupied
by a building.
A.3. Front building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located between ten
(10) and twenty-five (25) feet from the Front Property Line.
A.4. Corner side building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located between
five (5) and fifteen (15) feet from the corner side property line.
A.5. Unenclosed porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted to encroach to two (2) feet from the
front and corner side property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.6. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.7. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.8. Maximum Building Coverage shall be forty-five (45) percent of site area.
A.9. Minimum lot width is fifty (50) feet.
A.10. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be sixty (60) percent; an additional ten (10)
percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Off-Street Parking & Loading.
A.11. Parking is permitted in the rear yard.
A.12. Parking is permitted within the corner side yard Build-to Zone, but may not be located
closer to the corner side property line than the principal building Facade(s).
A.13. Structured parking is permitted internally and in rear.
A.14. All loading facilities and vehicular garage doors shall be located on the rear or side Facade.
Driveways & Access.
A.15. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
A.16. If an alley exists, an additional driveway is not permitted.
50
12. Building Type Standards: Manor Multifamily (continued)
B. Height & Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-12.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Building height shall be a minimum of one and a half (1 1/2) stories and a maximum of
three (3) stories.
B.2. Allowable floor height is a minimum of nine (9) feet, maximum of fourteen (14) feet.
Uses.
B.3. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
B.4. Parking is permitted fully below grade or internally in the rear of the building with a minimum
of thirty (30) feet, measured from the front and corner side Facades, occupied by a
permitted use other than parking.
51
12. Building Type Standards: Manor Multifamily (continued)
C. Facade Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4.12-C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the upper story front and corner side Facades shall
have transparent, non-reflective windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The Primary Entrance shall be located on the front or corner side building Facade. Entrances
at the corner of a building satisfy this requirement.
C.4. Provide a minimum of one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) feet of building frontage
on front and corner side Facades and those Facades facing parking lots.
C.5. Exterior entrances to upper stories are not permitted on the front Facade.
C.6. Exterior stairs to an upper story may not extend closer to the Front Property Line than the
front Façade.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.7. Allowable Cap Types are the parapet, pitched roof, and tower.
C.8. Allowable Base Types are the stoop, porch, and enclosed porch.
Balconies.
C.9. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
52
13. Building Type Standards: Manor
A. Building Siting. (Refer to Figure 4-13.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings on a single lot are not permitted.
Street Frontage.
A.2. Front building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located between ten
(10) and twenty-five (25) feet into the site from the Front Property Line.
A.3. Corner side building Facades must be constructed within a Build-to Zone located between
five (5) and fifteen (15) feet into the site from the corner side property line.
A.4. Unenclosed porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted to within two (2) feet of the front and
side property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.5. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.6. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.7. Maximum Building Coverage shall be forty-five (45) percent of site area.
A.8. Minimum lot width is forty (40) feet.
A.9. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be fifty-five (55) percent; an additional ten (10)
percent of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Parking.
A.10. Parking is permitted in the rear and side yards, behind the back Facade of the principal
building and is permitted within the corner side yard Build-to Zone, but may not be located
closer to the corner side property line than the principal building’s Facade.
Driveways & Access.
A.11. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
A.12. If an alley exists, an additional driveway is not permitted.
B. Height & Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-13.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
53
13. Building Type Standards: Manor (continued)
B. Height & Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-13.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Principal building height shall be a minimum of one and a half (1 1/2) stories and a maximum
of two and a half (2 1/2) stories.
B.2. Allowable floor height is a minimum of eight (8) feet, maximum of fourteen (14) feet.
Uses.
B.3. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
C. Facade Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-13.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the Front Facade shall have transparent, non-reflective
windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of the
Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The Primary Entrance must be on the front, side, or corner side Facade. Entrances at the corner
of the building satisfy this requirement.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.4. Allowable Cap Types are parapet, pitched roof, and tower.
C.5. Allowable Base Types are stoop, porch, and enclosed porch.
Balconies.
C.6. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
54
14. Building Type Standards: House
A. Building Siting. (Refer to Figure 4-14.A)
A.1. Multiple principal buildings on a single lot are not permitted.
Street Frontage.
A.2. Front and corner side building Facades must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from
the property lines.
A.3. Unenclosed porches, stoops, and stairs are permitted to within five (5) feet of the front and
corner side property lines.
Side & Rear Yard Setbacks.
A.4. Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet.
A.5. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
Buildable Area.
A.6. Maximum Building Coverage shall be thirty (30) percent of site area.
A.7. Minimum lot width is forty-five (45) feet.
A.8. Maximum Impervious Site Coverage shall be fifty (50) percent; an additional ten (10) percent
of the site may be Semi-Pervious.
Parking.
A.9. Surface parking is permitted in the rear and side yards, behind the back Facade of the principal
building.
A.10. If attached garages are located on the front Facade, the attached garage Facade shall not
have a width larger than thirty (30) percent of the building’s total front Facade width.
A.11. Attached garage shall not be located closer to the Front Property Line than the principal
building Facade.
Driveways & Access.
A.12. If no alley exists, one (1) driveway per lot is permitted.
A.13. If an alley exists, an additional driveway is not permitted.
55
14. Building Type Standards: House (continued)
B. Height & Use Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-14.B)
Building & Floor Heights. (See 4-5 Measuring Height)
B.1. Principal building height shall be a minimum of one (1) story and a maximum of two and a
half (2 1/2) stories.
B.2. Allowable floor height is a minimum of eight (8) feet, maximum of fourteen (14) feet, as
measured from floor to floor.
Uses.
B.3. Specific use information can be found in Section 3 Uses.
C. Facade Requirements. (Refer to Figure 4-14.C)
Transparency. (See 4-5 Measuring Transparency)
C.1. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the front Facade shall have transparent, nonreflective
windows.
C.2. On front and corner side Facades, no rectangular area greater than thirty (30) percent of
the Facade per floor may be blank, without transparency.
Building Entrance.
C.3. The Primary Entrance must be on the front, side, or corner side Facade. Entrances at the
corner of the building satisfy this requirement.
Allowable Cap & Base Types. (See 4-3 and 4-4)
C.4. Allowable Cap Types are pitched roof and tower.
C.5. Allowable Base Types are stoop, porch, and enclosed porch.
Balconies.
C.6. Balconies are permitted provided that the requirements outlined in Section 4-1(E) are met.
56
5. Parking & Access Standards
1. General Requirements.
Within the Main Street Corridor, off-street parking and location and width of driveways shall
follow the standards outlined in this Section.
A. Applicability. This Section applies as follows within the Main Street Corridor.
1. Development of all new parking facilities and driveways.
2. Improvements to existing parking facilities and driveways, including resurfacing, fencing,
curbs, walkways, or landscape installation.
3. Changes in intensity through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for parking requirements.
4. Change in Use.
5. Damage or Destruction. When a use that has been damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse,
explosion, or other cause is reestablished, any associated off-street parking spaces
or loading facilities must be reestablished in an amount equal to the number maintained
at the time of damage or destruction or if this quantity is in excess of these
standards, the minimum standards outlined in this Section must be met.
B. Parking Facility Location. The Building Type Standards (refer to Section 4) include specific
standards for locating parking and loading facilities and location and quantity of driveways
permitted per lot.
1. Loading Facilities. Refer to Section 15.7-3. Off-Street Loading for standards related to
Loading Facilities.
2. Parking Lot and Loading Layout. Parking layout and loading shall be designed according
to the following except as outlined in Section 5-2(H) Parking Facility Design:
a. Parcels Not Within the Parking Impact Zone. Refer to the Zoning Code, Section
15.7-2. Off-Street Parking.
b. Parking Impact Zone Parcels. Parcels within the Parking Impact Zone shall refer to
the Zoning Code, Section 15.7-4(F). Dimension of Parking Spaces and Driving
Aisles.
C. Availability of Off-Street Parking Areas. Except as permitted through a cooperative vehicular
parking agreement, Required off-street parking spaces shall be available to residents,
customers, employees, or guests of the principal use(s).
57
2. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
A. Intent. To establish appropriate vehicular and bicycle parking standards for development
along the Main Street Corridor.
B. Required Number of Vehicular Parking Spaces. Refer to Table 5-2.A Off-Street Parking
Requirements.
1. Computation. Off-street parking spaces shall be calculated using the following information.
a. Area Measurements. The following units of measurements shall be utilized to calculate
parking requirements.
(1) Dwelling Unit. Parking standards for residential buildings shall be computed using
dwelling unit as the unit of measure.
(2) Gross Square Footage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, parking standards for
non residential uses shall be computed on the basis of Gross Square Footage.
(3) Occupancy- or Capacity-Based Measurements. Parking spaces required per available
seat or per employee, student, or occupant shall be based on the greatest number
of persons on the largest shift, the maximum number of students enrolled, or
the maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever measurement is applicable.
2. Three or Fewer Spaces. When the application of the specified vehicular off-street parking
provisions results in a requirement of not more than three (3) spaces on a single
zoning lot, such parking spaces need not be provided for non residential uses. This exemption
does not apply if multiple users are located on a single lot and their cumulative
parking requirements are greater than three (3) spaces.
3. Maximum Allowable Vehicle Spaces. No use shall provide greater than ten (10) percent
over the minimum parking requirement without incorporating at least two (2) of
the following mitigating design features. In no case shall a use provide over twentyfive
(25) percent more parking spaces than the requirement.
a. The surface of all parking spaces in excess of ten (10) percent over the minimum
parking requirement shall be a Semi-Pervious Surface.
b. The frontage buffer shall be increased in width by thirty (30) percent and the heavy
side and rear buffer shall be used, regardless of the adjacent uses (refer to Sections
6-2 to 6-3 for more information).
c. The interior parking lot landscaping shall be increased by ten (10) percent over the
minimum requirements (refer to 6-4 for more information).
58
C. Shared Vehicular Parking. An arrangement in which two (2) or more non residential uses
with different peak parking demands use the same off-street parking spaces to meet their off
-street parking requirements.
1. General Provisions. Municipality may permit up to one hundred (100) percent of the
parking required for a daytime use to be supplied by the off-street parking spaces provided
for a nighttime or Sunday use and vice versa.
2. Approval. In order to approve a shared parking arrangement, the municipality must
find, based on competent evidence provided by the applicant, that there is no substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the sharing of parking
is proposed.
3. Description of Uses with Weekday, Nighttime, and Sunday Peak Parking.
a. Weekday Uses. The following uses are considered predominantly weekday uses:
office, retail, and industrial uses and other similar uses as authorized by the municipality.
b. Nighttime or Sunday Uses. The following uses are typically considered predominantly
nighttime or Sunday uses: entertainment uses, eating and drinking establishments,
religious assembly uses, auditoriums, and other similar uses with peak activity
at night or on Sundays, as authorized by the municipality.
D. Cooperative Vehicular Parking. An arrangement in which two (2) or more categories of uses
provide their required off-street parking in the same parking lot, thereby reducing the
number of individual parking lots and the number of curb cuts used to serve the parking
lots.
1. General Provisions. Cooperative parking is permitted with the following:
a. Up to a twenty (20) percent reduction may be approved when four (4) use categories
are involved.
b. Up to a fifteen (15) reduction may be approved when three (3) use categories are
involved.
c. Up to a ten (10) percent reduction may be approved when two (2) use categories
are involved.
2. Approval. Municipality must approve the cooperative agreement if any of the uses are
not located in the same building or on the same lot.
3. Location of Cooperative Parking. Cooperative parking must be less than or equal to
five hundred (500) feet from the entrance of the use to the closest parking space within
the cooperative parking lot, as measured along a dedicated pedestrian path.
4. Required Agreement. An agreement providing for cooperative use of an off-site parking
lot, executed by the parties involved, shall be in a form approved by and filed with
the relevant municipality.
a. Cooperative parking arrangements shall continue in effect only as long as the
agreement remains in force.
b. If the agreement is no longer in force, then parking must be provided as otherwise
required in this Section.
59
E. Vehicular Parking Credits. The vehicular parking standards in Table 5-2.A for non residential
uses may be reduced by achieving parking in one (1) or all of the following credits.
1. On-Street Parking Credit. Designated on-street parking within seven hundred and fifty
(750) feet of any lot line may be credited against the parking requirement at a rate of
one (1) credit for every two (2) on-street parking spaces within seven hundred and fifty
(750) feet.
2. Public Parking Credit. Public parking within five hundred (500) feet of any lot line
may be credited against the parking requirement at a rate of one (1) credit for every
three (3) public parking spaces within five hundred (500) feet.
F. Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. Bicycle parking (refer to Table 5-2.B Required
Bicycle Parking for quantity required) shall be designed and located as follows.
1. Dimensions. Required bicycle parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of two
(2) feet in width and six (6) feet in length.
2. Location. Bicycle parking shall be located as follows:
a. Indoor or outdoor spaces are permitted, provided they are located on the lot with
which they are associated.
b. Spaces located within individual dwelling units may not be counted toward nonresidential
bicycle parking requirements.
3. Maintenance and Lighting. Areas used for required bicycle parking must be well-lit
with acceptable drainage to be reasonably free of mud and standing water.
G. Parking Facility Design. In addition to any standards required by the Town, the following
are required for all off-street parking facilities.
1. Landscape Screening. All parking areas shall meet the requirements outlined in Section
6 Landscape Standards.
2. Pavement Materials. Open air parking lots shall be constructed with at least one of the
following materials.
a. Paving materials with a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of at least twenty-nine (29).
b. Semi-pervious pavement.
c. Comprised of at least fifteen (15) percent recycled content.
3. Curbs. A variety of curb types may be utilized for off-street parking facilities, including
ribbon, mountable, and slotted curbs.
a. If curbs are not utilized, wheel stops are required along parking spaces adjacent to
landscape areas and pedestrian paths.
60
3. Access Requirements.
A. Intent. To provide appropriate vehicular
access to development in the Main Street Corridor while minimizing its impact on pedestrian
circulation and overall aesthetics of the Corridor.
B. Applicability. The following standards apply to all development along the Main Street
Corridor.
C. Driveway Quantity and Placement. Each Building Type includes details on the quantity
and placement of driveways on a lot (refer to Sections 4-6 through 4-14). It is understood
that the Illinois Department of Transportation will have final approval on all new access
points onto Business 51, which includes both sides of the couplet.
D. Driveway Dimension and Design. Driveway width is measured at the property line, as illustrated
in Figure 5-3.A.
1. Width. All driveways shall have a maximum width of twenty-two (22) feet, with the
following exceptions:
a. MS1, MS2, MS3, & MS6 Districts. Maximum driveway width is fifteen (15) feet.
b. MS7 & MS8 Districts. Residential Building Types shall have a maximum driveway
width of twelve (12) feet.
c. One-Way Driveways. Maximum width for one-way driveways is eleven (11) feet.
2. Shared Access. When possible, adjacent developments should share points of access to
minimize the number of access points. Shared access provisions must be set forth in a
declaration or easement in a form approved by the Town.
3. Landscape Center. Driveways for the Manor Multifamily, Manor, and House Building
Types may incorporate a center landscape or Semi-Pervious strip to decrease a site’s
Impervious Coverage.
61
Table 5-2.A. Off Street Parking Requirements
Table 5-2.B. Required Bicycle Parking.
62
6. Landscape Standards
1. General Requirements.
Within the Main Street Corridor, the following standards apply to landscaping vehicular areas,
storage and refuse areas, and utility appurtenances, as well as landscape buffers between
different Building Types.
A. Applicability. This Section applies as follows within the Main Street Corridor.
1. All new development.
2. Existing development when:
a. Any improvements to existing parking lots, loading facilities, and driveways
occur, including resurfacing, fencing, curbs, walkways, and landscaping.
b. Alteration to an existing principal or accessory structure that results in a change of
fifteen (15) percent or more in the structure’s gross floor area.
c. A change in use or the intensity of a use on a lot, such as increasing seating.
3. Exceptions. Exceptions to the application of this Section are as follows:
a. Buffers. Landscape buffers are required according to the provisions in this Section
with the following exceptions.
(1) Shared Driveways. Buffers shall not be required along a property line where a
curb cut or aisle is shared between two adjoining lots.
(2) Points of Access. Buffering is not required at driveways or other points of
access to a lot.
b. Temporary Uses. These provisions do
not apply to temporary uses, unless
determined otherwise by the Town
Zoning Code Administrator.
c. Emergencies. In case of emergencies,
such as hurricanes, tornadoes,
windstorms, and floods, these
regulations may be waived by the
Town Zoning Code Administrator.
B. Planting Sizes and Specifications. All
plantings shall follow the Zoning Code,
Section 15.14-7(E)(3) Planting Sizes and
Specifications.
C. Existing Vegetation in Buffer Area. Buffer
requirements may be reduced through
crediting existing vegetation that is reasonably
equivalent in its screening characteristics, as
approved by the Town Zoning Code
Administrator.
63
2. Frontage Buffer.
A. Intent. To lessen the visual impact of vehicular areas visible from the street.
B. Applicability. These requirements apply to all lots within the Main Street Corridor (refer
to Figure 2-2.A Regulating Plan) where a vehicular area is located adjacent to a vehicular
right-of-way, on all street frontages, with the following exceptions.
1. Vehicular areas along alleys.
2. Single family residences.
3. Existing vegetation in buffer area.
C. Requirements. Typical frontage buffer requirements are illustrated in Figure 6-2.A Frontage
Buffer.
1. Depth. The landscape buffer shall consist of an area seven (7) feet in depth. The buffer
width may be increased if the area is also serving to handle the site’s stormwater runoff.
2. Location. The buffer shall be located between the street facing property line(s) and the
parking area with the following exception:
a. In front, corner side, and rear yards (on a through lot), when the parking area is located
adjacent to any building, the buffer must be located so that it aligns with the face of the
adjacent building back to the vehicular area. The area between the buffer and the property
line must be landscaped.
3. Shade Trees. A medium or large shade tree must be planted a minimum of every thirtyfive
(35) feet within the seven (7) feet of required landscape buffer, located on the street
side of the fence.
a. The spacing of these trees should alternate with street trees so that the final effect is a
staggered tree line.
b. All trees planted in the Frontage Buffer shall be large or medium shade trees (refer to
Town Tree Planting List).
4. Fence. A fence between three (3) and four (4) feet in height, made of metal or PVC, is required
and shall be located two (2) feet from the back of curb of the vehicular area.
a. No other fence material is permitted.
b. Fence colors are limited to black, gray, or dark green.
c. Fence opacity must be between thirty (30) and sixty (60) percent.
d. A gate opening is permitted every one hundred (100) feet.
5. Hedge. A continuous hedge is required on the street side of the fence, located between required
trees and in front of vehicular areas. The hedge must consist of individual shrubs
with a minimum width of twenty-four (24) inches, spaced no more than thirty-six (36)
inches on center.
6. Vehicle Overhang. The front or rear bumper overhang of vehicles parked within the vehicular
area may encroach into the buffer up to two (2) feet.
7. Access. This screening requirement does not prohibit the installation of or provision for
openings necessary for allowable access drives and walkways connecting to the public
sidewalk.
64
3. Side and Rear Landscape Buffers
A. Intent. To minimize the impact that a more intense use may have on a neighboring use and
to provide a transition between Building Types.
B. Applicability. These requirements apply to all directly adjoining properties as detailed in
Table 6-3.A.
1. Parcels Outside Corridor Boundaries.
a. Commercial, Cottage Commercial, Corridor, and Iconic Building Types located
adjacent to residentially-zoned parcels that are outside Corridor boundaries
(including parcels zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, and R-3B) shall be required to
install a light landscape screen as outlined in 6-3(E).
b. Auto-Oriented Building Types located adjacent to residentially-zoned parcels that
are outside Corridor boundaries (including parcels zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A,
and R-3B) shall be required to install a heavy landscape screen as outlined in 6-3
(D).
C. General Requirements. The following apply to all Side and Rear Buffers.
1. Buffer Depth. Depth for all Building Types is five (5) feet, except for the Auto-Oriented
Building, which shall have a buffer depth of ten (10) feet.
2. Location. Locate buffers on the more intensively zoned Lot.
a. Buffer is measured from the Side and Rear Property Lines.
b. The five (5) foot required landscape screen (see 6-3(C)(3)) shall be located directly
adjacent to the Rear or Side Property Line, regardless of the width of the buffer.
3. Required Landscape Screen. A five (5) foot landscape screen shall be installed and com
- pleted per the heavy or light landscape screening requirements (refer to Table 6-3.A).
4. Shade Tree. A medium or large shade tree
shall be installed at a minimum rate of one
(1) per every forty (40) feet.
65
D. Heavy Landscape Screening Requirement. Refer to Figure 6-3.A.
1. Hedge. A continuous hedge is required, located between required trees, when an opaque
fence is not utilized.
a. Hedge must consist of a row of individual shrubs with a minimum width of twentyfour
(24) inches spaced no more than thirty-six (36) inches on center, and shall have a
mature height within one (1) year of twenty-four (24) inches.
b. A minimum of thirty (30) shrubs per every one hundred (100) feet of affected Property
Line is required.
2. Fence. One of the following shall be installed.
a. A fence that is between four (4) and six (6) feet in height, made of steel or PVC, shall
be installed.
(1) No other fence material is permitted.
(2) Fence colors are limited to black,
grey, or dark green.
(3) Fence opacity must be between thirty
(30) and sixty (60) percent.
(4) Requires installation of hedge.
b. An opaque fence of six (6) feet in height
shall be installed.
(1) Does not require the installation of
hedge.
66
E. Light Landscape Screening Requirement. The standards specific to the light screening requirement
are illustrated in Figure 6-3.B.
1. Hedge. A continuous double row of shrubs is required, located between required trees.
a. Hedge must consist of a double row of individual shrubs with a minimum width of
twenty-four (24) inches spaced no more than thirty-six (36) inches on center, mature
height in one (1) year at twenty-four (24) inches.
b. A minimum of fifteen (15) shrubs per every one hundred (100) feet of Property Line is
required.
67
4. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.
A. Intent. To provide shade, minimize paving and associated stormwater runoff, and improve
the aesthetic look of parking lots. These requirements are illustrated in Figure 6-4.A.
B. Applicability. Interior parking lot landscaping is required for all open-air, off-street parking
lots with four (4) or more spaces.
1. Parking Lot Interior. The parking lot interior is defined as the area dedicated to parking
on a given parcel as measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement.
2. Reduction of Requirement. Landscape requirements may be reduced by including existing
vegetation as a credit.
C. Island and Median Requirements. Parking lot landscape islands and medians shall be installed
as follows.
1. Island and Median Width. Minimum width is five (7) feet.
2. Location.
a. Terminal Ends of Free Standing Rows. Landscape islands are required at the terminal
ends of any free-standing rows or bays of parking. Free-standing rows or bays
of parking are those that are not abutting the parking lot perimeter or structure, and
can have a single or double row of parking.
b. Every Ninth Space. A landscape island shall be provided every ninth (9th) parking
space for rows of parking that are more than eight (8) spaces in length. There shall
be no more than eight (8) continuous parking spaces in a row without a landscape
island.
c. Median. A landscape median is required in each free-standing bay of parking along
the length of the bay of parking.
3. Trees Within Islands.
a. Shade Tree. Each landscape island must have at least one (1) medium or large
shade tree planted within it.
b. Islands and Medians Less Than Nine (9) Feet in Width. When a landscape island is
less than nine (9) feet in width, the following are required within the estimated
Critical Root Zone of the tree at maturity.
(1) Structural soil shall be utilized under any paved surface.
(2) Install an aeration system and utilize permeable pavement.
c. Islands and Medians Between Nine (9) and Fifteen (15) Feet in Width. Structural
soil shall be utilized under any paved surface.
4. Stormwater. Islands may be designed to handle stormwater runoff.
68
D. Tree Requirements. Trees shall be planted as follows.
1. Tree Requirements per Parking Space.
a. Each parking space must be entirely located within fifty (50) feet of a tree planted
within the parking lot interior or within four (4) feet of the parking lot’s edge.
b. A minimum of one (1) medium or large shade tree must be planted within the
parking lot interior or within four (4) feet of the parking lots’ edge for every three
(3) parking spaces.
c. Trees within a designated buffer area may not be utilized to meet the above criteria.
2. Shade Requirements. Within twenty (20) years of tree installation, thirty (30) percent
of the interior of the parking lot must be shaded by the trees’ canopy. (Table 6-4.A)
a. Trees and landscaping located outside of the parking lot interior, including in the
side and rear buffer, or in the frontage buffer may not be applied to this requirement.
E. Other Potential Landscape Areas. Internal areas not dedicated to parking or drives shall be
landscaped.
1. One (1) medium or large shade tree is required in such spaces for the first one-hundred
fifty (150) square feet.
2. Plus one (1) medium or large shade tree per each additional six-hundred fifty (650)
square feet.
Table 6-4.A. Estimated Canopy & Height at Maturity.
69
5. Screening Open Storage, Refuse Areas, and Utility Appurtenances.
A. Intent. To reduce the visibility of open storage, refuse areas, and utility appurtenances
from public areas and adjacent properties.
B. Applicability. All dumpsters, open storage, refuse areas, and utility appurtenances located
along the Main Street Corridor.
C. Open Storage and Refuse Area Screening Requirements. Typical open storage or refuse
screening is illustrated in Figure 6-5.A.
1. Opaque Screen Wall. An
opaque screen wall (vertical
structured barrier to visibility at
all times such as a fence or wall)
is required around three (3)
sides of the dumpster and trash
bin area.
2. Screen Wall Height. The height
of the screen wall shall be the
higher of the following.
a. The height of the use to be
screened.
b. Six (6) feet.
c. A height sufficient in the
judgment of the
municipality to accomplish
the objective of the screen.
3. Location. Open storage and refuse areas are not permitted in the front or corner side
yards.
4. Location within Parking Lot. If refuse area is located within a larger paved area, such
as a Parking Lot, landscape islands must be located on three (3) sides of the area.
a. One (1) medium or large shade tree must be located in at least one (1) of these
landscape areas.
b. This tree, if located within fifty (50) feet of a parking space may be utilized to
meet the minimum shade requirements.
D. Utility Appurtenance Screening Requirements.
1. Large Private Mechanical Equipment. Private mechanical equipment visible from the
right-of-way, which is equal to or greater than four (4) feet in height, and is equal to or
greater than six (6) feet in any one direction, shall be fenced with opaque wood or
brick-faced masonry on all sides facing the right-of-way.
2. Small Private Mechanical Equipment. Private mechanical equipment smaller than four
(4) feet in height shall have landscape screening and a shrub bed containing shrubs
spaced no more than thirty-six (36) inches on center.
SEC. 16.1-1
CHAPTER 16 - SUBDIVISION CODE
DIVISION 1 – LAND SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
DIVISION 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 16.2-1 JURISDICTION. These regulations apply to every subdivision (as defined
herein) occurring inside the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, Illinois or occurring in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles from the Town's corporate limits, as those limits
exist at the time the subdivision occurs.
SEC. 16.2-2 POLICY. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town to consider
Subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments and the subsequent development thereof as subject to
the control of the Town pursuant to the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Town for the orderly,
planned, efficient, and economical development of the Town.
Land to be subdivided or developed as a Planned Unit Development shall be of such
character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire,
flood, or other menace, and land should not be subdivided or developed as a Planned Unit
Development until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been
made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation
facilities and improvements.
The existing and proposed public improvements should conform to and be properly related
to the proposals shown on the Official Comprehensive Map, and the capital improvements program
of the Town, and it is intended that this Code shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the
provisions and standards contained in Chapters 7, 8, 15 and 28 of the Town of Normal Municipal
Code, 1969, as amended, and in the Official Comprehensive Plan and the Capital Improvements
Program of the Town.
SEC. 16.2-3 PURPOSE. Because every subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of these
regulations is, or may become a part of the Town of Normal, and because each has, or may have an
impact on services provided by the Town, as well as on services provided by other governmental
units serving the community, this Code is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To protect, provide and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Town;
B. To guide the future growth and development of the Town, in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan;
C. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and
other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population;
SEC. 16.2-3(Cont.1)
D. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the
Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the
community;
E. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Town and the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the
uses of land and buildings;
F. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and
efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and
other public requirements and facilities;
G. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings
and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard to the
avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for
the proper location and width of streets and building setback lines;
H. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and
re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to insure
proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land;
I. To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to
serve the proposed subdivision and areas reasonably anticipated to be served by such
facilities;
J. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of
drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and
management of natural resources throughout the Town in order to preserve the
integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land;
K. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town and to insure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features;
L. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land,
including the use of average density in providing for minimum width and area of
lots, while preserving the density of land as established in the Town’s zoning
ordinance.
SEC. 16.2-3.1 INTENT OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Refer to SEC.15.9-1
of this Code.
SEC. 16.2-4 RESERVED.
SEC. 16.2-5 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. The language set forth in this Code shall
SEC. 16.2-5(Cont.1)
be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction, unless the context clearly
requires a different construction:
A. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular;
B. The present tense includes the past and future and the future includes the present.
C. The word “shall” is mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive, and “should” is
strongly recommended, but not mandatory.
D. Terms connotating a particular gender include each and every other gender.
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Code, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word
appearing in the parenthesis between a word and its definition shall be construed in
the same sense as that word.
F. All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their generally accepted
meaning.
G. The terms Corporate Authority, Mayor and Council, President and Board of
Trustees, Town Council and Council all mean the President and Board of Trustees
of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 16.2-6 DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this
Code, shall be interpreted as herein defined.
Abutting (Contiguous, Adjacent). Abutting means have one or more common boundary
lines or district lines.
Alley. An alley is a public right-of-way which is less than thirty (30) feet wide and affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property. Frontage on an alley shall not be construed
as satisfying the requirements related to frontage on a public street.
Basement. The story of a building which is partly below and partly above grade,
and having at least one half (1/2) its height above grade. (See “Grade” and “Story”)
Block. A block is a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a street or streets and any
combination of boundary lines of public or institutionally owned lands, railroad
rights-of-way, rivers and lakes and/or other lines of demarcation. A block may be located in
part within an incorporated city or village.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner of Normal, Illinois, or the duly
authorized representative.
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.1)
Building Setback Line. A line within a lot, or other parcel of land, so designated on the
preliminary plan and final plat, which denotes the area between such line and the adjacent
street right-of-way line where an enclosed building, and other obstructions are prohibited,
except those permitted obstructions as regulated by the Normal Zoning Code.
Center Line.
A. the centerline of any right-of-way having uniform width;
B. the original centerline, where a right-of-way has been widened irregularly;
C. the new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
Collection Tile System. A tile system serving individual lots for the purpose of receiving
water discharged from sources such as footing tiles and water softeners.
Official Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan). The Official Comprehensive Plan is
the composite of the functional and geographic elements of the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town of Normal, or any segment thereof in the form of plans, maps, charts, textual
materials and the official map, as adopted by the Town Council.
Cross Slope. The degree of inclination measured across pavements rather than longitudinal.
Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet.
Developer. (See “Owner”)
Development. Development means both the act of changing, and the state of a tract of land
after its function has been purposefully changed by man including, but not limited to,
construction of structures on the land, and alterations to the land, except grading that does
not alter the natural flow of storm water.
Dedicate. Transfer of ownership of right-of-way.
Drainage Way, Improved. A portion of a right-of-way or easement used or intended
principally for storm, surface or ground water drainage which meets or exceeds the design
and/or construction standards for public drainage ways.
Drainage Way, Unimproved. A portion of land used or intended principally for storm,
surface or ground water drainage which does not meet or exceed the design and/or
construction standards for public drainage ways.
Driveway. A driveway is a private access way for motor vehicles between a public or
private street and one or more structures or off-street parking areas.
Double Frontage (Through) Lot. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel streets.
Dwelling. A dwelling is a building designed or used principally for residential occupancy,
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.2)
including, without limitation, single-family dwellings, two family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings.
Easement. Easement is a quantity of land set aside in which a liberty, privilege, or
advantage in land without profit, is dedicated and is distinct from fee ownership of the land,
is granted either to the public, a particular person, a utility company or a combination
thereof.
Engineer. A licensed professional Engineer licensed by the State of Illinois.
Excavation. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar
material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
Escrow Deposit. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of
improvements within a subdivision or Planned Unit Development.
Field Inspector. An individual, company or firm appointed by the Town Engineer to inspect
construction to insure compliance with approved plans and specifications.
Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed,
replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by humans to a new location and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
Final Development Plan. A Final Development Plan is a final plan that is required to be
submitted to the Town as specified in the Planned Unit Development regulations, Division
15.9 of the Municipal Code.
Final Grade. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work
is completed in accordance with the approved engineering plans.
Final Punch List. A tabulation of deficiencies requiring corrective action prior to Final
Acceptance of a project.
Flood. A general or temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any
source.
Final Plat. A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described
hereafter.
Frontage. Frontage is the measure of lineal contiguity between a lot or portion thereof and
another lot, public street, alley or public way.
Frontage Road. A local street which is parallel to and either contiguous to, adjacent to, or
within the right-of-way of a arterial street.
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.3)
Geographic Information System (G.I.S.). A computer system maintained by Bloomington,
Normal and McLean County that stores and links non-graphic attributes or geographically
referenced data with graphic map features to allow a wide range of information processing
and display operations, as well as map production, analysis and modeling.
Lot. Means a quantity of land capable of being described with such definition that its
location and boundaries may be established and which is designated by its owner or
developer as land to be conveyed, used or developed as a unit or which has been conveyed,
used or developed as a unit, including any easements appurtenant thereto. Such lot shall
have frontage on a public or private street.
Lot Area. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side,
and rear lot lines.
Lot Depth. Any distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost
points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a
curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the
foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle
less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot, Interior. A lot which faces on one (1) street or with opposite sides on two (2) streets.
Lot, Out. A lot depicted on a Final Subdivision Plat which does not meet the requirements
of this Code for lots of record and which may not be used for buildings and parking lots.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the McLean
County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description
of which has been legally recorded.
Lot, Through. “Through lot” means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage
lots.
Manual. Manual shall mean the “Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements
in the Town of Normal” throughout this Code.
Official Map. The Official Map is the map adopted by the Town Council as part of the
Comprehensive Plan which is designated “Official Map” in that plan.
Median. An area between opposite traffic lanes of a street or roadway.
“No-Access” Strip. A land area at least one meter (three feet) wide along a lot line within
which no vehicular driveways shall be permitted.
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.4)
Owner. Any person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or
quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other legal entity having
sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or developed to commence
and maintain proceedings under the provisions of this Code.
Parcel. All contiguous land used or legally described and recorded as a single unit.
Parking Lot. An area not on public right-of-way, exclusive of driveways, which is used
for the parking of motor vehicles.
For purposes of computing the number of parking space in a lot, all areas
used for parking under unified control on the same or contiguous parcels of
land shall be considered as one (1) lot.
Parking Space/Pad. A parking pad is an off-street parking area adjacent to a driveway
which provides parking for a single motor vehicle.
Parkway (Side Strip). The unpaved strip of land within a street right-of- way between a
curb and right-of-way line.
Pavement. A portion of the street designated for vehicular use measured from face of curb
to face of curb or edge to edge of paved street surface where there are no curbs.
Pedestrian Way. A right-of-way or easement across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
Planned Unit Development. A Planned Unit Development is a lot or group of lots which is
developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control, which includes one (1) or
more principal buildings or uses, and is processed under the Planned Unit Development
procedure of the Zoning Code.
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of Normal, Illinois.
Preliminary Plan. A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as described in this
Chapter.
Project. All of the various parts of proposed construction submitted to the Town Engineer
for approval.
Property Line. The lines bounding a lot or parcel and delineating the land in individual
ownership.
Public Improvements. Public improvements includes streets, sidewalks, public utilities and
other structures, fixtures or land appurtenances which are or are intended to be dedicated to
the Town of Normal and the public generally.
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.5)
Reserve. To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by the Town (or other
government entity) for public purposes.
Right-of-way. A strip of land dedicated to or used by the public for vehicular and/or
pedestrian passage; storm, surface or ground water drainage; or public utility placement.
Roadway. A portion of a right-of-way used or intended principally for vehicular passage,
with appurtenant drainage ditches, ways or structures which does not meet or exceed the
design standards for the classification it holds.
Setback. The minimum longitudinal distance between the building line or structure and the
related front, side or rear property line.
Setback Line. A line shown on a plat delineating a setback.
Sidewalk. A portion of a right-of-way used or intended principally for pedestrian passage,
which meets or exceeds the design standards for public sidewalks.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of the floor and upper
surface of the floor or roof next above. A basement shall be counted as a story, and a cellar
shall not be counted as a story, unless it contains a dwelling unit.
Street. A street is that portion of a public or private right-of-way used and maintained by a
public entity which affords the public the principal means of access to adjacent lots of record
or property and meets the design and construction standards for the classification it holds.
Street, Collector. A collector street functions to conduct traffic between arterial streets
and/or activity centers. It is a principal traffic artery within residential areas and carries
moderate volumes of traffic. A collector street has potential for sustaining minor retail or
other commercial establishments along its route which will influence the traffic flow.
Street, Exterior. A street on the perimeter of a subdivision.
Street, Interior. A street entirely within the confines of a subdivision.
Street, Local. A local street is a short street, cul-de-sac, or court. The primary purpose of a
local street is to conduct traffic to and from dwelling units or businesses to other streets
within the hierarchy of streets.
Street, Arterial. An arterial street has a high average daily traffic (ADT) and is not intended
to be a residential street. An arterial street provides connection with major state and
interstate roadways and has a high potential for the location of significant community
facilities as well as retail, commercial, and industrial facilities.
Street Standards and Classifications. The current Illinois Department of Transportation
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.6)
classifications and standards as modified by the Town Council pertaining to requirements
for streets, as from time to time amended.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or
temporary location on or in the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, fences,
gazebos, signs, billboards, supporting tower, and swimming pools.
Subdivide. (1) the division of land into two or more lots, parcels, or tracts; (2) the
dedication of streets, ways, or other areas for use of the public; (3) any division of land
which creates more than one additional lot for transfer or ownership and/or building
development, or where a new street is involved, or additional utilities, such as sewer or
water trunk lines are involved; (4) any development of property adjacent to a street which
street does not comply with the Town’s standards for new street construction or
right-of-way width; (5) or meets the definition of a Planned Unit Development as defined in
the Normal Zoning Code; or (6) long term lease for new development; or (7) when two or
more lots are combined for development purposes as a unified parcel under single
ownership or unified control. (Amended 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5367)
Subdivision. Subdivision means the configuration of lots of record, outlots, public
rights-of-way and public improvements which result from subdividing land in accordance
with the procedures, requirements and standards of this Code.
Town. The Town of Normal, Illinois.
Town Clerk. The Town Clerk of Normal, Illinois, or the duly authorized representative.
Town Engineer. The individual occupying that position on the staff in the Town of Normal
or the designated representative.
Town Planner. The individual occupying that position on the staff of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois, or the duly authorized representative.
Unified Control. Unified control is the combination of two (2) or more tracts of land
through unified ownership or other arrangements, wherein each owner has agreed to allow
use and develop their tracts as a single lot under the provisions of the ordinance applicable
to Planned Unit Developments.
Use. The use of property is the purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include
any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the regulations of the Zoning
Code.
Trail. That portion of public right-of-way separated from the roadway intended for
multipurpose, non-motorized transportation and recreational use.
SEC. 16.2-6(Cont.7)
Vacate. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or easement or subdivision, and to
so note on the Final Plat recorded with the McLean County Recorder of Deeds.
Walkway. A portion of a right-of-way used or intended principally for pedestrian passage
which does not meet or exceed the design standards for public sidewalk.
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is the Building Commissioner for the
Town of Normal, Illinois, or such other person as designated by the Commissioner or the
duly authorized representative.
Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map is the map adopted by the Town Council showing
all the zoning district boundaries within the Town of Normal, Illinois.
SEC. 16.2-7 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT & SEPARABILITY. In the
interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare.
SEC. 16.2-7.1 CONFLICT WITH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISIONS.
A. Public Provisions. The regulations in this Chapter are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, statute
or other provision of law. Where any provisions of this Code imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other provision of this Code or any other
resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law; whichever
provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
B. Private Provisions. The regulations in this Chapter are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement
or restriction; the requirements of this Code shall govern.
SEC. 16.2-7.2 SEPARABILITY. If any part or provision of this Chapter or application
thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application
directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall
not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this Code or the application thereof to other
persons or circumstances. The Town Council hereby declares that it would have enacted the
remainder of this Code even without any such part, provision, or application.
SEC. 16.2-8 SAVING PROVISION. This Code shall not be construed as abating any
action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Town under
any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this Code, or as vacating or annulling
SEC. 16.2-8(Cont.1)
any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the Town except as shall
be expressly provided for in this Chapter.
SEC. 16.2-9 AMENDMENTS. For the purpose of providing the public health, safety, and
general welfare, the Town Council may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these
subdivision regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Town’s
Planning Commission in the manner prescribed by law.
SEC. 16.2-10 CONDITIONS. Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of
reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid power delegated by the State of
Illinois to the Town. The subdivider or owner has the duty of compliance with reasonable
conditions laid down by the Town for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of land
so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the Town and to the safety and
general welfare of the future owners of lots in the subdivision.
SEC. 16.2-11 RE-SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
SEC. 16.2-11.1 PROCEDURE FOR RE-SUBDIVISION. For any change in a
recorded plat of a subdivision, if such change affects any street layout shown on such plat, or
affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or affects any lot line, such change shall be
reviewed by the Town Planning Commission and the Town Council by the same procedure, rules
and regulations as for a subdivision as provided by this Code.
SEC. 16.2-11.2 PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISIONS WHERE FUTURE RESUBDIVISION
IS INDICATED. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision
plat shows one (1) or more lots containing more than one (1) acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be re-subdivided into smaller lots, the Town shall
require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension
of adjacent streets. Right of way dedications providing for the future opening and extension of
such streets shall be made a requirement of the plat.
SEC. 16.2-12 VACATION OF PLATS. In accordance with State law, any plat or part
thereof may be vacated by the owner of the parcel, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by
written vacation instrument to which a copy of the plat is attached. If there are public service
facilities in any street, or other public way, or easement shown on said plat, the instrument shall
reserve to the Town or other public entity or public utility owning such facilities the property,
rights-of-way, and easements necessary for continuing public service by means of those facilities
and for maintaining or reconstructing the same. The vacation instrument shall be approved by the
Town Council in the same manner as plats of subdivision, and shall also be approved by the public
utilities involved. In the case of platted parcels wherein any lots have been sold, the written
instrument must also be signed by all the owners of the lots in said parcel.
SEC 16.2-13 VARIATIONS.
SEC. 16.2-13.1 GENERAL. Where the Town Council finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this Code and/or the
SEC. 16.2-13.1(Cont.1)
purposes of the regulations in this Code may be served to a greater extent by an alternative
proposal, the Town Council may approve variations to these subdivision regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured provided that such variation shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided
that the Town Council shall not approve variations unless it shall make findings based upon
evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
A. the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare or injurious to other property located in the vicinity of the property in
question;
B. the conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the
property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other
property;
C. because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of
the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations in this
Code is carried out;
D. the variations will not in any manner vary from the provisions of Chapter 15 of this
Code on Zoning Regulations and/or the Official Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
Town.
SEC. 16.2-13.2 CONDITIONS. In approving variations, the Town Council may require
such conditions as will in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements of the Code.
SEC. 16.2-13.3 PROCEDURES. A petition for any such variation shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the Preliminary Plan is filed for the consideration of the
Planning Commission. Such petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts
relied upon by the petitioner. The Planning Commission may recommend variations from the
regulations of this Code in specific cases which, in the Planning Commission’s opinion, meet the
standards for granting variations as provided in Section 16.1- 13.1.
SEC. 16.2-14 OBLIGATION TO COMPLY.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to subdivide any land within
the corporate limits of the Town of Normal or any unincorporated area within one
and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the Town’s corporate limits and limits as set forth in
the intergovernmental agreement between the City of Bloomington and the Town
which sets boundary between the two municipalities, without following the
procedures, satisfying the requirements and meeting or exceeding the standards
specified in this Code, provided however, the provisions of this Code shall not apply
in the following instances:
SEC. 16.2-14(Cont.1)
1. To conveyances of a lot comprising and containing all contiguous property
owned by a person, group of persons, firm of entity, as a single parcel, to
some other person, group of persons, firm or entity;
2. To the offer, sale or conveyance of one or more lots of record;
3. To the sale or exchange of parcels of land between the owner of adjoining
and contiguous property which meet or exceed the minimum requirements of
this Code and the minimum bulk requirements of the Town Zoning Code;
4. To conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
5. To conveyances of land relating to the dedication of land for public use or
interest relating to or arising from the vacation of land impressed with a
public use;
6. To conveyances of land the principal use of which is presently agricultural
and intended to be used principally for future agricultural purposes; or
7. To a long-term lease for new development if all of the following conditions
apply: (i) the new development is a telecommunications antenna or a
billboard; (ii) the new development is located on a lot of record; and the new
development does not require water or sewer services. For the purposes of
this item 7, the term “telecommunications antenna” has the meaning set forth
in SEC. 15.15-4 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal; the term
“billboard” has the meaning set forth under SEC. 15.13-4 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Normal.
Town staff may waive the obligation to comply with the subdivision code
where units are created pursuant to the Illinois Condominium Property Act
except where "footprint" lots are created which are equal to or larger than the
individual units and a fee interest is conveyed in the underlying property.
B. It shall be unlawful to any person, firm or corporation to develop, build on, use or
improve any lot without dedicating such street right-of-way as would have been
required by this Ordinance if the lot had been subdivided from a larger parcel
immediately prior to such development, construction, use or improvement.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to develop, build on, use or
improve any parcel or lot within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal or any
unincorporated area within one and one-half miles of the Town's corporate limits
without following the procedures, and satisfying the requirements and meeting or
exceeding the standards specified in this Code, or without meeting the requirements
of the Town Planned Unit Development Code. It being the intent of this section to
apply to all types of development both within the corporate limits and areas lying
SEC. 16.2-14(Cont.2)
within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the Town of Normal.
(Added 6/18/01 by Ord. No. 4731)
D. It shall be unlawful to combine existing lots of record for development as a single
parcel without re-platting the parcel as one or more lots of record and otherwise
complying with the requirements of this Chapter except: two lots of record may be
combined as a single parcel for development if both lots are zoned R-1A or R-1B.
(Added 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5367)
(Entire SEC. 16.2-14 Amended 9/15/2014 by Ord. No. 5555)
SEC. 16.2-15 VIOLATION PENALTIES. Any person found guilty of violation,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this Code, upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Three Hundred Dollars
($300.00) for the first offense and not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day
period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as
quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue
any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification or knowledge of the
existence thereof. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 16.2-16 PLAT OFFICER (Note: office not required in the Town)
SEC. 16.2-17 LAND TRUSTS-DISCLOSURES OF BENEFICIAL INTERESTS.
Whenever any trustee of a land trust, or any beneficiary or beneficiaries of a land trust make
application to the Town for approval of a subdivision under this Code relating to the land which is
subject of such trust, such application shall identify each beneficiary of such land trust by name and
address and define his interest therein as required by Illinois Compiled Statutes. All such
applications shall be verified by the applicant in his capacity as trustee, or by the beneficiary as a
beneficial owner of interest in such land trust. If such application is filed by body politic or other
corporate entity, it shall be verified by a duly authorized officer of such body politic or other
corporate entity for whom such application is made.
SEC. 16.2-18 TIMING (SUBDIVISION PROCESS CHART). (see following page)

SEC. 16.3-1
DIVISION 3 - SUBMISSION & REVIEW PROCEDURES
SEC.16.3-1 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE. The owner or developer may
schedule one or more pre-application conferences with the representatives of the Town Council,
Planning Commission, school district administrative staff, when determined appropriate, and Town
Staff for the purpose of reviewing development proposals, concept plans and comparable
preliminary data by making a request for a pre-application conference to the Town Clerk. The
purpose of a pre-application conference is to review material which is in a preliminary conceptual
form and which may, after review and comment, be then refined by the owner or developer into a
preliminary subdivision or Planned Unit Development Preliminary Development Plan. Thereafter,
the Town Planner may furnish the applicant with written comments regarding the proposed
subdivision; said communication may also include the staff's recommendation with respect to
whether land shall be dedicated and/or a cash contribution shall be made by the developer to satisfy
the Public Land Dedication Requirements as contained in Division 6. The pre-application
conference may be waived by mutual agreement between the Town Staff and the owner or
developer.
SEC.16.3-2 PRELIMINARY PLAN. Before subdividing any land subject to
requirements of this Code, the owner or developer shall comply with the following:
SEC. 16.3-2.1 SUBMISSION. The owner or developer shall submit to the Town Clerk
twenty-one (21) paper copies of a Preliminary Plan in the form and providing all information
required by SEC. 16.4-2.
SEC. 16.3-2.2 FILING FEE. An application for approval of a Preliminary Subdivision
Plan shall be filed with the Town Clerk and be accompanied by a fee receipt reflecting payment
to the Town Treasurer of the appropriate fee as set forth in Division 16 of Chapter 25.
(Amended 2/16/09 by Ord. No. 5236)
SEC. 16.3-2.3 SCHEDULING AND NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC HEARING.
Upon receipt of a Preliminary Plan and required filing fee, the Town Clerk shall schedule and
give notice of a legislative public hearing before the Planning Commission in the manner
prescribed by SEC. 15.12(D)(3). The legislative public hearing shall be scheduled not later than
at the first regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring more than twenty-four
(24) days after the filing date of the Preliminary Plan.
The Town Clerk's notice shall contain:
A. The name of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, its commonly
known location and legal description;
B. A statement of what the application is requesting the Council/Commission to
approve;
C. A statement of where copies of the application, the preliminary subdivision or
SEC. 16.3-2.3(Cont.1)
preliminary development plan and all other supporting documentation can be
inspected by the public;
D. A statement that all interested persons have the right to appear at the public
hearing on such preliminary subdivision or preliminary development plan and
present evidence; and
E. The date, time and location of the public hearing.
The Town Clerk, on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall notify the owner or
developer of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development as to the time and place of
the public hearing thereon at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the said hearing.
SEC. 16.3-2.4 DISTRIBUTION OF PRELILMINARY PLAN FOR REVIEW AND
COMMENT. The Town Clerk shall route one (1) or more copies of the Preliminary Plan to
various Town staff members for review and comment. One (1) copy of the plan shall be
provided to each member of the Planning Commission and each member of the Town Council
prior to their respective consideration and review of the plan.
SEC. 16.3-2.5 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW & COMMENT. The Town Staff shall
review such Preliminary Plan and shall submit their recommendations for approval,
modification, or disapproval of said Plan to the Town Planner. The Town Planner shall review
said Plan and shall submit a written report containing said recommendations to the Planning
Commission for its consideration at the public hearing on such Preliminary Plan application.
The Town Planner shall also send the owner or developer of the subdivision or planned unit
development a copy of the said written report prior to the hearing.
SEC. 16.3-2.6 LEGISLATIVE PUBLIC HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION.
The Planning Commission shall conduct a legislative public hearing on the Preliminary Plan
during which it shall determine the extent to which the plan conforms or fails to conform with
the standards of this Code and shall, not later than ninety (90) days after the adjournment of the
legislative public hearing, transmit its recommendation on the plan to the Town Council. The
Planning Commission may recommend approval of a Preliminary Plan with an approval
recommendation conditioned upon the making of one (1) or more changes in the proposal, which
such changes shall be enumerated in the Commission’s transmittal to the Town Council, or may
transmit the plan to the Council without recommendation. Should the Planning Commission fail
to act within the ninety (90) days from the adjournment of the public hearing, or fail to adjourn
the public hearing within one hundred twenty (120) days of its commencement, the plan shall be
submitted to the Council without recommendation.
SEC. 16.3-2.7 COUNCIL APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF A PROPOSED
PRELIMINARY PLAN. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Planning Commission's
recommendation or within one hundred eighty (180) days from the filing date of the Preliminary
Plan, whichever occurs first, the Town Council shall approve or reject the proposed Preliminary
Plan. Failure of the Council to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of
the Preliminary Plan. Upon approval of the Preliminary Plan by the Council, the Town Clerk
SEC. 16.3-2.7(Cont.1)
shall secure from the owner or developer a reproducible mylar copy of the approved Preliminary
Plan and shall cause the signatures required on the "Notice of Approval" as provided by SEC.
16.3-2 of this Code to be affixed thereon. The Town Clerk shall then cause six (6) copies of the
approved Preliminary Plan with such signatures affixed thereon.
SEC. 16.3-2.8 EXTENSION OF TIME PERIODS BY MUTUAL CONSENT. Time
periods for review by the Planning Commission or Council may be extended by mutual consent
of the owner or developer and the Planning Commission or Council. Any such extension shall
stay the running of all subsequent time periods.
SEC. 16.3-2.9 EXTENSION OF PRELIMINARY PLANS. Approved Preliminary
Plans or portions thereof on which no Final Plat has been submitted for review and approval
shall expire and be of no force or effect three (3) years after this approval, except:
A. The filing of a Final Plat and necessary supporting documents pursuant to
SEC. 16.2-3 and SEC. 16.2-5 shall extend the life of a remaining valid
preliminary plan for three (3) years; or
B. If the life of a Preliminary Plan is extended by action of the Town Council.
SEC. 16.3-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ENGINEERING PLANS AND
SPECIFICATIONS. Before subdividing any land subject to the requirements of this Code, an
owner or developer shall comply with the following:
SEC. 16.3-3.1 PREREQUISITES. Approval and continuing validity of a Preliminary
Subdivision Plan;
SEC. 16.3-3.2 SUBMISSION. The owner or developer shall submit two (2) sets of
engineering plans and specifications for all public improvements proposed in or necessary to
serve lots depicted in an approved Preliminary Plan or portion thereof, which plans and
specifications shall be in the form and include the content required by SEC. 16.4-3. Such plans
shall be in compliance with the Preliminary Plan.
SEC. 16.3-3.3 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
A. The public improvement plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved
or disapproved by the Town Engineer.
B. The Town Engineer will require the owner or developer to submit all data, plans,
specifications and additional materials as may be necessary to completely and
accurately determine the extent of compliance or noncompliance with the Town’s
public improvement design standards and accepted engineering practice and to
demonstrate that the proposed manner of construction and installation will meet
or exceed all Town Public Improvement Construction Standards as outlined in “A
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of
Normal.”
SEC. 16.3-3.3(Cont.1)
C. The public improvement plans and specifications, whether they meet or exceed
the Town subdivision, public improvement design standards and otherwise
demonstrate good and acceptable engineering design and practice, shall be
approved by the Town Engineer.
D. Approval or disapproval by the Town Engineer shall be in writing and shall make
reference to the public improvement plans and specifications.
SEC. 16.3-4 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION
PROCEDURES. The owner or developer of property desiring to install public improvements in
an area depicted on a proposed or approved Preliminary Plan or approved or proposed Final
Subdivision Plat shall perform such installation in accordance with the following procedure:
SEC. 16.3-4 PREREQUISITES TO INSTALLATION.
A. For Installations Before Final Plat Approval:
1. Approval and continuing validity of an approved Preliminary Plan;
2. Approval of public improvement engineering plans and specifications for
any and all public improvements which are to be installed or the
installation of which is to be commenced prior to the approval of a Final
Plat;
B. For Installation After Final Plat Approval:
1. Approval of a Final Plat;
2. Posting of a Final Plat, Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
Workmanship Bond and security therefore, in the amount and form
specified in SEC 16.4-6 for all public improvements depicted in, adjacent
to or necessary to serve lots or outlots depicted in an area for which Final
Plat approval has been obtained.
SEC. 16.3-4.2 INSPECTION. During installation of public improvements, either before
or after Final Plat approval, the owner or developer shall comply with the requirements of
Section 1.15 of “A Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of
Normal” by which the Town Engineer or his Designate shall make periodic inspections. Failure
to comply and install or maintain such installations in a manner that permits inspection shall
constitute grounds for rejecting or revoking Preliminary Plan or Final Plat approval, forfeiting
pledged security and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
SEC. 16.3-4.3 PLAN REVIEW, INSPECTION AND TESTING FEE. The cost
incurred by the Town for review of public improvement plan and specifications as required by
SEC. 16.3-3 of this Code and the inspection and testing of public improvements as required by
SEC. 16.3-4(B) of this Code, shall be paid by the owner or developer. Such cost shall be equal
SEC. 16.3-4.3(Cont.1)
to the actual cost incurred by the Public Works Department in labor, materials, transportation and
overhead for such review, inspection and testing as calculated by the Town Engineer. At the
time such plans and specifications are filed with the Town Engineer, the owner or developer
shall pay to the Town a fee of two percent (2%) of the costs as estimated by the Town Engineer
of such required land improvements. Said fee shall be applied as credit against the actual costs
incurred by the Public Works Department for review of such plans and the inspection and testing
of such improvements. The balance of the actual costs shall be paid to the Town by the owner or
developer at the time such review and inspection has been completed by the Public Works
Department. All land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this Code shall be
inspected by the Public Works Department during the course of construction.
SEC. 16.3-4.4 GRADING PLANS RECORD DRAWINGS. The owner or developer
shall submit to the Town Engineer for approval, prior to issuance of a building permit or prior to
the installation of any utilities serving a proposed lot of record, whichever is earlier, a record
drawing of the grading plan which is required by Section 1.05-B(2) of “A Manual of Practice for
the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal”. The record drawings submitted
shall be one (1) clear and legible transparent mylar and one (1) photo static print of the approved
grading plan and shall also depict the actual ground surface elevations on all lot corners and
building pads in addition to the proposed elevations on the approved grading plan. (Added
4/19/93 by Ord. No. 4132)
SEC. 16.3-5 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE. Before
subdividing any land, subject to requirements of this Code, an owner or developer shall comply
with the following Final Plat submission, review and approval procedure:
SEC. 16.3-5.1 PREREQUISITES.
A. Approval and continuing validity of a Preliminary Subdivision Plan;
B. Approval of the public improvement plans and specifications proposed in,
adjacent to or necessary to serve lots or outlots depicted in the area for which
Final Plat approval is sought;
C. Payment of any and all applicable tap-on and street light fees prior to recording
the Final Plat; and
D. Prior to recording the Final Plat, the posting of any required Final Plat Public
Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond; filing and
establishment of any required Adjacent Street Substandard Roadway
Improvement Guarantees and security; making of any required Public Land
Dedications or cash contribution in lieu thereof; and obtaining and filing with the
Town of any off-site easements or right-of-way for public improvements serving
the site.
E. Submission of a fee receipt reflecting payment to the Town Treasurer of the
appropriate following fee:
SEC. 16.3-5.1(Cont.1)
AREA IN SUBDIVISION FEE
Less than 2 acres $200.00
At least 2 acres but less than 15 acres $300.00
At least 15 acres but less than 25 acres $400.00
25 acres or more $500.00
SEC. 16.3-5.2 SUBMISSION. The owner or developer shall submit to the Town Clerk
two (2) transparent mylars, one (1) digital computer-aided drafting file on disk, and fifteen (15)
copies of a Final Plat, in a form and providing all the information, data and supporting material
required by SEC. 16.4-4 and retaining the design characteristics of the approved Preliminary
Plan and public improvement engineering plans and specifications.
SEC. 16.3-5.3 DISTRIBUTION OF FINAL PLAT FOR REVIEW AND
COMMENT. The Town Clerk shall route one (1) or more copies of the Final Plat to Town
Staff members for review and comment. One (1) copy of the Final Plat shall be provided to each
member of the Town Council prior to the consideration of the plan.
SEC. 16.3-5.4 TOWN COUNCIL REVIEW, REFERRAL AND APPROVAL OR
DISAPROVAL. Within thirty (30) days from the submission of a Final Plat and supporting
material, the Town Council shall review the Final Plat to determine the extent to which it
conforms with the approved Preliminary Plan and approved public improvement plans and
specifications and shall further review the supporting material to determine its conformance with
the requirements of this Code. If the Final Plan substantially conforms with the approved
Preliminary Plan and public improvement plans and specifications and if the supporting material
meets all Code requirements, then the Council shall approve the Final Plat by Resolution within
thirty (30) days from the date of its review. The Council may approve such plats subject to the
subsequent posting of Final Plat Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond; Adjacent
Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee, and related security documents and reserves. If
the Final Plat does not in some way substantially conform with the approved Preliminary Plan, or
if the supporting material does not conform with all Code requirements, then the Council, within
thirty (30) days from the date of its review, shall take one of the following actions:
A. By Resolution, approve the Final Plat;
B. By Resolution, approve the Final Plat with conditions;
C. By Resolution, disapprove the Final Plat;
D. Refer the Final Plat to the Planning Commission for legislative public hearing, at
which time and place the Planning Commission shall determine the extent to
which the (Revised) Final Plat conforms or fails to conform with the standards of
this Code. The Planning Commission shall, not later than ninety (90) days after
the adjournment of the legislative public hearing, transmit its recommendation on
SEC. 16.3-5.4(Cont.1)
the (Revised) Final Plat to the Town Council. Within sixty (60) days from the
receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation with respect to the
(Revised) Final Plat, the Town Council shall, by Resolution, approve or
disapprove the Plat.
SEC. 16.3-5.5 RECORDING. Within seven (7) days from the date of adoption of a
Resolution approving the Final Plat, or within seven (7) days from the date on which the last
event referred to this Code or characterized in the Resolution as a prerequisite to recording of the
Final Plat occurs, whichever is later, the Town Clerk shall record a copy of the Final Plat, a
certified copy of the Resolution approving the Final Plat, and any supporting certificates
necessary to accomplish the recording in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County.
If such Final Plat is not recorded within ninety (90) days of Town Council approval, such plat
shall become null and void.
SEC. 16.3-5.6 EXPEDITED FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION, REVIEW AND
APPROVAL PROCEDURE - SUBDIVISION WITH THREE LOTS OR LESS.
Notwithstanding the sequential procedure for subdivision plan submission, review and approval
specified elsewhere in this Division, an owner or developer meeting the pre- requisites specified
in this paragraph may utilize the expedited Final Plat process described herein:
A. Prerequisites.
1. The plat depicts a total of not more than three (3) lots and outlots;
2. The plat includes all contiguous property in common ownership or unified
control.
3. The proposed subdivision shall not necessitate the construction or
installation of public improvements.
4. That no waivers of this Code be requested.
B. Submission. Any person desiring to utilize the expedited final plat procedure,
shall submit the following to the Town Clerk:
1. A written request to waive the preliminary plan, submission, review, and
approval procedure.
2. Ten (10) copies of a utility plan and flood plain map. The utility plan shall
show all information of existing and proposed utilities as required for a
preliminary plan. The flood plain map will outline the area in the flood
hazard area as described in Chapter 28 of the Municipal Code of the Town
of Normal, 1969, as amended.
3. Two (2) transparent mylars, one (1) digital computer-aided drafting file on
disk, and fifteen (15) photo static copies of the Final Plat in a form
SEC. 16.3-5.6(Cont.1)
providing all information, data and supporting material required by
Section 16.4-4. (Amended 11/7/83)
4. A fee receipt reflecting payment to the Town Treasurer of the appropriate
following fee:
AREA IN SUBDIVISION FEE
Less than two acres $200.00
At least two acres but less than
fifteen acres $300.00
At least fifteen acres but less than
twenty-four acres $400.00
Twenty-five acres or more $500.00
(Amended 2/4/08 by Ord. No. 5170)
C. Distribution of Final Plat for Review and Comment. The Town Clerk shall route
one (1) or more copies of the Final Plat to the Town staff members for review and
comment. One (1) copy of the Final Plat shall be provided to each member of the
Town Council prior to their consideration of the plan.
D. Town Council Review, Referral and Approval or Disapproval. Within thirty (30)
days from the submission of a final plan under this expedited review and
procedure, the Town Council shall review the submission to determine the extent
to which it conforms with the requirements of this Code. If the material meets all
Code requirements, then the Council shall approve the Final Plat by resolution
within thirty (30) days from the date of its review. The Council may approve
such plats subject to the subsequent payment of any and all applicable fees and
posting of a Final Plat Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond; Adjacent
Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee, Public Improvement Engineering
Plans and Specifications and related materials, security documents and reserves. If
the Final Plat in some way does not conform with all Code requirements, then
within thirty (30) days from the date of its review, the Council shall take one or
more of the following actions:
1. By Resolution, approve the Final Plat;
2. By Resolution, approve the Final Plat with conditions;
3. By Resolution, disapprove the Final Plat;
4. Require the submission of a Preliminary Plan;
5. Refer the Final Plat to the Planning Commission for legislative public
hearing, at which time and place the Planning Commission shall determine
the extent to which the Final Plat conforms with the standards of this
Code. The Planning Commission shall, not later than ninety (90) days
after the adjournment of the legislative public hearing, transmit its
recommendation on the Final Plat to the Town Council. Within sixty (60)
days from the receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation with
SEC. 16.3-5.6(Cont.2)
respect to such Final Plat, the Council shall, by Resolution, approve or
disapprove same.
E. Conformance with Other Requirements. Except as provided in this section, the
recording of Final Plats, the posting of bonds, the submission of as-built plans and the release of
bonds, shall be as provided in this Chapter.
SEC. 16.3-6 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT FINAL PLAN. Refer to SEC.
15.9-4 of this Code.
SEC.16.3-7 PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP
GUARANTEES. Either prior to the approval of a final subdivision plat or prior to its recording
and within the time framework, if any, specified in the Resolution of approval, the owner or
developer shall post, secure and file with the Town Clerk a Final Plat Public Improvement
Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond with appropriate evidence of security and file
and establish an Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee and security in the
manner, amount and form described respectively in SEC. 16.4-6.
SEC. 16.3-8 SUBMISSION OF RECORD DRAWINGS. After installation,
completion, inspection, testing and receipt of engineering approval, but before Town acceptance
for maintenance of any public improvements within a subdivision, the owner or developer shall
submit record drawings of the public improvement plans in the form and with the content
required by Section 1.16 of “A Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the
Town of Normal”.
SEC. 16.3-9 ACCEPTANCE FOR MAINTENANCE.
SEC. 16.3-9.1 COMPLETION OF ALL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. After the
developer has complied with the requirements of Section 1.16 and 1.17 of “A Manual of Practice
for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal” and within thirty (30) days after
the Town Engineer’s written recommendation for acceptance, the Town Council shall, by
resolution, accept for maintenance all public improvements within, adjacent to or serving lots or
outlots depicted on a Final Plat.
SEC. 16.3-9.2 COMPLETION OF ALL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS EXCEPT
SIDEWALKS. If the developer has complied with all of the requirements of Section 1.16 and
1.17 of “A Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal”,
except the completion and inspection of an approved sidewalk, then the developer may post a
payment, performance, and workmanship guarantee in the manner and form described in Section
16.4-6.1 guaranteeing the construction of the proposed sidewalk, which guarantee shall be
secured by posting a cash escrow with the Town of Normal in the amount determined by the
Town Engineer. If the guarantee and security is posted for the approved sidewalk, then within
thirty (30) days after the Town Engineer’s written recommendation for acceptance of all public
improvements except sidewalk, the Town Council shall, by resolution, accept for maintenance
all public improvements except sidewalk within, adjacent to, or serving lots or outlots depicted
on a Final Plat.
SEC. 16.3-9.2(Cont.1)
If the developer constructs the approved proposed sidewalk as guaranteed, then the Town
shall, upon approval by the Town Engineer, release to the developer the posted cash escrow
securing such sidewalk construction. If the approved proposed sidewalk for which guarantee and
cash escrow has been posted is not constructed within two (2) years of posting such guarantee
and cash escrow, the Town may use the funds in the cash escrow to construct the approved
proposed sidewalk, billing the developer for any deficiency and refunding to the developer any
surplus from the cash escrow account.
SEC. 16.3-10 FINAL SECURITY RELEASE.
SEC. 16.3-10.1 FINAL PLAT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PAYMENT,
PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BONDS. One (1) year after the date on which a
Resolution accepting a Final Plat for maintenance is adopted, unless a material or workmanship
claim is submitted to the surety company or escrow agent, the security for Final Plat Public
Improvement, Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bonds shall expire and may be released
upon certification of satisfactory condition by the Town Engineer.
SEC. 16.3-10.2 ADJACENT SUBSTANDARD ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT
GUARANTEES AND SECURITY. The adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee
and security shall expire pursuant to SEC. 16.4-6.2 unless the Town Engineer has earlier
certified completion of improvements to adjacent substandard roadways, and the security, plus
interest at seven percent (7%) per annum may be released without further action by the Town
Council.
SEC. 16.3-11 RESERVED.
SEC. 16.4-1
DIVISION 4 - FORM AND CONTENT
SEC. 16.4-1 CONCEPT PLAN. Concept Plan shall be drawn to engineering scale and
shall show the conceptual layout of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development
including the general layout of streets, drainage, sewerage, and land uses and the present location
of major natural features such as streams and lakes.
SEC. 16.4-2 PRELIMINARY PLANS AND SUPPORTING MATERIAL.
SEC. 16.4-2.1 GENERAL. The owner or developer submitting a Preliminary Plan shall
submit all information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of an owner or
developer to provide this information in the form required shall be sufficient grounds for the
Town to refuse to accept the filing of a Preliminary Plan or to reject the Preliminary Plan at any
stage in the review and approval process and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of this
Code.
SEC. 16.4-2.2 MINIMUM AREA INCLUDED IN PRELIMINARY PLAN. A
Preliminary Plan shall include not less than all contiguous property in common ownership or
unified control.
SEC. 16.4-2.3 REQUIRED FORM AND CONTENT OF A PRELIMINARY PLAN
AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS. Plans, drawings, surveys, maps, schematics, and
comparable material shall be submitted in the form and content as specified in Section 1.05 of "A
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal".
SEC. 16.4-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ENGINEERING PLANS AND
SPECIFICATIONS.
SEC. 16.4-3.1 GENERAL. The owner or developer submitting public improvement
engineering plans and specifications shall submit all the information required by this Section.
Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information shall be sufficient grounds for the
Town to refuse to accept the filing of public improvement engineering plans and specifications,
to reject the plans and specifications at any stage in the review and approval process, to reject a
Final Plat depicting lots or outlots served by such public improvements.
SEC. 16.4-3.2 MINIMUM MATERIAL SUBMITTED. Engineering plans and
specifications shall be submitted for all public improvements proposed in or necessary to serve
lots depicted in an approved Preliminary Plan or portion thereof. Such materials shall include,
without limitation, plans, profiles, standard details, and special details drawn in sufficient detail
and supported with sufficient data to make possible a complete and accurate determination of the
extent of compliance or non-compliance with the Town's Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements.
SEC. 16.4-4 FINAL PLAT.
SEC. 16.4-4.1
SEC. 16.4-4.1 GENERAL. The owner or developer submitting a Final Plat shall submit
all information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of an owner or developer
to provide this information in the form required shall be sufficient grounds for the Town to
refuse to accept the filing of a Final Plat or to reject the Final Plat in any stage of the review and
approval process.
SEC. 16.4-4.2 AREA INCLUDED IN A FINAL PLAT.
A. A Final Plat shall not include any area not included in an approved and then valid
Preliminary Plan unless an exemption of the Preliminary Plan requirements of
SEC. 16.3-2 of this Code has been approved by the Town Council in accordance
with SEC. 16.3-5.6 of this Code.
B. A Final Plat shall not depict any public improvements or lots served by, which are
to be served by, or which under this Code require service by public improvements
unless the public improvement engineering plans and specifications for such
public improvements have been submitted, reviewed and approved;
SEC. 16.4-4.3 REQUIRED FORM AND CONTECT (OF FINAL SUBDIVISION
PLATS AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS). Final Plats, certificates, and comparable
material shall be submitted in the form and content as specified in Section 1.05 of “A Manual of
Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal”.
SEC. 16.4-5 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
Refer to SEC. 15.9-11 of this Code.
SEC. 16.4-6 PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP
GUARANTEES.
SEC. 16.4-6.1 FINAL PLAT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PAYMENT,
PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND.
A. Nature of the Obligation. Any owner, developer or subdivider shall submit a Final
Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond
obligating the signer(s) to do each of the following:
1. Install all public improvements depicted or an approved preliminary plan,
engineering plans and specifications or final plat.
2. Pay all plan review and inspection fees.
3. Prepare and submit to the Town one (1) complete set of plans showing
such required land improvements as actually installed in the manner
described in SEC. 16.4-7.
SEC. 16.4-6.1(Cont.1)
All public improvements shall be completed within two (2) years
following the approval of the Final Plat by the President and Board of
Trustees of the Town, and prior to acceptance of the improvements for
maintenance. In addition, the execution of the subdivider’s Final Plat
Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond shall
obligate the signer(s) to guarantee the improvements against faulty
materials and workmanship for a period of one (1) year following
acceptance of the improvements for maintenance by the President and
Board of Trustees of the Town.
B. Penal Amount of Bond and Security.
1. Penal Amount. The penal amount of the Final Plat Public Improvement
Payment and Performance and Workmanship Bond shall be the higher of
the following:
a. If some or all of the improvements have been installed, inspected,
and approved, then one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated
cost of those improvements not installed and inspected, plus ten
percent (10%) of the Town Engineer’s estimate for all
improvements, shall be held as security until all improvements
have been accepted for maintenance by the Town Council. At this
time, the security shall be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
Town Engineer’s estimate and held for the one (1) year guarantee
period for materials and workmanship. Also the owner or
developer must pay all plan review and inspection fees not paid
and prepare all record drawings not then submitted.
b. If none of the improvements have been installed, then one hundred
and ten percent (110%) of the Town Engineer’s estimate of the
cost of installing all public improvements shall be required to
guarantee the materials and workmanship. This amount may be
reduced to ten percent (10%) of the Town Engineer’s estimate
upon acceptance of the improvements for maintenance.
2. Security. The Final Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance, and
Workmanship Bond shall be secured in one of the following ways:
a. By posting a cash escrow amount in a local bank or savings and
loan association in the amount specified in SEC. 16.4-6.1(B)(1) as
adjusted by any releases authorized pursuant to SEC. 16.4-6.1(D).
b. By posting a renewable irrevocable letter of credit in the amount
specified for a minimum of two (2) years in SEC. 16.4-6.1(B)(1)
from a local bank or savings and loan association naming the
SEC. 16.4-6.1(Cont.2)
Town as a beneficiary thereof. The minimum of two (2) year term
renewal with two (2) months notice to Town prior to expiration.
C. Form of Bond and Security Documents.
1. The form of the Final Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
Workmanship Bond secured by cash escrow is provided in Exhibit G.
2. The form of the Final Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
Workmanship Bond secured by an irrevocable letter of credit is as
provided in Exhibit H.
D. Releases from Escrow Accounts Posted as Security. As installation of public
improvements progresses, and is inspected and approved by the Town Engineer,
releases from such escrow accounts, including interest accumulated thereon, may
be authorized by the Town Engineer in writing, based upon his estimate of the
cost for work completed, inspected and approved, provided however, no release
shall be made which would reduce the escrow account to an amount less than ten
(10) percent of the Town Engineer’s original estimate of the cost of installing all
public improvements, paying all plan review and inspection fees and preparing
as-built plans until all public improvements in the subdivision have been accepted
for maintenance by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town, at which
time the escrow account shall be released to an amount of not less than five
percent (5%) of the Town Engineer’s original estimate of cost. Funds then
remaining in the escrow account may be released one (1) year after official action
by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal accepted the
subdivision for maintenance or on such later date as any written claim against the
escrow account by the Town is finally resolved.
SEC. 16.4-6.2 ADJACENT SUBSTANDARD ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT
GUARANTEE AND SECURITY.
A. Nature of the Obligation. Any owner, developer, or subdivider developing a
subdivision bordering on one or more roadways is obligated to contribute one-half
(1/2) the cost of improving such roadway or roadways on all streets, the
obligation shall endure for ten (10) years from the date the Final Plat is recorded
unless:
1. The developer or subdivider builds the half of the street adjacent to his
development in which case the developer shall have no obligation, or
2. The Town obtains the right-of-way and Adjacent Substandard Roadway
Improvement Guarantee and security for the roadway opposite the
development, in which case the developer or subdivider’s obligation shall
be limited to ten (10) years from the date the Final Plat is recorded.
SEC. 16.4-6.2(Cont.1)
B. Guarantee and Security.
1. Security. The Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee
shall be secured in one of the following ways:
a. By posting a cash reserve account with the Town of Normal in the
amount determined by SEC. 16.4-6.2(A) as adjusted by releases
authorized pursuant to SEC. 16.4-6.1(D).
b. By posting an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount determined
by SEC. 16.4-6.2(A) from a local bank or savings and loan
association naming the Town as beneficiary thereof.
2. Form of Guarantee.
a. The form of the Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement
Guarantee secured by cash escrow is as provided in Exhibit I.
b. The form of the Adjacent Substandard Roadway Improvement
Guarantee and Security secured by an irrevocable letter of credit is
as provided in Exhibit J.
SEC. 16.4-7 RECORD DRAWINGS.
SEC. 16.4-7.1 GENERAL. After completion, inspection and approval of all public
improvements, but prior to acceptance of the public improvements for maintenance, the owner or
developer shall submit all information required by this Section in the form specified in the
Manual of Practice. Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information in the form
required shall be sufficient grounds for the Town to refuse to release the subdivider from his or
its Final Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond; Adjacent
Substandard Roadway Improvement Guarantee or to release the security or reserve for such
bond, bonds or guarantee, and shall constitute a violation of this Code.
SEC. 16.4-7.2 REQUIRED FORM. As-built plans shall consist of photographic
reproduction mylar with a maximum size of 24" by 36" and the corresponding digital
computer-aided-drafting files in the specified version and format of AUTOCAD on a 3.5" floppy
diskette.
SEC. 16.4-7.3 REQUIRED CONTENT. As-built plans shall provide the content
required for public improvement engineering plans and specifications (specified in SEC.
16.4-3.3) but shall accurately depict the plans, profiles, standard details and special details as
actually installed, inspected and approved, rather than as proposed.
SEC 16.4-8 RESERVED.
SEC. 16.5-1
DIVISION 5 - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
SEC. 16.5-1 - PERMITTED USES IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
Refer to SEC. 15.9 of this Code.
SEC. 16.5-2 - LAND USE DENSITY RATINGS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS
FOR RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
Refer to SEC. 15.9-14 of this Code.
SEC. 16.5-3 - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS.
Refer to SEC. 15.9-15 of this Code.
SEC. 16.5-4 - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT.
Refer to SEC. 15.9-16 of this Code.
SEC. 16.5-5 - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR A C-1 MULTI-USE OFFICE PARK.
Refer to SEC. 15.9-17 of this Code.
SEC. 16.6-1
DIVISION 6 - PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION
AND RESERVATION REQUIREMENTS
SEC 16.6-1 GENERAL APPLICABILITY. All subdivisions of property with a
residential use shall be designed so that park and recreational and school areas are provided in the
manner and to the extent prescribed by this Section, so as to accommodate the open space and
recreational and school needs of those persons living within the confines of the subdivision. This
Division shall also apply to any development on a platted lot of record.
SEC 16.6-2 AMOUNT & LOCATION OF LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
As a condition of approval of a final plat of a subdivision or development on a platted lot of record,
each owner, subdivider or developer of property with a residential use, shall be required to dedicate
land for park and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of
the development or to contribute cash in lieu of said actual land dedication, or to make a
combination of cash contribution and land dedication at the election of the Town in accordance with
the following criteria and formula:
A. Requirement and Population Table. The ultimate density of a proposed development
bears directly on the amount of land required for park purposes. The total
requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate
population. Projected population is based upon the maximum number of dwelling
units per acre permitted in the respective zoning district and the projected number of
occupants per unit See SEC. 16.6-3(C)&(D).
B. Location. The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map as adopted by the Town
Council, shall be used as a guideline in locating sites along with the Park & Open
Space Master Plan. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located
throughout the development according to accepted standards for park area distances.
The use of bike and pedestrian trails and greenways throughout the subdivision is
also desirable.
C. Cash Contribution Alternatives. In the event the Town should determine that a cash
contribution shall be made by the owner, subdivider or developer in lieu of land
dedication, the Town shall apply the population ratio of l.0 acre of land for one
hundred (100) ultimate population within the development or area to be subdivided
times the fair market value as established in SEC. 16.6-3 of this Code.
D. Condition of Land. The property to be dedicated pursuant to this Division shall be
in a condition acceptable to the Town. The subdivider or developer shall meet with
the Town prior to removing or altering the pre-development condition of the land.
The Town and subdivider or developer shall reach agreement on the condition of the
property to be dedicated prior to any alteration of the property by the subdivider or
developer. Unless otherwise agreed, land dedicated shall comply with the design
SEC. 16.6-2(Cont.1)
and construction standards for recreational facilities in the Town of Normal Manual
of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal.
E. Parkland Credit. Greenways and trails throughout the subdivision connecting to
adjacent properties may upon Town approval receive full or partial credit as
parkland, provided the same is dedicated in a condition acceptable to the Town.
SEC. 16.6-3 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU
OF LAND DEDICATION. By agreement with the subdivider or developer or in the sole
discretion of the Town, the owner, subdivider, or developer shall be required to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication or a combination of land and cash in lieu of land. The
cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the Town or
other public body designated by the Town, solely for the acquisition and development of park and
recreation land as herein before classified, which may be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing
local park and recreational land which already serves such areas.
A. Fair Market Value. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the “fair
market value” of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein, that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreational sites. It has been
determined that the present “fair market value” as of the adoption date of the revised
code of such improved land in the planning jurisdiction of the Town is $45,000 per
acre and such figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the
subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of such
objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the “fair market value” of
such improved land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof and
final determination of said “fair market value” per acre of such improved land shall
be made by the Town Council based upon such information submitted by the
subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the
Town Council.
B. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee. There will be situations when a
combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary.
These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a
park. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the park
location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in
lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been
required to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired
and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete
the site. The remaining portion shall be required by dedication, and a cash
contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
SEC. 16.6-3(Cont.1)
C. Density Formula. The estimated population per dwelling unit based on current and
short range projected trends in family size of new construction is indicated in this
Section and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication for acres
of land and any combination of land dedication and cash contribution unless a
written objection is filed thereto by an owner, subdivider or developer. The estimate
is as follows:
Zoning District Population (People per dwelling unit)
R-1AA 2.7
R-1A 2.7
R-1B 2.7
R-2 2.5
R-3A 2.5
R-3B 3.0
R-4 2.7
Any other District permitting dwelling
Units (Other) 2.5
This figure can be reviewed on an annual basis and may be adjusted annually to
reflect changes in land costs and the costs of improvements based upon the
maximum allowable number of dwelling units per lot. For property zoned R-3A,
R-3B, and under the Other category above, the estimate shall be based on the
maximum allowable number of two bedroom dwelling units per lot.
In the event an owner, subdivider or developer files a written objection to the
population estimates listed herein, he shall submit his own demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision, or
development and in that event, final determination of the density formula to be used
in such calculations shall be made by the Board of Trustees based upon such
demographic information submitted by the owner, subdivider or developer and from
other sources which may be submitted to the Board of Trustees. It is recognized that
population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and
the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof,
as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
D. Land and Cash Contribution Formula.
1. In the event the Town shall require land dedication pursuant to this Section,
it shall be in amounts not less than the following:
SEC. 16.6-3(Cont.2)
Land Dedication
Zoning District (square feet per dwelling unit)
R-1AA 1,176.12
R-1A 1,176.12
R-1B 1,176.12
R-2 1,089.00
R-3A 1,089.00
R-3B 1,089.00
R-4 1,176.12
Other 1,089.00
It is recognized that local conditions change over the years and the land
dedication requirements of this Section are subject to periodic review and
amendment, if necessary.
2. Cash Contribution. In the event the Town shall require solely cash in lieu of
park and recreation land dedication, pursuant to this Section, the cash
contribution shall not be less than the amounts in the following table:
Cash contribution
Zoning District (per dwelling unit)
R-1AA $608.11
R-1A $608.11
R-1B $608.11
R-2 $562.50
R-3A $562.50
R-3B $562.50
R-4 $608.11
Other $562.50
It is recognized that local conditions change over the years and the cash
contribution provided in the foregoing is to be subject to periodic review and
amendment, if necessary.
SEC. 16.6-4 RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND. Where the Comprehensive
Plan or the standards of the Town call for a larger amount of park and recreational land in a
particular subdivision than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the
developer’s contribution shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the Town, provided that such
acquisition is made within one (1) year from the date of the Final Plat or building permit which
includes the area of the park to be dedicated.
SEC. 16.6-5 COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS. Where the
subdivision or development is less than forty (40) acres (16 hectares), public open space which is to
be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in
order to produce usable recreation areas without hardship on a particular developer.
SEC. 16.6-5(Cont.1)
SEC. 16.6-6 TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING. Unless otherwise agreed, the slope,
topography and geology of the dedicated site shall be in conformance with the Town of Normal
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements.
SEC. 16.6-7 IMPROVED SITES. Unless otherwise agreed, all sites shall be dedicated in
a condition in conformance with the Town of Normal Manual of Practice for the Design of Public
Improvements.
(SEC. 16.6-1 through 16.6-7 Amended 3/20/06 by Ord. No. 5064)
SEC. 16.6-8 SCHOOL LAND DEDICATION.
SEC. 16.6-8.1 GENERAL.
A. Where it is the policy of the impacted school district to request developers of new
residential developments to dedicate land or make cash contributions to the
district in lieu of dedicating land for new schools, the following provisions shall
apply.
B. Fees and/or land dedications from developers of residential developments under
the jurisdiction of the Town shall be in accordance with SEC 16.6-8.
SEC. 16.6-8.2 PROVISIONS.
A. Dedication of School Sites or Payment of Fees in lieu of. As a condition of
approval of a building permit, a Final Plat of subdivision or Final Development
Plan of a Planned Unit Development, each subdivider or developer shall be
required to dedicate land for school sites, to serve the immediate and future needs
of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, as determined by the Town of Normal and
the impacted school district, in accordance with the following criteria and
formula.
B. Criteria for Requiring School Site Dedication.
1. Requirement and Population Ratio. The ultimate number of students to be
generated by a development, subdivision, or Planned Unit Development
shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for
school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by
obtaining the ratio of: (1) estimated children to be served in each such
school classification over the (2) maximum recommended number of
students to be served in each school classification as stated herein, and
then applying such ratio to the (3) said minimum recommended number of
acres for a school site of each such school classification as stated herein.
The product thereof shall be the area of land deemed needed to have
sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in
each such school classification.
SEC. 16.6-8.2(Cont.1)
2. School Classifications and Size of School Site. School classifications and
size of school sites within the Town shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:
School Max. No. Min. Site
Classification of Students Size (Acres)
Elementary 600 11
Junior High 900 29
Senior High 1,200 50
3. Location. The Town of Normal Comprehensive Plan and or the standards
adopted by the impacted school district shall be used as a guideline in
locating sites.
SEC. 16.6-8.3 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF
SCHOOL SITES. Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a school site, the Town shall require the
subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The
cash contribution in lieu of school sites shall be held by the Town, solely for the use in the
acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing school site which already
serves the needs of that development. Said cash contribution in lieu of school site dedication
shall be deposited with the Town prior to issuance of a building permit, recording of the final
plat or approval of the Final Development Plan for a Planned Unit Development, as determined
by the Town.
A. Fair Market Value. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the
“fair market value” of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein,
that otherwise would have been dedicated as a school site. It has been determined
that the present “fair market value” of such improved land in and surrounding the
Town is $35,000 per acre and such figure shall be used in making any calculation
herein unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the
event of any such objection the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the
“fair market value” of such improved land in the area of his/herdevelopment or
other evidence thereof and final determination of said “fair market value” per acre
of such improved land shall be made by the Town Council based upon such
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from any other sources
which may be submitted to the Town Council, school district and others.
B. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee. There will be situations when a
combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both
necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the school site.
That portion of the land falling within the school location shall be
SEC. 16.6-8.3(Cont.1)
dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution shall be required
for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a small
portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The
remaining portions shall be required by dedication and a cash contribution
in lieu thereof shall be required.
SEC. 16.6-8.4 DENSITY FORMULA. The following table of population density is
generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new
construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land
or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the
subdivider or developer.
Housing Elementary Junior High Senior High
Type (Children per du) (Children per du) (Children per du)
Single & 0.385 0.117 0.187
Two Family
Multifamily 0.094 0.036 0.06
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Table of Estimated
Ultimate Population listed herein, he/she shall submit his/her own demographic study showing
the estimated additional population to be generated from the development, subdivision or
planned unit development and in that event final determination of the density formula to be used
in such calculations shall be made by the Town Council based upon such demographic
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be
submitted to the Town Council, school district or others. It is recognized that population density,
age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic
review and amendment if necessary.
SEC. 16.6-8.5 ANNEXATION. The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu
thereof required by this Section shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any
land to the Town and provisions thereof shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement
governing such land.
SEC. 16.6-8.6 EXEMPTIONS. The dedication of land or cash contributions in lieu
thereof as required by this Section shall be applicable unless the Town Council determines either
that such new development will not in itself have an impact upon or create a need for new school
facilities and that any such need is not uniquely attributable to such new subdivision. The
determination by the Town Council shall be binding upon all the parties involved.
SEC. 16.6-8.7
SEC. 16.6-8.7 FORMULA FOR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.
SEC. 16.6-8.8
SEC. 16.6-8.8 PROCEDURES FOR MANAGING CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.
A. The school district's business agent shall provide a copy of the school district's
policy and procedures to any developer seeking approval of a new residential
development under the jurisdiction of the Town.
B. The required cash contributions shall be deposited with the Town's Finance
Department before the Town shall record the Final Plat or approve the Final
Development Plan of a Planned Unit Development.
C. The Finance Department shall deposit the cash contribution in an escrow account
and shall issue periodic reports to the business agent for the school district.
D. The business agent shall file a capital improvement plan with the City Clerk
which shall indicate the proposed use of funds by the school district.
E. The business agent shall file a request for transfer of funds with the City Clerk,
certifying that the funds so paid, shall be used for the capital improvements in
accordance with the plan referenced in SEC 16.6-8.8(D).
F. The school district's business agent shall maintain records indicating the use of
the funds. In the event the funds are not used by the school district within one
year of receipt, said funds with any earned interest will be returned to the Town.
SEC. 16.6-8.9 DEVELOPMENT IN UNLISTED ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS.
Whenever development occurs in any zoning classification not listed in SEC. 16.6-8.7, and such
development includes new dwelling units, then the formula for land and/or cash contributions
shall be based on the type and actual number of new dwelling units to be constructed per acre for
such development or the maximum allowable number of dwelling units allowed per acre or per
lot in the proposed development. The number of school children estimated to be generated from
such development will be based on the housing type for such development being single and twofamily
or multiple-family as set forth in SEC. 16.6-8.4. In the event the owner, subdivider, or
developer files a written objection to the proposed land and/or cash contribution, he shall submit
his own demographic study showing the estimated additional school- age population to be
generated from the development. Final determination of the density formula to be used shall be
made by the Board of Trustees.
SEC. 16.6-9 CREDIT FOR PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Property
subject to the land dedication or cash contribution requirements of this Division shall be entitled
to a credit towards such dedication or contribution requirement if such property was used for
residential dwelling purposes immediately prior to imposition of the obligations of this Division.
The credit shall be equal to the land dedication or cash contribution calculated on the actual
number of dwelling units on said property immediately prior to the imposition of the obligations
of this Division. (Added 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5367)
(Entire Division 6 of Chapter 16 Amended 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5262)
SEC. 16.7
DIVISION 7 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
All subdivisions shall be designed and constructed to conform with the principles, requirements,
standards and specifications enumerated in the following chapters of "A Manual of Practice for the
Design of Public Improvements in the Town of Normal":
Chapter 1 Engineering and Administration Procedures
Chapter 2 Protection and Restoration
Chapter 3 General Subdivision Design Standards
Chapter 4 Design and Construction Standards for Streets
Chapter 5 Design and Construction Standards for Sidewalks and
Pedestrian Ways
Chapter 6 Design and Construction Standards for Storm Sewers,
Drainage Ways and Storm Water Detention Facilities
Chapter 7 Design and Construction Standards for Sanitary Sewers
Chapter 8 Design and Construction Standards for Water Distribution and Supply
System
Chapter 9 Design and Construction Standards for Street Lights
Chapter 10 Design and Construction Standards for Bridges & Culverts
Chapter 11 Design and Construction Standards for Railroad Crossings
Chapter 12 Design and Construction Standards for Other Public Utilities
Chapter 13 Design and Construction Standards for Sediment and Erosion Control
Chapter 14 Design and Construction Standards for Recreational Facilities
(Comprehensive Amendment to Chapter 16 on 6/30/1998 by Ord. No. 4530)
SEC. 16.8-1
DIVISION 8 – AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT
SEC. 16.8-1. All subdivisions and development occurring within one and one-half miles of
the corporate limits of the Town of Normal shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter
28 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended.
(Division 8 Added 4/21/08 by Ord. No. 5191)
EXHIBIT A1
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS.
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That I, the undersigned, hereby certify that
I am the owner of all the premises embodied in the attached Plat of the
____________________________________________ Subdivision to the Town of Normal,
McLean County, Illinois, and that I have caused said Plat to be made and that it is a true and
correct plat of “The ________________________ Subdivision to the Town of Normal,”
McLean County, Illinois, is laid off in lots and streets by ______________________ Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor Number _________ and I, the undersigned, hereby dedicate and set apart
for the use of the general public forever all of the streets and highways as indicated and shown
on said Plat; and I further dedicate the easements therein set forth to the Town of Normal for
general utility purposes, and as a covenant running with the land, I covenant to hold the Town of
Normal, its officers and agents harmless and covenant not to sue the Town of Normal, its officers
and agents for any damage to or removal of surface or subsurface improvements placed in the
dedicated easements by myself or my assigns where such damage or removal is caused by work
within the easement by the Town of Normal, its officers or agents. This covenant shall be
binding on my assigns and successors.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and seal this ______ day of
_______________, 20__.
___________________________________(SEAL)
EXHIBIT A1
Page 2
NOTARY’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS.
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the County and State aforesaid, do hereby
certify that __________________________, an individual, personally known to me to be the
same person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day
in person and acknowledged that he signed, sealed and delivered the said instrument as his free
and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release and waiver of
Homestead and also including the dedication of all streets and highways to the use of the general
public forever and including the grant of certain utility easements to McLean County, Illinois.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this _____ day of _______________________.
____________________________
Notary Public
(S E A L)
(Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5247)
EXHIBIT A2
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS.
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That we, the undersigned, hereby certify
that we are the owners of all the premises embodied in the attached Plat of the
______________________ Subdivision to the Town of Normal, McLean County, Illinois, and
that we have caused said Plat to be made and that it is a true and correct plat of "The
_________________________ Subdivision to the Town of Normal," hereby dedicate and set
apart for the use of the general public forever all of the streets and highways as indicated and
shown on said Plat; and we further dedicate the easements therein set forth to the Town of
Normal for general utility purposes, and as a covenant running with the land, we covenant to
hold the Town of Normal, its officers and agents harmless and covenant not to sue the Town of
Normal, its officers and agents for any damage to or removal of surface or subsurface
improvements placed in the dedicated easements by ourselves or our assigns where such damage
or removal is caused by work within the easement by the Town of Normal, its officers or agents.
This covenant shall be binding on our assigns and successors.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, We have hereunto set our hands and affixed our seals this
_____ day of _____________________, 20___.
____________________________(SEAL)
_____________________________(SEAL)
EXHIBIT A2
Page 2
NOTARY'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for said County and State aforesaid, do hereby
certify that _______________________ and _________________ husband and wife,
personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed, sealed and
delivered the said instrument as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set
forth, including the release and waiver of Homestead and also including the dedication of all
streets and highways to the use of the general public forever and including the grant of certain
general utility easements to McLean County, Illinois.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this ______ day of _________________,
20______.
_________________________________
Notary Public
(S E A L)
(Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5247)
EXHIBIT A3
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That we, the undersigned, hereby certify
that we are the owners of all or part of the premises embodied in the attached Plat of
__________________________ Subdivision of the Town of Normal, County of McLean, State
of Illinois to-wit:
That the undersigned, _______________________________________ a/an
_________________________ Corporation, the owner of Lots ________ through ______, have
caused said Plat to be made and that it is a true and correct Plat of the
_______________________________ Subdivision to the Town of Normal, McLean County,
Illinois, and is laid off into lots and streets by __________________________, Registered Illinois
Land Surveyor Number ____; and we, the undersigned, hereby dedicate and set apart for the use
of the general public forever, all of the streets and highways as indicated and shown on said Plat;
and we further dedicate easements therein set forth to the Town of Normal for general utility
purposes, and as a covenant running with the land, we covenant to hold the Town of Normal, its
officers and agents harmless and covenant not to sue the Town of Normal, its officers and agents
for any damage to or removal of surface or subsurface improvements placed in the dedicated
easements by ourselves or our assigns where such damage or removal is caused by work within
the easement by the Town of Normal, its officers or agents. This covenant shall be binding on
our assigns and successors.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and affixed our seals
this _____________ day of _____________________, 20____.
___________________________________
A_____________________________ Corporation,
BY: __________________________________
Its ___________________________________
ATTEST:________________________________
Its _____________________________________
EXHIBIT A3
Page 2
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS.
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and aforesaid County in the State aforesaid, do hereby
certify that _____________________________________ personally known to me to be the
_____________________________of ______________________________,
a______________________________________Corporation, and ___________________
_______________, personally known to me to be the _________________________ of said
Corporation, whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this
day in person and severally acknowledged that as such ________________________ and
________________________________, of said Corporation and caused the seal of said
Corporation to be affixed thereto pursuant to authority given by the Board of Directors of said
Corporation as their free and voluntary act and as the free and voluntary act and deed of said
Corporation, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, including the dedication of all streets
and highways to the use of the general public forever, and including the grant of certain general
utility easements to the Town of Normal, Illinois.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this _______ day of _____________, 20____.
________________________________
Notary Public
(S E A L)
(Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5247)
EXHIBIT B
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, _________________________________________, Registered Illinois Land Surveyor Number
______ do hereby certify that I have surveyed, in accordance with the laws and usages of the
State of Illinois, and with the Ordinances of the Town of Normal, for
____________________________ for the following described property, to-wit:
I further certify that I have subdivided the same into _____________ lots and the streets
are shown on the attached plat and further certify that. it contains _______ acres.
Iron pins identify all lot corners as shown on said plat and all measurements are given in
feet and decimals thereof.
Said subdivision is to be known as __________________________McLean County,
Illinois.
I further certify that the foregoing plat accompanying this certificate correctly represents
the said premises as subdivided.
__________________________________ ___________________________________
Name of Firm
__________________________________ Registered Land Surveyor No.__________
__________________________________ __________________________________
Date
EXHIBIT C
DRAINAGE STATEMENT
___________________________, Registered Professional Engineer, and _________________
____________________________________________________________________________,
being the owner(s) of the premises heretofore platted by ______________________, Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor No. ______ to be and become _________________________________
to the Town of Normal, McLean County, Illinois do hereby certify that to the best of their
knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of
said Subdivision or any part thereof; or that if such surface water drainage will be changed,
reasonable provisions have been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into
public areas or drains which the Subdivider has a right to use and that such surface waters will be
planned for in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices so as to reduce the
likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the Subdivision.
I further certify that all or portions of Lots _________________________________ are within
the Special Flood Hazard Area, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
_____________________________
Registered Professional Engineer
OWNER(S):
_____________________________
_____________________________
EXHIBIT D
COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
I, __________________________________, County Clerk of McLean County, State of
Illinois, do hereby certify that on the ____________ day of ____________________________,
20____, there were no delinquent taxes unpaid, special assessments or delinquent special
assessments against the tract of land shown on the plat attached to this certificate and described
in the Certificates of the Surveyor attached hereto and to said plat.
__________________________________
County Clerk, McLean County, Illinois
(Seal of Said County)
EXHIBIT E
SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that I _____________________________________________ as owner of the
property herein described in the Surveryor’s Certificate, which will be known as
________________________________________ subdivision, to the best of my knowledge, is
located within the boundaries of Community Unit School District #________, and/or High
School District # ________ in McLean County, Illinois.
Dated this ___________ day of ___________________, 20_______.
_________________________________
Print Owner's Name
STATE OF ILLINOIS
} SS
COUNTY OF McLEAN
I, _____________________________________________________________, a Notary Public
in and for the County and State aforesaid, do hereby certify that ________________________
__________________ personally known to be the same person whose name is subscribed to the
foregoing owner's statement, appeared before me, this day, in person and acknowledged the
execution of this statement as his free and voluntary act.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this ________________________________ day of
____________________________, 20________.
_______________________________________
Notary Public
EXHIBIT F
PLAT CERTIFICATION*
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF MCLEAN )
Approved by the County Board, McLean County, Illinois, this ________________ day of
________________, 20______.
____________________________
County Plat Officer
* For plats outside the corporate limits.
EXHIBIT G
FINAL PLAT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY CASH ESCROW
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ______________________________
(owner and/or subdivider of the property) hereinafter called the Principal, is/are held and firmly
bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called the Obligee, in the penal
sum of _________________ (amount of bond) lawful money of the United States, for which ____ he
_____ hereby bind ______________________ (himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made
by ____________ (them) their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly
and severally, by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this ____day ____________________ of 20___, at Normal, McLean
County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town
of Normal for the acceptance of a tract of land as a subdivision to the Town of Normal under the
name and title of _______________________________________________________ (name of
subdivision), McLean County, Illinois, per plat of _____________________________ (name of
Registered Land Surveyor) Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. ______ consisting of
_______ (number of lots in subdivision) lots and streets, dated _____________ (date of final
plat) and the plan of which Plat has received preliminary approval by the Planning Commission
of the Town of Normal and the Board of Trustees, and which Plat will be finalized upon the
Principal's meeting the further requirements of the Land Subdivision Code of the Town of
Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided, and for which a final plat
will be presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is described as follow, to-wit:
(Legal Description of the property in the Subdivision)
EXHIBIT G
Page 2
WHEREAS said subdivider is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to provide
sanitary sewer and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm
water conduits, street signs, pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and
provide a complete and accurate set of as built plans, all of which said work is to be done per
exact specifications and plans as provided by said ordinance and as heretofore established by the
Town of Normal; and
WHEREAS said subdivider's promise and guarantee that all construction on said
proposed improvements shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the
ordinances of the Town of Normal, and subject at all times to the inspection and approval of said
Obligee and its authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or before
________________________ (two years after the date of Council approval of the subdivision)
and upon further guarantee that all damage or liability is caused or results from the construction,
operation or repairs made by the said Principal to said streets, utility conduits, etc., pursuant to
the terms of said plans and specifications, will be repaired and the Obligee herein, its officers or
employees saved harmless from any and all claims whatsoever arising from the operations of the
Principal for and during the period from the acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and for one
year after the completion and acceptance by said Obligee of all matters and things required by
said ordinance and herein bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded
subdivider shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters
and things in said plans and specifications, the resolution approving the subdivision, this bond or
the subdivision ordinance of the Town of Normal required and set forth and specified to be done
by said subdivider and performed by said subdivider at the time and in the manner in said
documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse and save the above-named
Obligee harmless from all loss and damaged which said Obligee may sustain by reason of failure
or default on the part of said subdivider so to do, then this obligation shall be null and void;
otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
(Appropriate Notary's Certificate for the Principal)
EXHIBIT G1
ESCROW RECEIPT
SUBDIVIDER'S PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT
PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND
The undersigned bank or savings and loan association by its duly authorized officers and
agents, acknowledges and certifies to the undersigned Subdivider or Owner, and to the Town of
Normal, McLean County, Illinois, effective the _____ day of ______________, 20____ as
follows:
1. That it maintains a regular office for the transaction of its business in McLean County,
Illinois.
2. That it has received and now holds in escrow, pursuant to the terms hereof, the sum of
________________________________ received from the undersigned Subdivider(s).
3. That this escrow account has been established by the undersigned Subdivider as
security on said Subdivider's Public Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship
Bond for __________________________ (name of subdivision) as provided in SEC. 1 6.3-4 of
the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, McLean County, Illinois, 1969, as amended, to the
date thereof, and shall be held and disbursed in accordance with said Bond, said Ordinance, and
as follows:
(a) The account, plus interest earned thereon, shall be held by the undersigned,
conditioned upon performance by the Principal on its Subdivider's Public
Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond furnished to the
Town of Normal for the improvements required as shown on the Final Plat of the
above mentioned Subdivision, the preparation of as-built plans and the payment of
inspection and testing fees.
(b) All withdrawals of the principal from the account shall be made subject to the
release of the Town of Normal by the Town Engineer, and the same may be paid as
work progresses and is completed, subject also to the said Engineer's approval.
(c) At or at any time after the expiration of the two-year performance period specified
in said Bond and upon certification by the Town Engineer that the principal has
failed to perform in accordance with the terms and requirements of said Bond or the
Town's Subdivision Ordinance, which said certification shall contain an
enumeration of such failures and deficiencies, all funds remaining on deposit or
such portion thereof as the Town Engineer deems necessary to complete, repair or
replace the public improvements within the subdivision or portions thereof, prepare
such as-built plans, pay such inspection and testing fees and take or perform any
other actions necessary to guarantee that the Subdivision will conform in every
respect with its approved Final Plat and the applicable codes, ordinances and
requirements of the Town of Normal shall be paid over to the Town of Normal.
EXHIBIT G1
Page 2
(d) Upon the completion of the improvements and total approval and final acceptance
for maintenance of all subdivision improvements within said subdivision by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Town, $_________________ shall remain
upon deposit in the escrow account as a workmanship guarantee until expiration of
one year after the approval and acceptance by the Town of Normal or until such
later date as any written claim by the Town against the escrow account is finally
resolved.
__________________________________
BY:
__________________________________
Its________________________________
ATTEST:
_________________________________
Its _______________________________
EXHIBIT H
FINAL PLAT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ________________________
________(owner and/or subdivider of the property) hereinafter called the Principal, is/are held
and firmly bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called the
Obligee, in the penal sum of ______________________ (amount of bond) lawful money of the
United States, for which _____ he _____ hereby bind ____________ (himself/herself/itself/
themselves) to be truly made by ______________________ (them) their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this _____ day of __________, 20____, at Normal, McLean County,
Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town
of Normal for the acceptance of a tract of land as a subdivision to the Town of Normal under the
name and title of______________________________________ (name of subdivision), McLean
County, Illinois, per plat of ___________________________________(name of Registered
Land Surveyor) Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. _____ consisting of _____ (number of
lots in subdivision) lots and streets, dated ________________________ (date of final plat) and
the plan of which Plat has received preliminary approval by the Planning Commission of the
Town of Normal and the Board of Trustees, and which Plat will be finalized upon the Principal's
meeting the further requirements of the Land Subdivision Code of the Town of Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided, and for which a final plat
will be presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is described as follows, to-wit
(Legal Description of the property in the Subdivision)
EXHIBIT H
Page 2
WHEREAS said subdivider is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to provide
sanitary sewer and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm
water conduits, street signs, pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and
provide a complete and accurate set of as-built plans, all of which said work is to be done per
exact specifications and plans as provided by said ordinance and as heretofore established by the
Town of Normal; and
WHEREAS said subdivider's promise and guarantee that all construction on said
proposed improvements shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the
ordinances of the Town of Normal, and subject at all times to the inspection and approval of said
Obligee and its authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or before
________________________ (two years after the date of Council approval of the subdivision)
and upon further guarantee that all damage or liability is caused or results from the construction,
operation or repairs made by the said Principal to said streets, utility conduits, etc., pursuant to
the terms of said plans and specifications, will be repaired and the Obligee herein, its officers or
employees saved harmless from any and all claims whatsoever arising from the operations of the
Principal for and during the period from the acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and for one
year after the completion and acceptance by said Obligee of all matters and things required by
said ordinance and herein bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded
subdivider shall well and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters
and things in said plans and specifications, the resolution approving the subdivision, this bond or
the subdivision ordinance of the Town of Normal required and set forth and specified to be done
by said subdivider and performed by said subdivider at the time and in the manner in said
documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse and save the above-named
Obligee harmless from all loss and damages which said Obligee may sustain by reason of failure
or default on the part of said subdivider so to do, then this obligation shall be null and void;
otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
____________________________________
____________________________________
(Appropriate Notary's Certificate for the Principal)
(Legal Description of the property in the subdivision)
EXHIBIT H1
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
THE _____________________________________
(Name of financial institution)
DATE: ____________________
TO: The Town of Normal
We hereby authorize you to draw from our financial institution up to an aggregate
amount of _______________________ ($_____________________________) United States
Dollars (amount of security required) from the account of ____________________ (name of
developer) in connection with ______________________________ (name of the subdivision).
This Letter of Credit is available to you upon your presentation of a request for payment,
accompanied by a signed statement by the Engineer of the Town of Normal that ____________
______________________(name of developer) has failed to complete the required construction
of on- or off-site public improvements for the _____________________ Subdivision in
accordance with the Town's Subdivision Code and the Subdivider's Final Plat Public
Improvement Payment, Performance and Workmanship Bond dated the _______ day of
_____________, 20____.
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms of
this letter, if and when duly presented at this office in _______________________, Illinois, until
the expiration of one year after the approval and acceptance by the Town of all subdivision
improvements within said subdivision, or until such later date as any written claim by the Town
against the subdivider or his financial institution is finally resolved.
__________________________________
BY:
ATTEST: __________________________________
Its ________________________________
_____________________________________
Its ___________________________________
EXHIBIT I
ADJACENT SUBSTANDARD ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
SECURED BY CASH RESERVE
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: That ________________________, owner
and/or subdivider of the property hereinafter called the "Principal" is/are held and firmly bound
unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal Corporation hereinafter called the "Obligee" in the penal
sum of ______________________ (amount of cash reserve) lawful money of the United States,
for which _____ he _____ hereby binds _______________________________________
(himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made by their heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns jointly and severally.
SEALED and DATED this _____ day of ______________, 20____, at Normal, McLean
County, Illinois.
WHEREAS a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town
of Normal for the acceptance of a tract of land as a subdivision to the Town under the name and
title __________________________________________ (name of the subdivision) McLean
County, Illinois, per plat of ________________________ (name of Registered Lane Surveyor)
Registered Land Surveyor No._____, consisting of ________(number of lots in the subdivision)
lots and streets, dated _______________(date of the final plat) and the plan of which plat has
received preliminary approval by the Planning commission of the Town of Normal and the
Board of Trustees and which plat will be finalized upon the Principals meeting the further
requirements of the Land Subdivision Code of the Town of Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided and for which the final plat
will be presented and for which this guarantee is provided is as follows, to-wit:
WHEREAS said subdivider is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to contribute
one-half of the cost of improving any and all sub-standard roadway or roadways abutting or
bordering on said subdivision in accordance with SEC. 16.3-4 B; and
WHEREAS the __________________ Subdivision borders and abuts portions of the
following substandard roadways:
EXHIBIT I
Page 2
And
WHEREAS the undersigned promises and guarantees to make such a contribution upon
receipt of a Certificate of Completion signed by the Town Engineer of the Town of Normal
certifying that one or more of the above-listed adjacent substandard roadways of the Town of
Normal in accordance with Section 16.3-4 B; and
WHEREAS the undersigned has secured this obligation by posting
_______________________($ _______________) with the Town of Normal.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH that if the
undersigned contributes 1/2 the cost of improving any of such adjacent substandard roadways
which are improved in accordance with SEC. 16.3-4 B, this obligation shall be null and void.
Otherwise, the same shall remain in full force and effect.
In the event that one or more of such adjacent substandard roadways are improved to
meet or exceed all Town street standards and that improvement is completed in accordance with
SEC. 16.3-4 B, and I am notified at the address listed below in writing of that completion, and
fail to make the contribution described in this Guarantee and required by the Town's subdivision
ordinance within 60 days from the date of mailing, the Town may utilize all or such portion of
the reserve account established as security for this guarantee plus accumulated interest thereon
for the purpose of making the required contribution.
PRINCIPAL:
______________________________
______________________________
(Appropriate Notary's certificate for
the Principal)
Receipt of _____________________________________ ($___________________) as a
reserve for subdivider's adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee acknowledged
this _____day of ___________, 20______.
TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS,
BY:
____________________________________
Its _________________________________
EXHIBIT J
ADJACENT SUBSTANDARD ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
SECURED BY IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ______________________
__________ (owner and/or subdivider of the property) hereinafter called the Principal, is/are
held and firmly bound unto the Town of Normal, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called the
Obligee, in the penal sum of ______________________ (amount of bond) lawful money of the
United States, for which ____ he ____ hereby bind ___________________________________
(himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made by ____________________ (them) their
heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, by the following
presents.
Sealed and dated this ____ day of ___________, 20____ at Normal, McLean County,
Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the Board of Trustees of the Town
of Normal for acceptance of a tract of land as a subdivision to the Town of Normal under the
name and title of ______________________________ (name of subdivision), McLean County,
Illinois, per plat of __________________ (name of Registered Land Surveyor) Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor No. ______, consisting of _____________ (number of lots in
subdivision) lots and streets, dated ______________ (date of final plat) and the plan of which
Plat has received preliminary approval by the Planning Commission of the Town of Normal and
the Board of Trustees, and which Plat will be finalized upon the Principal's meeting the further
requirements of the Land Subdivision Code of the Town of Normal.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided, and for which a final plat
will be presented, and for which property this guarantee is given is described as follows, to-wit:
WHEREAS said subdivider is required by ordinance of the Town of Normal to contribute
one-half of the cost of improving any and all sub-standard roadway or roadways abutting or
bordering on said subdivision in accordance with SEC. 16.3-4 B; and
EXHIBIT J
Page 2
WHEREAS the ____________________ Subdivision borders and abuts portions of the
following substandard roadways:
And
WHEREAS the undersigned promises and guarantees to make such a contribution upon
receipt of a Certificate of Completion signed by the Town Engineer of the Town of Normal
certifying that one or more of the above listed adjacent substandard roadways has been improved
to meet or exceed the applicable street standards of the Town of Normal in accordance with
SEC. 16.3-4 B; and
WHEREAS the undersigned has secured this obligation by posting an irrevocable letter
of credit in accordance with SEC. 16.3-4 B.1 with the Town of Normal.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH that if the
undersigned contributed one-half the cost of improving any of such adjacent substandard
roadways which are improved in accordance with SEC. 1 6.3-4 B, this obligation shall be null
and void. Otherwise, the same shall remain in full force and effect.
In the event that one or more of such adjacent substandard roadways are improved to
meet or exceed all Town street standards and that improvement is completed in accordance with
SEC. 16.3-4 B, and I am notified at the address listed below in writing of that completion, and
fail to make the contribution described in this Guarantee and required by the Town's subdivision
ordinance within 60 days from the date of mailing, the Town may utilize all or such portion of
the letter of credit established at security for this guarantee plus accumulated interest thereon for
the purpose of making the required contribution.
PRINCIPAL:
________________________________
________________________________
(Appropriate Notary's Certificate
for the Principal)
EXHIBIT J1
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
The _______________________________________
(NAME OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION)
DATE: _______________________
TO: The Town of Normal
We hereby authorize you to draw from our financial institution up to an aggregate
amount of ________________ ($______________) United States Dollars (amount of security
required) from the account of ____________________________________ (name of the
subdivision).
This Letter of Credit is available to you upon your presentation of a request for payment,
accompanied by: a signed statement by the Engineer of the Town of Normal that
___________________ (name of the developer) has failed to complete the required construction
of the adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee for the _______________________
Subdivision in accordance with the Town's Subdivision Code and the Subdivider's Adjacent
Substandardized Roadway Improvement dated the _____ day of ____________, 20_____.
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms of
this letter, if and when duly presented at this office in ____________________, Illinois until the
expiration of one year after the approval and acceptance by the Town of all subdivision
improvements adjacent to said subdivision, or until such later date as any written claim by the
Town against the subdivider or his financial institution is finally resolved.
______________________________
BY:
______________________________
Its ___________________________
ATTEST:
____________________________________
Its __________________________________

SEC. 17.1-1
CHAPTER 17 - MISDEMEANORS
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 17.1-1 ATTEMPTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any
offense prohibited by any Ordinance of the Town of Normal or do any act toward it when such
person fails or is intercepted or prevented from execution of such act attempted where no express
provision is made by Ordinance for the punishment of such attempt otherwise. Upon conviction,
such person shall be deemed guilty to the same extent and punished to the same extent as if the act
had been completed.
SEC. 17.1-2 ACCESSORIES. It shall be unlawful for anyone to aid, advise, abet, assist or
encourage the commission of any act prohibited by any ordinance of the Town of Normal, or by any
means cause such act to be committed, whether present at the committing of such act or not. Upon
conviction such person shall be deemed guilty to the same extent and punished to the same extent as
a principal.
SEC. 17.1-3 PERSON. Whenever the term “person” appears in this Chapter, it shall mean
any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, unincorporated association, public or
private corporation, joint-stock company, trust, estate, or other legal entity.
SEC. 17.1-4 VICARIOUS LIABILITY. Every act or omission, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of
any person shall be deemed and held to be the act of such principal or employer, and said principal
or employer shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him personally, provided said act or omission was within the scope of employment or
the scope of authority of such officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee.
SEC. 17.1-5 SEVERABILITY. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of any
Section of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of
this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end,
the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
SEC. 17.2-1
DIVISION 2 – PROHIBITED CONDUCT – GENERAL
SEC. 17.2-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. A person commits disorderly conduct when he
knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to
provoke a breach of the peace; or
B. Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire
protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that
there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists; or
C. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm in the effect that a bomb or other
explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger
human life, knowing at the time for such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or
D. Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a
report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has
been committed; or
E. Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately
looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it; or
F. Urinates or defecates on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public
building or of any building where the public gathers or has access, or in any other
place, whether public or private, where such act could be observed by any member
of the public, except in such place that has been designated as a restroom; or
G. Starts a fight or engages in a fight in the Town of Normal. A fight means any
physical altercation between two or more individuals. Self-defense as allowed
pursuant to Illinois law shall be an affirmative defense to the charge.
H. Burns a cross with the intent to intimidate another person in the Town of Normal.
“Intimidate” means threaten death or bodily harm or place a person in reasonable
apprehension of death or bodily harm. A violation of this SEC. 17.2-1(H) shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 for each
occurrence.
I. Disturbs, Disrupts, or Interrupts any regular or special meeting of any Board,
Committee, or Commission of the Town of Normal. In addition to any penalty for
any violation of this Section, any person disturbing, disrupting, or interrupting any
meeting may be summarily ejected from the premises at the direction of the Chair of
the meeting. (Added 4/18/2011 by Ord. No. 5381)
SEC. 17.2-2
SEC. 17.2-2 GAMBLING. It shall be unlawful to commit "gambling" within the
corporate limits of the Town of Normal, Illinois. Gambling as used herein is defined in the same
manner the term is used and defined in the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.
SEC. 17.2-3 THROWING OR PLACING OBJECTS. It shall be unlawful to cast, throw
or propel any rock, bottle, water-balloon, or object on any street, alley or public place in a reckless
manner or with the intent to alarm or disturb another; and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit
any glass, nails, cans, excessive amounts of dirt, tacks, or other similar articles on any street,
sidewalk or alley in the Town.
SEC. 17.2-4 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, BB GUNS, AND PAINT-BALL GUNS.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air rifle in the Town. “Air rifle” means and
includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun, or any
implement that is not a firearm which impels a breakable paint ball or a pellet constructed of hard
plastic, steel, lead, or other hard materials. The Town of Normal Police may seize, take, remove, or
cause to be removed any air rifle or firearm used in any manner in violation of this Section.
Exceptions: The foregoing shall not apply to the discharge of a firearm or air rifle:
1. when lawfully hunting; or
2. when lawfully used in self-defense; or
3. when the discharge is by a police officer lawfully performing his duty; or
4. when an air rifle is discharged on private ground with the permission of the
owner or person in control of such property under circumstance when such
air rifle is fired, discharged, or operated in such a manner as not to endanger
persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent
the projectile from passing over any other real property or space outside the
limits of such property; or
5. when the discharge occurs at a permitted gun range.
(SEC. 17.2-4 Amended 6/17/13 by Ord. No. 5496)
SEC. 17.2-5 PUBLIC NUDITY. It is unlawful for any person over the age of eight (8)
years to appear in any public place or in any place exposed to public view in a state of nudity. A
state of nudity means exposing to public view male or female genitals, pubic hair, perinaeum, anal
region or pubic hair region or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
SEC. 17.2-6 CLIMBING TELEPHONE POLES. No person shall climb upon any
electric pole, telephone pole, electric light pole, sign pole, or water storage tower unless in the
performance of his duties.
SEC. 17.2-7 ASSAULT. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit an
assault on any other person. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
SEC. 17.2-8 BATTERY. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit a
battery upon any other person or persons. A person commits battery if he intentionally or
SEC. 17.2-8(Cont.1)
knowingly, without legal justification, and by any means (1) causes bodily harm to an individual or
(2) makes physical contact with an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
SEC. 17.2-9 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to do any of the following acts: (a) knowingly damage any property of
another without his consent; or (b) recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damage property of
another; or (c) knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or (d) knowingly
injure a domestic animal of another without his consent; or (e) knowingly deposit on the land or in
the building of another, without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive compound, and
thereby intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building. A sanction for a violation
of this Section can include restitution to the owner of the property.
SEC. 17.2-10 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the land, or any part thereof, of
another after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after
receiving notice from the owner, occupant, to depart. A person has received notice
from the owner or occupant, within the meaning of the foregoing paragraph, if he
has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to such land, or the forbidden part thereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the dwelling of another, including an
apartment, without the consent of a lawful occupant of the dwelling. This Section
does not apply to emergency personnel or Town of Normal Inspectors.
SEC. 17.2-11 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLE. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly and without authority enter into a vehicle.
SEC. 17.2-12 RESISTING OR DELAYING AN OFFICER. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully resist, hinder or delay an officer of the Town of Normal, or any other public
officer, in the discharge of his official act or duty, or who shall neglect or refuse to obey any lawful
order or direction of any such officer.
SEC. 17.2-13 ASSISTING A PRISONER TO ESCAPE. It shall be unlawful for any
person to aid or assist in the escape of any person from the custody of a Town officer, or from any
place of imprisonment, or to supply any such persons so being in custody or imprisoned with any
weapons or with any intoxicating liquor.
SEC. 17.2-14 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH SUBPOENAS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, unincorporated association, or
corporation to fail to comply with a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued by
any Board or Commission of the Town of Normal pursuant to any investigatory or
adjudicative function of that Board or Commission.
SEC. 17.2-14(Cont.1)
B. Penalty. Any person, partnership, incorporated association or corporation which
violates this Section shall be fined $200.00. Every day that such person, partnership,
incorporated association, or corporation continues to fail to comply with the terms of
the subpoena or subpoena duces tecum shall be considered a separate offense.
SEC. 17.2-15 OBSCURING CHALK MARKS USED FOR PARKING ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obscure or obliterate chalk marks drawn on motor
vehicle tires for parking enforcement purposes. This prohibition shall not apply when the method of
obscuring or obliterating chalk marks in by driving the motor vehicle.
SEC. 17.2-16 FIREWORKS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to knowingly
possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks
in the Town of Normal, other than in accordance with a public display permit issued
by the Town of Normal. The term fireworks as used herein shall mean and include
any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall
include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of
balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any
fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing
visual effects: provided, however, that the term “fireworks” shall not include snake
or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”,
“bobby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar
alarms”; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper
or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive
compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for sale,
expose for sale or sell any snake or glow worm pellets, smoke devices; trick
noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”,
“cigarette loads”, “auto burglar alarms”, sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths
grains or less of explosive compound in any place other than a building approved by
the Town of Normal Fire Department for the sale of fireworks as meeting all Town
of Normal and State of Illinois codes for structures containing fireworks.
SEC. 17.2-17 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly provide a police officer of the Town of Normal a false name, false date of
birth, or any other false information.
SEC. 17.2-18
SEC. 17.2-18 THEFT.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft.
1. A person commits theft when he obtains control over property of the owner
and:
a. intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property; or
b. knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
c. uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit. In addition to any other sanction
which may be imposed for this violation, a sanction for a violation of
this Section can include restitution to the owner of the property.
2. A violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $500 if the value of the item taken is less than $300, and
punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 if the value
of the merchandise taken is more than $300. In addition to any other
sanction which may be imposed for this violation, a sanction for a violation
of this Section can include restitution to the owner of the property.
SEC. 17.2-19 RETAIL THEFT.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit retail theft.
1. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
a. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention
of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use, or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
b. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of
value, or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed
to any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a
retail mercantile establishment, and attempts to purchase such
SEC. 17.2-19(Cont.1)
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
c. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
d. Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
e. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time
of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use, or benefit of such cart; or
f. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or
attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of
the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit, or other
property of the merchant; or
g. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using such device to
deprive the merchant permanently of the possession, use, or benefit
of any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of
such merchandise; or
h. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner
and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property when a lessee of the personal property of
another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the
full retail value of such property to the lessor in satisfaction of any
contractual provision requiring such, within 10 days after written
demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing, given
after the expiration of the leasing agreement by registered mail to the
lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown on the leasing
agreement shall constitute proper demand.
2. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this Section:
a. “Theft detection device remover” means any tool or device
SEC. 17.2-19(Cont.2)
specifically designed and intended to be used to remove any theft
detection device from any merchandise.
b. “Theft detection shielding device” means any laminated or coated
bag or device designed and intended to shield merchandise from
detection by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
c. “Under-ring” means to cause the cash register or other sales
recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the
merchandise.
d. “Shopping Cart” means those push carts of the type or types which
are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores, or other retail
mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting
commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores
to a place outside the store.
e. “Retail Mercantile Establishment” means any place where
merchandise is displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale to the
public.
f. “Premises of a Retail Mercantile Establishment” includes, but is not
limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas
in shopping centers, and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or
on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
g. “Merchant” means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile
establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer,
director, franchisee, or independent contractor of such owner or
operator.
h. “Merchandise” means any item of tangible personal property.
i. “Full Retail Value” means the merchant’s stated or advertised price
of the merchandise. To “conceal” merchandise means that, although
there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not
visible through ordinary observation.
3. Presumptions. If any person:
a. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings,
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment; and
SEC. 17.2-19(Cont.3)
b. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for
receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment, such person shall be presumed to have, possessed,
carried away, or transferred such merchandise with the intention of
retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise
without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
c. Leaves the retail mercantile establishment by use of a designated
emergency exit with merchandise without having paid the full retail
value of such merchandise.
4. A violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100
nor more that $500 if the value of the merchandise taken is less than $150,
and punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 if the
value of the merchandise taken is more than $150. In addition to any other
sanction which may be imposed for this violation, a sanction for a violation
of this Section can include restitution to the owner of the property.
SEC. 17.2-20 SKATEBOARDING. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or
otherwise operate a skateboard in any of the following places:
A. In Uptown Normal. Defined as that area south of Mulberry Street, east of Fell
Avenue, north of the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way, and west of Linden
Street, excepting therefrom, however, property used for Constitution Trail.
Skateboard. Any board or platform device having at least two axles with wheels on
each end of a style commonly occurring on roller skates, or any other similar device,
such device intended to be ridden by a person who propels himself or herself by
pushing the platform forward and then riding upon it as it coasts.
(SEC. 17.2-20 Added 9/21/09 by Ord. No.5294)
SEC. 17.2-21 BICYCLES IN UPTOWN. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a
bicycle on any sidewalk in Uptown Normal or within the traffic circle in Uptown Normal. Uptown
Normal is defined as that area south of Mulberry Street, east of Fell Avenue, north of the Union
Pacific Railroad right-of-way, and west of Linden Street, excepting therefrom, however, property
used for Constitution Trail. Ride a bicycle means to sit upon a bicycle and use human power to
propel the bicycle. The Traffic Circle in Uptown shall mean the circular pedestrian area at the
circular intersection of North Street with Constitution Trail Boulevard and Beaufort Street.
(SEC. 17.2-21 Added 7/19/2010 by Ord. No. 5345)
SEC. 17.3-1
DIVISION 3 – REGULATED SUBSTANCES
SEC. 17.3-1 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his or her possession in
other than the original package with the seal unbroken, any alcoholic liquor on any
public right-of-way, street, or sidewalk, or in any public place other than a liquor
establishment appropriately licensed under the provisions of Chapter 4 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended and in such
cases, only during the hours during which the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted.
No person shall possess alcoholic liquor, whether open or sealed, in any public park.
Exception: The possession of alcohol in a sealed, one-time use, tamper-proof bag,
meeting the requirements of 235 ILCS 5/6-33, shall not be a violation of this
Section. (Amended 11/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5460)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or accept a
gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession. A violation
of this SEC. 17.3-1(B) is punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00, nor more
than $1,000.00.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to consume alcoholic
liquor. A violation of this SEC. 17.3-1(C) is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200.00, nor more than $1,000.00.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to represent that he or
she is 21 years of age or over for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving
alcoholic liquor.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to present or offer to
any licensee, agent or employee any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age
and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own for the purpose
of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise procuring or
attempting to procure an alcoholic beverage. A violation of this SEC. 17.3-1(E) is
punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00, nor more than $1,000.00.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have in his or her
possession, any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age
and identity. A violation of this SEC. 17.3-1(F) is punishable by a fine of not less
than $200.00, nor more than $1,000.00.
G. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in
the performance of a religious ceremony or service. A violation of this SEC. 17.3-
1(G) is punishable by a fine of not less than $350.00, nor more than $3,000.00.
SEC. 17.3-1(Cont.1)
H. It shall be unlawful for any clerk or employee of a licensed liquor establishment to
give, deliver, or sell alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years.
I. No person shall sell any alcoholic liquor to any other person unless the seller has a
license to sell liquor in the Town of Normal. A violation of this Sec. 17.3-1(I) is
punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00, nor more than $3,000.00.
The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony or the consumption by a minor under the direct
supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not
prohibited by this ordinance.
SEC. 17.3-2 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA
PROHIBITED.
A. It is unlawful for any person to possess 10 grams or less of any substance containing
cannabis, except as authorized under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/) or other law.
B. It shall be unlawful to knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia, except as
authorized under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or
other law.
C. The term “cannabis” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 3 of the Cannabis
Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3).
D. The term “drug paraphernalia” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 2, of the
Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/2).
E. Any person who violates any provision of this Section is subject to a fine of not less
than $350 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
(Entire SEC. 17.3-2 Amended 8/16/2016 by Ord. No. 5653)
SEC. 17.3-3 SALE TO AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS;
SMOKING IN TOWN BUILDINGS.
A. Sale of Tobacco or Alternate Nicotine Products to Minors. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to sell, buy for, furnish, exchange, or give away any
tobacco product or alternative nicotine product to any person under the age of 21
years.
B. Possession of Tobacco by Minors. No minor under 18 years of age shall have in his
or her possession any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product. It shall not be
a violation of this section for any person under 18 years of age to possess any
tobacco product or alternative nicotine product while in the presence of his or her
parents or guardian, or in the performance of a religious ceremony, or while
SEC. 17.3-3(Cont.1)
participating in a theatrical performance, or, the incidental and temporary possession
of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products in the performance of retail clerk
duties for businesses registered with the Town of Normal.
C. Regulation of Smoking and Tobacco Chewing in Town Buildings. No person shall
smoke, use an electronic smoking device, or chew tobacco in Town buildings.
D. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words have the following
meanings:
1. Smoke. To light, emit, or exhale, the smoke of, a pipe, cigar, cigarette or any
other tobacco product.
2. Town Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind and which is permanently
affixed to the ground and which is owned by the Town of Normal.
3. Alternate Nicotine Product. Any product or device defined as an “alternate nicotine
product” under Section 1.5 of the Prevention of Tobacco Use by Minors and Sale
and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act (720 ILCS 675/1.5).
4. Electronic Smoking Device. Any electronically operated device that causes the user
to inhale or exhale any smoke, nicotine, vapor, or other substance other than those
produced by unenhanced human expiration of air from the lungs. "Electronic
smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marked, or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or any other similar device.
E. Penalty. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of a petty offense and for the
first offense shall be fined not to exceed $50.00, and for a second or any subsequent
offense shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined not to exceed $500.00.
(Entire SEC. 17.3-3 Amended 11/19/18 by Ord. No. 5757)
SEC. 17.3-4 SMOKING REGULATORY ACT.
A. Title. This Section shall be known as the Smoking Regulatory Act of 2006.
B. Interpretation with Other Laws. Nothing in this Division overrides any existing
elimination of smoking that is already covered by fire code restrictions.
C. Definitions. The following words and phrases whenever used in SEC. 17.3-4 shall
have the following meanings:
Adult Day Care Home. A private residence which receives for care one or more
aging or disabled adults, not related to the family.
Business. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.1)
liability company, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes,
including without limitation retail establishments where goods or services are sold as
well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered.
Child Day Care Home. A private residence which receives for care one or more
children under the age of 12, not related to the family.
Church. A facility or outdoor place of public assembly primarily and regularly used
for religious worship or religious instruction.
Employee. Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services
for a non-profit entity.
Employer. Any person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including
without limitation a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs
the services of one or more individual persons.
Enclosed Area. All space in any structure or building that is enclosed on all sides by
any combination of walls, half walls, windows, or doorways extending from floor to
the ceiling, regardless of whether they are open or closed.
Facility. Any enclosed structure or building intended for human occupancy.
Health Care Facility. Any office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or
psychological conditions, including without limitation hospitals, rehabilitation
hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories,
and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and
other specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting
rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms, and wards within health care
facilities.
Outdoor Place of Public Assembly. Any sports arena, recreational area, park, theater,
and similar place where members of the general public assemble and congregate in a
designated seating area in order to witness an event or performance open to the
public.
Place of Employment. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees frequent during the course of employment, including
without limitation work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not
a “place of employment” unless it is used as a child day care home, adult day care
home, health care facility, or home-based business of any kind open to the public.
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.2)
Private Club or Lodge. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and if
alcoholic beverages are sold such sale is incidental to its operation. The affairs and
management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The
organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax
as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501.
Public Place. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public
is permitted, including without limitation banks, any business, educational facilities,
government buildings, health care facilities, laundromats, museums, public
transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, bars/taverns, retail food
production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
service line, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, outdoor place of public
assembly, waiting rooms and common areas in multiple family residences. A
private residence is not a “public place” unless it is used as a child day care home,
adult day care home, health care facility, or home-based business of any kind open
to the public.
Retail Tobacco Store. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of its gross
revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes,
and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and
in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. “Retail tobacco store” does
not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or
any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
Service Line. Any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or
receiving services of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of
money.
Shopping Mall. Any enclosed walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or
professional establishments.
Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe,
hookah, weed, herbs, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
Sports Arena, Enclosed or Semi-Enclosed. Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice rink, bowling
alley, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to
participate in or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
D. Town Owned Facilities. Smoking or the use of electronic smoking devices, as
defined in Section 17.3-3, shall be prohibited in any Town facility and any Town
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.3)
vehicle, including without limitation facilities and vehicles owned, leased, or
operated by the Town of Normal. (SEC. 17.3-4(D) Amended 11/19/18 by Ord. No.
5757)
E. Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment. Smoking shall
be prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of employment within the
Town of Normal, except as provided in SEC. 17.3-4(H).
F. Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Place of Assembly. Smoking is prohibited at
any outdoor place of public assembly located within the Town of Normal.
G. Reasonable Distance. Smoking is prohibited within fifteen (15) feet of any public
entrance to an area in which smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
smoking is prohibited within twenty-five (25) feet of any entrance, outdoor air
intake, or operable window of a Town Owned Facility, including without limitation
facilities owned, leased, or operated by the Town of Normal. (Amended 07/02/18 by
Ord. No. 5742)
H. Where Smoking is Not Regulated. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Division to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of
SEC. 17.3-4(E) and SEC. 17.3-4(G).
1. Private residences, except when used as a licensed child day care home,
adult care home, health care facility, or a home-based business of any kind
open to the public.
2. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated
as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must
be contiguous, and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more
than 25% of the rooms rented to quests in a hotel or motel may be designated
as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or
nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms.
3. Retail tobacco stores in operation prior to January 1, 2008. The retail
tobacco store shall annually file with the Town Clerk by January 31st an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar
year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after January 1, 2008, may only qualify for an exception if located in a
freestanding structure occupied solely by the business, and smoke from the
business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.4)
4. Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where
smoking is permitted, and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the
nursing home.
5. Outdoor patios, to the extent permitted under the Smoke Free Illinois Act of
2007, as amended, from time to time.
6. Public sidewalk, roadway, park and golf course (unless such area becomes
an outdoor place of public assembly).
I. Declaration of Establishment as Non-Smoking. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Division, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control
of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment,
facility, or outdoor area as a non-smoking place by posting a sign in conformance
with the provisions of this Act. Smoking shall be prohibited in any area declared a
non-smoking area, and any person smoking in such area shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of this Act.
J. Non-Retaliation. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any
manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer
because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this
Division or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this Division.
K. Enforcement.
1. Notice of the provisions of this Division shall be given to all applicants for a
business license in the Town of Normal.
2. Any citizens who desires to register a complaint under this Division may file
a complaint with the Town of Normal.
3. The Town shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated
inspection, inspect for compliance with this Division.
4. An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by
this Division shall inform persons violating this Division of the appropriate
provisions thereof. Posting of a no smoking sign conforming with this
Division shall be considered adequate notice.
5. In addition to the remedies provided by this Division, the City Manager or
any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager or other
person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with
the provisions of this Section may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those
provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.5)
L. Posting of Signs. Every public place, place of employment, place established as
non-smoking pursuant to SEC. 17.3-4(I), and outdoor place of public assembly
where smoking is prohibited by this Division shall have posted at every public
entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. The
international “no smoking” symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a
burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar diagonally across it shall be
considered acceptable under this Section.
M. Violations and Penalties.
1. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this SEC.
17.3-4 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than
($100.00), nor more than ($500.00).
2. A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a place subject
to this Division and who fails to prohibit smoking shall be guilty of an
infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than ($100.00), nor more than
($2,500.00).
An owner, manager, operator, or person in control of a place subject to this
Division shall be deemed to have permitted a violation of the Division if a
violation has occurred while the owner, manager, operator, or person in
control is physically present at the location at the time of the violation. It
shall be a defense to this charge that the owner, manager, operator, or person
in control of the premises has told the smoking offender that smoking is
prohibited, and if the smoker does not stop smoking, the owner, manager,
operator, or person in control has called the police at the time of the violation
and reported the refusal to comply with the ordinance.
3. A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a place subject
to this Division and who fails to post a sign in conformance with the
provisions of this Division shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of not less than ($100.00), nor more than ($500.00).
4. Each day on which a violation of this Section occurs shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation.
N. Public Education. The Town of Normal shall engage in a continuing program to
explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this SEC. 17.3-4 to citizens
affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance
with it.
O. Other Applicable Laws. This SEC. 17.3-4 shall not be interpreted or be construed
to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
SEC. 17.3-4(Cont.6)
P. Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this SEC. 17.3-4 or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
of this SEC. 17.3-4 which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this SEC. 17.3-4 are declared to be
severable.
SEC. 17.4-1
DIVISION 4 – CHILDREN
SEC. 17.4-1 HARMFUL MATERIALS TO MINORS.
A. Definitions - For purposes of this Section:
1. Adult. An adult is a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
2. Harmful Material. The term "Harmful Material" means material which the
average person applying contemporary standards find its predominant
appeal, taken as a whole, is to prurient interest that is a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex, or excretion which goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters,
and is material the redeeming social importance of which is substantially less
than its prurient appeal. The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the
material shall be judged with reference to average minors of the same
general age of the minor to whom such material was sold, rented or
exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its sale, rental, or exhibition that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case, the predominant appeal of the material
shall be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
Where circumstances of sale, rental, or exhibition indicate the material is
being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such
evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the material and can
justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is
in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal. The following material is
presumed to contain harmful material but the presumption may be rebutted:
a. Material rated X by the Motion Picture Association of America; or
b. Material with any of the following designations: (1) X-rated or X
material; (2) XXX rated, or XXX material; (3) Adults only rated or
adults only material; (4) Not for sale to or not for viewing by minors;
(5) Any combination of the above designations;
3. Knowingly. Knowingly means having knowledge of the contents of the
subject matter or the age of the recipient of harmful material or recklessly
failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the
contents of the material, or failing to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining
the true age of the recipient of the material.
4. Material. The term material means any writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment.
5. Minor. A minor is a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
SEC. 17.4-1(Cont.1)
6. Peruse. The term peruse means to read, examine or view.
7. Promotional Material. The term “promotional material” means any and all
boxes, containers, brochures, leaflets, posters, wrappers, packaging or other
material visually depicting harmful material.
8. Visual depiction. The term visual depiction means a representation
consisting of pictures, photographs, drawings, slides, video, film or other
visual medium.
B. No person having custody, control, supervision of, or employed in any commercial
establishment open to minors shall knowingly sell, rent, or exhibit harmful material
to a minor.
C. A rebuttal presumption shall be made that harmful material has not been exhibited to
a minor if:
1. A separate adult display area is maintained for such material which area: (a)
is enclosed in such a manner that material in the area is not visible from
outside the area; and (b) a sign is posted at the point of ingress prohibiting
entry by minors, and further provided the material is not removed from the
area without an opaque cover or other system which prevents exhibition of
the material to a minor; or
2. The material is blocked from view by an opaque cover or other system
which prevents exhibition to a minor; or
3. The material is kept out of public view and available only upon request by an
adult.
D. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any minor employee of a commercial
establishment from handling a commercial transaction involving harmful material
provided no visual depiction of harmful material is visible to the minor and provided
the minor employee is not allowed to peruse harmful material.
E. Minor Falsifying Age. No minor shall falsify his or her age for the purpose of
procuring harmful materials. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who
falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of eighteen (18)
years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity
which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining,
viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful
material, shall be guilty of an offense under this Section.
F. No minor may rent from any person, purchase, or peruse harmful material. No
minor shall enter or be permitted by any person in a separate adult display area.
SEC. 17.4-1(Cont.2)
G. Penalty. Violation of any of the provisions of this SEC. 17.4-1 shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than ($100.00), nor more than ($500.00). A separate and
distinct offense is deemed committed each day such violation continues.
SEC. 17.4-2 CURFEW – PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
A. It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or upon any
public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times:
1. Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
2. Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday;
3. Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day.
B. It is a defense to a violation under this chapter if the child engaged is in the
prohibited conduct while:
1. Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of Illinois authorize a
person less than 17 years of age to perform.
2. Accompanied by the child’s parent, legal guardian, custodian, sibling,
stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age.
3. Accompanied by an adult at least 18 years of age approved by the child’s
parent, guardian, or custodian.
4. Participating in, going to, or returning from:
a. Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than
17 years of age to perform;
b. A school recreational activity;
c. A religious event;
d. An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from
an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
e. An activity involving the exercise of the child’s rights protected
under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, or both;
f. An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity that
SEC. 17.4-2(Cont.1)
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one (1) or more adult.
A citation for violation of subsection (A) of this section may be issued by a police
officer only if he reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and none of the
defenses enumerated in subsection (B) apply.
C. A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be fined not
less than $10.00, nor more than $500.00.
SEC. 17.4-3 TRUANCY PROHIBITED.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years enrolled in a public,
private, or parochial school within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, to absent himself or herself from attendance at school for any day or portion
thereof, during such period when school is in session, without parental permission or
valid excuse.
B. A valid cause for absence from school shall include illness, death in the immediate
family, other family emergency, or other causes beyond the control of the person so
absenting himself or herself from school, provided that parental permission for
absence due to such cause is obtained, in writing, from the parent and is submitted to
the proper school authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after such absence, not
counting weekends.
C. Parental permission, as required by this Section, shall refer to and include
permission obtained from a parent, legal guardian, other adult person standing in
loco parentis and having custody and control over such person under the age of 18
years.
D. Each day that such person under 18 years of age absents himself or herself from
school attendance shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as
such.
E. Persons violating this Section shall be fined not less than $5.00, nor more than
$500.00 for each offense.
SEC. 17.5-1
DIVISION 5 – NOISE REGULATIONS
SEC. 17.5-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division:
Residential area. Any area that is zoned as R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3A, R-3B, or R-
4 and any mobile home park authorized as a special use in an area that is zoned B-1.
Powered equipment. Any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, nail gun,
lawn mower, lawn or garden tool, leaf blower, or similar tool. “Powered equipment” does
not include snow-removal equipment or generators.
Sound amplifying device. Any device utilizing electric current that amplifies a musical
instrument, tuner, phonograph record, magnet tape, any electronically synthesized sound
or the human voice.
SEC. 17.5-2 SPECIFIC NOISE PROHIBITIONS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS. No
person may conduct any of the following activities in a residential area if the activity produces
clearly audible sound beyond the boundary line of the property or residential unit on which or in
which the activity is conducted:
1. The use or operation of power equipment used between the hours of 9:30pm and
7:00 am that produces clearly audible sound beyond the boundary line of the
property or residential unit on which or in which the activity is conducted;
2. The use or operation of any sound amplification device, so that the device
produces loud and raucous sounds beyond the boundary line of the property,
unless a permit has been obtained under SEC. 17.5-4;
3. The use or operation of any sound amplifying device so that the device produces
loud and raucous sounds within a multiple-family structure at any time during the
following hours:
a. Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 10:00 a.m. on
the following day;
b. Between 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Saturday; or
c. Between 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Sunday.
SEC. 17.5-3 SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES IN NON-RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
It is unlawful to use or operate a sound amplifying device on public property, including rights-ofway,
or on property other than a residential area in such a manner that the device produces loud
and raucous sounds at a distance greater than 50 feet from the device, unless a permit has been
obtained under SEC. 17.5-4.
SEC. 17.5-4
SEC. 17.5-4 PERMITS FOR SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES.
A. Anyone desiring to use or operate a sound amplification device beyond the limits
stated in item (2) of SEC. 17.5-2 or stated in SEC. 17.5-3 must make application
to the Chief of Police for a sound amplification permit. The application must state
whether live or recorded sound will be amplified, and if live, the names and
addresses of the performers must be provided.
B. The following terms apply for each permit:
1. The permit is in effect only from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time,
Sunday through Thursday and 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Friday and
Saturday.
2. The sound amplification device may not produce loud and raucous sounds
greater than 100 feet from the device.
3. The permit may not allow loud and raucous sounds within 50 feet of a
school or church during the hours they are in session or within 50 feet of a
hospital or nursing home.
C. The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue a permit to anyone who applies for
the same. The Police Chief or his designee may deny a permit for a location if a
violation of this Division 5 has occurred at that location within the past two years,
or the person or entity seeking the permit has violated any Section of this Division
5 within the past two years. The Police Chief may deny a permit if a permit for
this location or within 300 feet of this location has been issued within the past
three months, and the Police Chief reasonably believes that the issuance of the
permit would unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
D. Each permit is valid only during the time specified in the permit.
E. Each permittee must comply with all the provisions of this Division 5 and is
responsible for seeing that the sound amplifying device is used or operated in
accordance therewith.
SEC. 17.5-6 EXEMPTIONS.
A. The restrictions on the use and operation of power equipment in item (1) of SEC.
17.5-2 do not apply to any work or project for which a permit has been issued
under Chapter 11 by the Director of Inspections or to any work or project for
which a permit has been issued under Chapter 8 by the Director of Public Works
or the Town Engineer. But any such permit may, in the discretion of the Director
or Engineer, may limit the hours during which the use and operation of power
equipment may exceed the restrictions in SEC. 17.5-2.
SEC. 17.5-6(Cont.1)
B. The restrictions of this Division do not apply to any activity conducted by the
Town or any other unit of government or any of the government’s officials,
employees, or agents acting in their official capacity.
C. The restrictions of this Division do not apply to emergency vehicles or to warning
or anti-theft devices.
D. The restrictions of this Division do not apply to carillons.
(Division 5 Amended 11/7/2016 by Ord. No. 5663)
SEC. 17.6-1
DIVISION 6 – PUBLIC PROPERTY
SEC. 17.6-1 USE OF PARKS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to assemble or be present
upon the grounds of any public park of the Town of Normal between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day in any year; said time to be governed by the
applicable time in question, whether it be Central Standard Time or Daylight Saving
Time.
B. Use of Golf Course. It shall be unlawful for any person to golf, or cause golf balls to
land on the grounds of any golf course or driving range owned by the Town of
Normal unless such person has paid any appropriate fees or otherwise obtain
permission to be on the golf course of driving range.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hit any golf balls or to cause any golf balls to
be hit onto any Town parks or golf courses except golf courses or driving ranges
where such activities are permitted when the appropriate fee has been paid therefore.
D. Any person or persons found to be violating this provision shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00. Each day that any such
violation continues shall be considered as a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.
SEC. 17.6-2 PERMITTED HOURS FOR USE OF CONSTITUTION TRAIL. It shall
be unlawful for any person or group of persons to assemble or be present upon the grounds of the
Constitution Trail in the Town of Normal earlier than one hour before sunrise or later than one hour
after sunset.
SEC. 17.6-3 HORSES PROHIBITED ON CONSTITUTION TRAIL. It is unlawful
for any person to permit the presence of horses and/or ponies on Constitution Trail.
SEC. 17.6-4 NO CAMPING IN UPTOWN ROUNDABOUT AND GATEWAY
PLAZA. No person shall camp in the Uptown roundabout or in the Gateway Plaza.
As used herein, Uptown roundabout means that interior space bordered by the intersections
of Beaufort, North, and Constitution Boulevard in the form of a traffic circle or roundabout.
As used herein, Gateway Plaza means all that space located between the Town of Normal
Children’s Discovery Museum and Uptown Station, north of the Union Pacific Railroad right-ofway
and south of Beaufort Avenue in Uptown Normal.
As used herein, camping means the use of a space for living accommodation purposes such
as sleeping activities or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the
purpose of sleeping) or storing personal belongings or making any fire or using any tents or other
SEC. 17.6-4(Cont.1)
structure for sleeping or doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on cooking activities when
it reasonably appears in light of all of the circumstances that the participants in conducting any of
these activities are, in fact, using the space as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the
participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging.
(Entire Division 17.6-4 Added 3/5/2012 by Ord. No. 5430)
SEC. 17.6-5 UPTOWN STATION CODE OF CONDUCT.
A. As used herein, Uptown Station means the building and parking deck occupying the
common address of 11 Uptown Circle, Normal, Illinois. It shall be unlawful for any
person while in Uptown Station to commit any of the following acts:
1. Interfere with the lawful operation or movement of any vehicle;
2. Ride a skateboard or rollerblade;
3. Bring a bicycle into the facility, except to bring the bicycle directly from the
street to the designated bike rack, or to check such bicycle for transport;
4. Illegally possess a weapon;
5. Smoke tobacco or any other substance, except in compliance with state and
local law;
6. Spit, urinate, or defecate, except in the designated restroom facility
equipment;
7. Discard or deposit any rubbish, trash, offensive substance, or debris in a
place other than a designated refuse receptacle;
8. Utilize a sound amplification device or musical instruments so as to alarm or
disturb facility operations or any other person;
9. Sell any item or engage in any commercial activity, except as provided by
license or lease issued by the Town, specifically identifying Uptown Station
as a permitted use;
10. Beg, panhandle, or solicit donations from members of the public;
11. Consume alcohol, except in lawfully license liquor establishments;
12. Activate any emergency alarm device, except in cases of actual emergency;
13. Mutilate, deface, mark, mar, or destroy any sign, notice, or advertisement
lawfully placed on or at the facility;
SEC. 17.6-5(Cont.1)
14. Sleep or place feet or shoes on seats located at the facility;
15. Place or cause to be placed any sign, notice, or advertising in or on any part
of the facility without the permission of the Town of Normal;
16. Refuse to leave the facility when asked to do so by authorized personnel or
police;
17. Engage in any activity which disrupts or hinders the use of the facility or
disturbs or alarms any other person in the facility. Loud or boisterous
activity, verbal or physical harassment, running, fighting, yelling, cursing, or
congregating in large groups may be among the activities which may disrupt
or hinder the use of the facility or disturb or alarm other persons in the
facility;
18. Engage in any illegal activity;
19. Bring animals into the facility without the permission of authorized facility
personnel (except for animals used to aid persons with disabilities and except
for authorized animal transport purposes);
20. Occupy space with personal property for an excessive length of time or
occupy an excessive amount of space, all as determined by authorized
facility personnel;
21. Be present in the facility wearing inappropriate clothing or in a condition of
poor personal hygiene so as to alarm or disturb other persons in the facility;
22. Access building areas above the first floor, except for the purpose of
conducting authorized business in such areas; or
23. Perform any act that unreasonably alarms or disturbs other patrons of the
facility or unreasonably interferes with the lawful use or operations of the
facility and its occupants.
B. Additionally, authorized facility personnel may issue a ban notice in writing to any
person who has violated any of the foregoing rules or any other law, the effect of
which is to exclude such person from Uptown Station. Violation of any lawfully
issued ban order shall be considered a trespass and subject such person to immediate
arrest.
C. Ban Appeal Process. Any person issued a ban order by authorized facility
personnel may within three city business days appeal such order in writing to the
City Manager or designee for a review of the facts surrounding issuance of the order.
The City Manager or designee shall hold an informal hearing at which hearing the
City Manager or designee may receive evidence relevant to the ban order and
SEC. 17.6-5(Cont.2)
appeal. The City Manager or designee has authority to uphold, modify, or rescind
the ban.
(Entire Division 17.6-5 Added 5/21/2012 by Ord. No. 5441)
SEC. 17.6-6 EXCLUSION FROM PARKS.
A. In addition to other remedies provided for violations of this Code, or of any of the
laws of the State of Illinois, the Director of Parks and Recreation, the Police Chief
and any of their designees (herein Town employee) may exclude any person from
any park property when such person engages in conduct that is disruptive to the
normal and customary use of the park. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other
rights protected by the state or federal constitutions. However, a person engaged in
such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected, but are disruptive to
the normal and customary use of the park, shall be subject to exclusion as provided
by this Section. As used herein, park property means any Town property managed
or used by the Parks and Recreation Department for recreational purposes.
B. Any person who enters onto, or remains on park property during an effective
exclusion is guilty of trespass and may be arrested and prosecuted under appropriate
law or ordinance.
C. The duration of exclusion is in discretion of the Town employee issuing the
exclusion, but shall not exceed a period of one (1) year.
D. Conduct considered disruptive to the normal and customary use of the park includes,
but is not limited to, any violation of law, attempted violation of law, fighting,
establishing control over identifiable areas to unreasonably intimidate others from
entering those areas, concealing illegal activities, theft, damage to property, illegal
possession of drugs, illegal possession of weapons, use of profane language causing
a breach of the peace, sale of unauthorized merchandise, failure to follow the
authorized direction of any Parks and Recreation employee, gang-related activities,
and conduct injurious to, or adversely affecting the safety of any person. As used
herein, gang related activity means those activities identified in Illinois law as “street
gang-related” or “gang-related.” As used herein, gang includes criminal street gangs
as defined by Illinois law and any group of persons identified by the Normal Police
Chief as affiliated, associated or peripheral to a criminal street gang.
E. The excluded person need not be charged, tried, or convicted of any crime or be
issued an ordinance violation in order for an exclusion order to be effective. The
exclusion may be based upon observation by any Town employee or upon civilian
reports that would ordinarily be relied upon by a reasonable person.
F. The exclusion order shall be communicated to the excluded person. The authorized
Town employee shall specify the date, length and place of exclusion, a brief
SEC. 17.6-6(Cont.1)
description of the disruptive conduct, consequences for failure to comply with the
exclusion order and the method for appealing such exclusion order.
G. The excluded person may, within three (3) Town business days, appeal the exclusion
order to a supervisor of the issuing Town employee. The exclusion order shall
remain in effect during such appeal. The supervisor shall hold an informal hearing
at which the supervisor may receive evidence relevant to the exclusion and appeal.
The supervisor has authority to uphold, modify, or rescind the exclusion.
H. The decision of the supervisor of the issuing Town employee is final. Any person
may seek judicial review of the supervisor’s decision pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Act.
I. The exclusion order shall remain in effect during the pendency of any administrative
or judicial proceeding.
(Entire Division 17.6-6 Added 7/1/2013 by Ord. No. 5500)
SEC. 17.7-1
DIVISION 7 – PROPERTY
SEC. 17.7-1 OPEN BURNING AND COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.
A. It shall be unlawful to store or permit to be stored any combustible refuse in such a
way as to create a fire hazard or to store or throw any refuse of any kind on any
street, alley or other public place. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
set to fire, to burn, or to cause to be burned, any rubbish, leaves, grass, weeds, or
other matter within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, except as provided
in SEC. 17.7-1(B) and 17.7-1(C).
B. A permit is required for all fires conducted outside of a building, except cooking and
recreational fires, which are allowed without a permit under the following
conditions:
1. Cooking fires are allowed under the following conditions:
a. The fire is built in a fireplace or grill;
b. The fire is used for cooking purposes only;
c. The fire is kept under competent and continuous supervision;
d. All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel for the fire
is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so as not to constitute a
hazard;
e. All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use thereof
has been completed; and
f. Only clean, dry firewood or charcoal may be used for cooking fires.
Construction materials or yard waste are strictly prohibited. The use
of flammable or combustible liquids, other than commercially
produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
2. Recreational fires are allowed under the following conditions:
a. The fire is in a commercially available portable fireplace, a chiminea,
a permanent outdoor fireplace constructed of stone or firebrick, or in
an approved fire pit. For purposes of this Section, an approved fire
pit shall be bare ground with no vegetation no less than fifteen feet in
diameter.
b. Only clean, dry firewood may be used for recreational fires.
Construction materials or yard waste is strictly prohibited. The use
SEC. 17.7-1(Cont.1)
of flammable or combustible liquids, other than commercially
produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
c. The fire is kept under competent and continuous supervision.
d. All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel for the fire
is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so as not to constitute a
hazard.
e. All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use thereof
has been completed.
f. No fire shall exceed three feet in diameter or two feet in height.
g. No fire in an approved container (portable fireplace or chiminea)
shall be located within 8 feet of a building. No fire in a fire pit shall
be located within 25 feet of a building.
h. At least one functioning, portable fire extinguisher with a 4-A rating
shall be outside and available for immediate use at all times when the
fire is burning or a functional garden hose attached to a functional
water source.
i. No recreational fires are permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
j. No recreational fire shall be permitted when the Fire Chief or his
designee has issued an order banning all recreational fires. The Fire
Chief may issue an order banning all recreational or special event
fires when wind conditions or drought create a significant risk of fire
spreading beyond the recreational or special event fire.
k. All recreational fires shall be extinguished when repeated wind gusts
in excess of 20 miles per hour are presented or when there is
sustained wind in excess of 15 miles per hour.
C. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to have an open fire, except cooking and
recreational fires as set forth in SEC. 6.4-17(A)(2) of this Code, or to engage in the
following activities in the Town of Normal, unless a permit has been obtained prior
to the open fire or engaging in the listed activity:
1. Special Event Fires. A person or entity may have an open special event fire
if the following conditions are met:
a. A special event fire permit has been obtained from the Town of
Normal Fire Department.
SEC. 17.7-1(Cont.1)
b. The group or person obtaining the permit provides competent and
continuous supervision.
c. The fire is built in connection with an activity comparable to one of
the following illustrative examples: school pep rally bonfire;
scouting and related activities; group wiener roasts; or campfires.
d. The fire is in a fire pit which shall consist of bare ground with no
vegetation no less than 30 feet in diameter.
e. Only clean, dry firewood or non-treated lumber may be used for
special event fires. The use of flammable or combustible liquids,
other than commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the
fire is strictly prohibited. No special event fire shall exceed ten feet
in diameter or ten feet in height.
f. All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel for the fire
is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so as not to constitute a
hazard.
g. All fires and coals are thoroughly extinguished after the use thereof
has been completed.
h. No special event fire shall be located within 50 feet of a building.
i. At least one functioning, portable fire extinguisher with a 4-A rating
shall be outside and available for immediate use at all times when the
fire is burning or a functional garden hose attached to a functional
water source.
j. No special event fires are permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
k. No special event fire shall be permitted when the Fire Chief or his
designee has issued an order banning all special event fires. The Fire
Chief may issue an order banning all special event fires when wind
conditions or drought create a significant risk of fire spreading
beyond the special event fire.
l. All special event fires shall be extinguished when repeated wind
gusts in excess of 20 miles per hour are presented or when there is
sustained wind in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(Entire SEC. 17.7-1 Amended 7/18/2011 by Ord. No. 5391)
SEC. 17.7-2
SEC. 17.7-2 POSTING BILLS. It shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on
any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. No person shall post, paint, print or
nail any bill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice or advertising matter of any kind on any
curbstone, public waiting room or building, or on any sidewalk, tree, lamp post, telegraph,
telephone or electrical pole or upon any private wall, door, gate, fence or building without the
consent of the owner. Each day such sign shall remain after notice to remove same has been given
shall constitute a separate offense.
SEC. 17.7-3 OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS. It shall be unlawful to
obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building,
factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used
by two or more tenants or families, in such a manner as to interfere with the free use of such
stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
SEC. 17.7-4 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS. It shall be unlawful to permit any
unused or abandoned refrigerator, ice box, deep freeze or other freezer to remain in any place which
is accessible to any child, without first removing the doors to such ice box, refrigerator or freezer.
SEC. 17.7-5 OUTDOOR STORAGE OF UNLICENSED NON-OPERATING
VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. It shall be a unlawful for any person owning, leasing,
occupying, or having charge of any premises within the Town to allow an inoperable or unlicensed
motor vehicle to remain on the premises, unless such vehicle is in an enclosed building, or unless
said premises has as its principal use the maintenance, repair, sale, storage or manufacture of
vehicles.
An inoperable vehicle is any vehicle which is incapable of being operated on a public
highway or which has not operated on the highway for a period of eight (8) weeks whether the
vehicle is operable or not.
An unlicensed vehicle is any vehicle which does not display a valid license plate or valid
license applied for sticker.
SEC. 17.7-6 LITTER.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Section shall mean:
1. Litter. Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. “Litter” may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal,
plastic or paper containers of other packaging construction material, motor
vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or
offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any person or create
a traffic hazard, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which
has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly;
SEC. 17.7-6(Cont.1)
2. Motor vehicle has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 1-146 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code; and
3. Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other legal
entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
B. Dumping, Deposit, etc. of Litter Prohibited – Exemptions. No person shall dump,
deposit, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping,
throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or private property, within
the Corporate Limits of the Town, or upon or into any river, lake, pond, or other
stream or other body of water within the Corporate Limits of the Town, unless:
1. The property has been designated by the Town for the disposal of litter, and
the litter is disposed of on that property in accordance with the applicable
rules and regulations of the Pollution Control Board;
2. The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container by the owner or tenant
in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of litter;
3. The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property or has
first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or the
act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and in
addition, under the ordinances of the Town of Normal, does not create a
public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a fire hazard;
4. The person is acting, under the direction of proper public officials during
special clean-up days; or
5. The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation where
health and safety is threatened and removes and properly disposes of such
litter when the emergency situation no longer exists.
C. Dumping, Deposit, etc., from Motor Vehicle Prohibited – Deposit of Garbage or
Refuse in Receptacles Along Public Streets. No person shall dump, deposit, drop,
throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public
street, upon any public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond,
stream or body of water within the Corporate Limits of the Town except as
permitted in subsection B of this Section. Nor shall any person transport by any
means, garbage or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business or other
site to and deposit such material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public streets or at any Town park or other Town property.
D. Presumption of Violation by Operator – Throwing, Deposit, etc., of Litter from
Motor Vehicle. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any
motor vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
SEC.17.7-6(Cont.2)
operator of that motor vehicle has violated subsection C, but that presumption may
be rebutted.
E. Accumulation of Litter Prohibited. No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon
real property, of which the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a
manner as to constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be
blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of another
person.
F. Violations - Penalty. Persons who violate subsections B, C or E are subject to the
penalties set out in this subsection.
1. Any person convicted of a violation of subsections B, C or E is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined for the first conviction not less than $10.00
nor more than $50.00; for the second conviction, not less than $25.00 nor
more than $100.00; and for a third or subsequent conviction, not less than
$50.00 nor more than $500.00.
2. In addition to any fine imposed under this subsection, the court may order
that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose of
the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal and
disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the
person so convicted.
3. The penalties prescribed in this subsection are in addition to, and not in lieu
of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities otherwise imposed or
conferred by law.
G. Effect of Invalid Provision or Application—Severability. If any provision of this
Section or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, such validity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Section
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this
end the provisions of this Section are declared to be severable.
SEC. 17.7-7 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED. – It shall be unlawful for any person to place
graffiti as hereafter defined upon any publicly or privately-owned wall or other exposed surface
within the Town of Normal. Graffiti shall mean any drawing, inscription, writing, figure, or mark
made upon a wall or other exposed surface including but not limited to any house, garage, rock,
bridge, fence, gate, tree, monument, motor vehicle, sidewalk, street, lamppost, street sign,
underpass, or retaining wall, whether publicly or privately owned with paint, chalk, dye, ink, pencil,
wax, or other substance or by etching, scratching, cutting, burning, or carving without the express
consent of the owner of said wall or other exposed surface.
Each wall or exposed surface marked by graffiti shall constitute a separate offense.
SEC. 17.8-1
DIVISION 8 – ANIMALS
SEC. 17.8-1 CRUELTY. No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the Town in any way.
Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Division.
SEC. 17.8-2 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
A. Definition. A dangerous animal includes any of the following animals, including
hybrids thereof: lion, tiger, leopard, elephant, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay,
mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, civet, serval, hyena, bear, wolf, or coyote,
or any poisonous or life-threatening reptile. A life-threatening reptile is any
member of the crocodilian family or any constricting snake six feet or over in length,
such as a boa, python, and anaconda.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dangerous animal in the Town of
Normal.
C. It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to
run at large within the Town.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit a dangerous animal without first
receiving and displaying a license from the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture for warm-blooded animals
on display, animals that perform in public, or animals used in educational
presentations. Exhibitors must provide during public exhibition reasonable and
sufficient distance or barriers between the animals and the public. When there is a
possibility of animals coming in direct contact with the public, a knowledgeable and
responsible attendant must be present, and there must be sufficient distance
maintained, as well as physical and behavioral barriers. It shall be unlawful for any
person exhibiting a dangerous animal to knowingly permit a member of the public to
come in contact with a dangerous animal.
SEC. 17.8-2.5 PRIMATES.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section:
1. Dangerous Animal Statute. Section 48-10 of the Criminal Code of 2012.
2. Primate. A nonhuman member of the order of primate, including, without
limitation chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, bonobo, gibbon, monkey, lemur,
loris, aye-aye, and tarsier.
SEC. 17.8-2.5(Cont.1)
3. Permitted facility. A properly maintained zoological park, federal licensed
exhibit, circus, college or university, scientific institution, research
laboratory, or veterinary hospital.
B. Keeping Primates Prohibited. No person may have a right of property in, keep,
harbor, care for, act as custodian of, or maintain in his or her possession any primate
except in an escape-proof enclosure at a permitted facility. The restrictions of this
subsection B do not prohibit a person who had lawful possession of a primate before
January 1, 2011 from continuing to possess that primate if the person registers the
primate in accordance with the requirements of Subsection D of this Section.
C. Primates in Public Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to bring a primate into a
public place except for transport to and from a permitted facility. It is unlawful for a
person to allow any member of the public to come in contact with a primate.
D. Registration Requirements. The requirements of this Subsection D do not apply to
any Federal or State Agency. In addition to any notification requirements under the
Dangerous Animal Statute, each person who has lawful possession of a primate
under this Section is required to register the primate by providing written
notification to the Chief of Police. The registration must be made on or before
January 1, 2015 and annually thereafter. The registration must include (i) the
person’s name, address, and a telephone number and (ii) the type of primate, the age,
a photograph, a description of any tattoo, microchip, or other identifying
information, and a list of current inoculations. A person registering a primate must
notify the Chief of Police in writing within 30 days of a change of address and must
notify the Chief of Police in writing immediately if the primate dies, escapes, or
bites, scratches, or injures a person.
(Sec. 17.8-2.5 Added 10/6/2014 by Ord. No. 5559)
SEC. 17.8-3 NOISES. It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the
peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
SEC. 17.8-4 STRAYS. It shall be unlawful to permit any dog, cat, cattle, horse, swine,
sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the Town. Any such animal running at large in any public
place in the Town shall be impounded in the manner provided in the following article. It shall
further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the Town for the purpose
of grazing or feeding.
SEC. 17.8-5 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS. The members of the Police
Department or any other person authorized by the Town are hereby authorized to kill any dangerous
animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.
SEC. 17.8-6 DISEASED ANIMALS. No domestic animal afflicted with any contagious
disease or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or
removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except as provided by State law.
SEC. 17.8-7
SEC. 17.8-7 HOUSING. No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where an
animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep,
propagate or culture any live swine or pigs, pigeons, poultry, or any form of livestock in the Town,
except horses and donkeys may be kept on property zoned A-Agriculture District. (Amended
6/20/2011 by Ord. No. 5387)
SEC. 17.8-8 PARKS. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, walk, lead, or allow any
horse or pony within the confines of any recreation park of the Town of Normal, including but not
limiting thereto, Constitution Trail.
SEC. 17.8-9 DISRUPTION OF GARBAGE. It shall be unlawful for any animal to tear
up, break into, or disrupt any container which holds garbage, trash, or debris. The owner of every
animal shall be responsible for the behavior of his/her animal under the provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 17.8-10 RABIES, INOCULATION, AND TAG.
A. Inoculation Against Rabies. It shall be the duty of every owner who keeps, harbors,
or otherwise maintains a dog or cat more than four months of age in the Town to
have the same inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Dogs must have
a valid rabies certificate according to the laws of the State of Illinois. For dogs, the
type and brand of the anti-rabid vaccine used, and the method of inoculation shall be
in accordance with and evidenced by a rabies tag specified by the applicable laws of
the State of Illinois. Any dog or cat which is not inoculated against rabies as
required herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and such dog or cat may
be apprehended and impounded. All dogs must be registered with McLean County
Animal Control and must display such registration on the dog by means of the rabies
tag. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog more than four months of
age in the Town of Normal for more than thirty days which is not registered with
McLean County. Any dog found in the Town of Normal which is not registered or
does not display said registration tags may be immediately impounded by a police
officer or animal control warden. Such animal may be released to the owner upon
proof of rabies vaccination (or deposit for such vaccine), registration, and payment
of all applicable fees.
B. Collar and Tag. Every owner shall provide each dog more than four months of age
kept, harbored, or otherwise maintained by him in the Town with a sturdy collar to
which the aforesaid rabies tag shall be securely fastened, and it shall be the owner's
duty to make certain that the collar and tag are worn at all times by the dog when off
the owner's premises.
C. Unauthorized Removal of Tag. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
police official, animal warden, or other person charged with the enforcement of this
Division, to remove a rabies tag from any dog without the owner's or his agent's
consent.
SEC. 17.8-11
SEC. 17.8-11 RUNNING AT LARGE.
A. Running At Large. Off the premises of the owner and not under physical restraint by
means of a leash, cord, or chain, or confined by means of a secure enclosure. It shall
be unlawful to permit to run at large any dog or cat on the streets, parks, or public
ways of the Town, or on private property where the owner or person in control of the
private property has not granted permission for the dog or cat to be on the private
property. If any dog or cat shall be found running at large upon public property or
upon the private premises of any person other than the owner or keeper of such dog
or cat, the owner or keeper of such dog or cat shall be deemed guilty of violation of
this Section. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs leading blind
persons, or to dogs or cats exhibited at dog, cat, or pet shows or dog training schools,
or dogs belonging to a law enforcement agency being used for law enforcement
purposes. A violation of this section shall be considered an absolute liability
offense.
B. Impoundment. Any dog or cat which runs at large is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and such dog or cat may be apprehended and impounded if found running
at large by any police officer, animal warden, or other person authorized by the
Town.
SEC. 17.8-12 DANGEROUS DOGS.
A. Definitions.
1. Dangerous dog means
a. any dog which, when unmuzzled, in an aggressive or terrorizing
manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack on
any street, sidewalk or public property or private property other than
the property of the owner of the dog; or
b. any dog which bites a person or other animal whether on public or
private property but does not cause injury; or
c. any dog which has been declared a “dangerous dog” by any other
jurisdiction.
2. Vicious dog means
a. any dog that bites or attacks a human being or other animal on public
or private property causing injury to a person or other animal; or
b. any dog that has been found to be a “dangerous dog” on three
separate occasions in this or other jurisdictions; or
SEC. 17.8-12(Cont.1)
c. any dog that has been found to be a “vicious dog” by any other
jurisdiction.
3. Dog subject to euthanasia means
a. any dog which has killed any person, dog, or cat; or
b. any dog which has rabies; or
c. any dog previously declared a “vicious dog” and bites a person or
animal causing injury to that person or animal;
d. any dog previously declared a “vicious dog” and, when unmuzzled,
in an aggressive or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an
apparent attitude of attack on any street, sidewalk or public property
or private property other than the property of the owner of the dog; or
e. any dog previously declared a “vicious dog” and was subsequently
“running-at-large”; or
f. any dog previously declared a “vicious dog” which is not kept in the
manner required of keepers of “vicious dogs.”
4. Injury. Any wound requiring medical or veterinary treatment.
5. Exceptions.
a. No dog shall be declared “dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to
euthanasia” if it is a trained law enforcement dog performing in the
line of duty for a law enforcement agency.
b. No dog shall be deemed “vicious” if it bites a trespasser on the
property of its owner or bites anyone who has tormented or abused it.
c. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, dogs may be euthanized at
the request of the owner, for humane treatment purposes, or if
unclaimed at an animal shelter or veterinary clinic.
B. Procedures for declaring a dog “dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to euthanasia”.
1. Any person may file a complaint in writing with the Police Department
seeking to have a dog declared “dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to
euthanasia.” The Police Chief or his designee shall review the report, and if
he finds that the criteria for declaring a dog “dangerous,” “vicious,” or
“subject to euthanasia” have been met, shall declare the dog “dangerous,”
“vicious,” or “subject to the euthanasia” and set a hearing on the declaration.
SEC. 17.8-12(Cont.2)
The Police Chief shall immediately notify the owner of the dog of the
declaration. Such notice shall include the basis for the declaration, the
declaration, the restrictions placed on keeping the animal, notice of the
hearing date, time and place, and the rights of the owner at the hearing.
2. An owner of a dog declared “dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to
euthanasia” has a right to present evidence at the hearing in front of the
Police Chief or his designee and to question any persons presenting evidence
in support of the declaration. The hearing must take place within seven days
of the declaration of “vicious,” “dangerous,” or “subject to euthanasia” if the
dog is impounded. If the dog is not impounded, the hearing shall be held in
an expeditious manner, no later than thirty days from the declaration.
3. At any hearing, the person bringing the complaint shall have the burden of
proving the complaint by a preponderance of the evidence, except that any
finding that a dog is subject to euthanasia shall be by clear and convincing
evidence. The hearing shall be informal, and the strict rules of evidence
shall not apply. Hearsay shall be permitted. An owner of a dog shall be
permitted to ask questions of the witnesses and to bring evidence in
opposition to the complaint.
4. The Police Chief shall keep a record of the outcome of all hearings and the
name, registration number, owner’s name and address of all dogs declared
“dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to euthanasia.”
C. Disposition and keeping of dogs declared “dangerous,” “vicious,” or “subject to
euthanasia”.
1. Dogs declared dangerous. Any dog declared dangerous shall be kept in a
building or fenced enclosure from which the dog cannot escape at all times.
At all other times, when outside and not in a fenced enclosure, a dangerous
dog must be on a leash not exceeding six feet in length firmly attached to the
dog and held by a person strong enough to restrain the dog at all times.
When outdoors, the dog shall display a dangerous dog tag issued by McLean
County Animal Control firmly affixed on the dog’s collar. It shall be
unlawful to keep a dangerous dog in a manner other than as set forth in this
subsection. The owner or keeper of a dog declared dangerous shall obtain a
dangerous dog tag within 14 days of the declaration that the dog is
dangerous. Each day upon which the owner or keeper of a dog declared
dangerous fails to obtain the dangerous dog tag shall be considered a
separate violation of this ordinance. (Amended 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5366)
2. Dogs declared vicious. Any dog declared vicious shall be kept in a building
or fenced enclosure from which the dog cannot escape at all times. An
owner or keeper of a vicious dog must have a secure fenced enclosure in
which to exercise the dog. The dog shall be muzzled at all times when
SEC. 17.8-12(Cont.3)
outside a building, including when inside a fenced enclosure. When in a
secure fenced enclosure, the vicious dog must be in constant supervision by
a person. To be “muzzled” means to have a device securely fastened over
the mouth of the dog such that it cannot bite any person or other animal. A
vicious dog shall not be permitted outside except in a secure fenced
enclosure and except for the limited purpose of obtaining veterinary care or
to respond to an order of a court. When outside not in a secure, fenced
enclosure, the vicious dog must be muzzled and on a leash not exceeding six
feet in length firmly attached to the dog and held by a person strong enough
to restrain the dog at all times. When outside, whether in an enclosure or
not, the vicious dog must display a vicious dog tag issued by McLean
County Animal Control firmly affixed to its collar at all times. When inside
a building, a vicious dog must be kept inside the dwelling unit of the keeper
of the dog and is not allowed in any common areas of the building. All
vicious dogs must be spayed or neutered within 14 days of the declaration
that they are vicious. It shall be unlawful to keep a vicious dog in a manner
other than as set forth in this subsection. The owner or keeper of a vicious
dog must provide to the Police Chief a letter or other proof signed by a
licensed veterinarian that the vicious dog has been spayed or neutered or that
the dog has died within 14 days of the declaration that the dog is vicious.
The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall obtain a vicious dog tag within
14 days of the declaration that the dog is vicious. Each day upon which the
owner or keeper of a vicious dog fails to obtain the vicious dog tag or to
provide the notice of spaying, neutering, or death shall be considered a
separate violation of this ordinance. (Amended 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5366)
3. Dogs subject to euthanasia. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog
declared “subject to euthanasia” by the Police Chief or his designee to
immediately take the dog to an impound facility or veterinarian who shall
hold such animal for euthanasia pending the hearing before the Police Chief
or his designee. The animal shall be euthanized in a humane manner no
sooner than two days after the hearing on the determination of the Police
Chief that the dog is subject to euthanasia, unless the owner consents to an
earlier time. It shall be unlawful for an owner to remove a dog declared
subject to euthanasia from the jurisdiction or to refuse to have the dog
euthanized immediately. In the event that an owner does not deliver a dog
subject to euthanasia to an impound facility or veterinarian, the Town may
seek a warrant from the Circuit Court of McLean County for the immediate
seizure of the dog. The owner or keeper of a dog subject to euthanasia must
provide to the Police Chief a letter or other proof signed by a licensed
veterinarian that the dog has been euthanized within 14 days of the
declaration that the dog is subject to euthanasia. Each day upon which the
owner or keeper of a dog subject to euthanasia fails to provide the notice of
euthanasia shall be considered a separate violation of this ordinance.
(Amended 1/18/11 by Ord. No. 5366)
SEC. 17.8-12(Cont4)
D. Duty to report “dangerous” or “vicious” dogs.
Any person keeping a dog which has been declared “dangerous” or “vicious” in
another jurisdiction shall report that fact to the Police Chief within three days of
bringing the dog into the Town of Normal. All dogs declared “dangerous” or
“vicious” in another jurisdiction shall be kept in a manner as if declared “dangerous”
or “vicious” in the Town of Normal. It shall be unlawful to fail to report a
“dangerous” or “vicious” dog within three days of bringing the dog into the Town of
Normal.
E. No transfer of “vicious dog,” “dangerous dog,” or “dog subject to euthanasia.”
No owner or keeper of a “vicious dog,” “dangerous dog,” or “dog subject to
euthanasia” shall sell or give away such a dog except to allow the dog to be
euthanized. An owner or keeper of a “vicious dog” or “dangerous dog” must report
any relocation of the animal, whether in the Town of Normal or outside the Town of
Normal to the Normal Police Department.
SEC. 17.8-13 ANIMAL BITES. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to prevent
such animal from biting or attacking any person in the Town, and, if a person is bitten by an animal,
he shall report the incident to the Police Department immediately.
Any animal which may bite or attack any person in the Town is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and such animal may be apprehended by a police officer, animal warden or other
person charged with the enforcement of this Division.
If any owner has notice that his animal has bitten any person, it shall be unlawful for such
owner to kill such animal, or sell or give such animal away, or to permit or allow such animal to be
taken beyond the limits of the Town except to a licensed veterinary hospital or impound facility, but
it shall be the duty of such owner to immediately report the incident to the Police Department, or
other person charged with enforcement of this Division, and to immediately place such animal in a
licensed veterinary hospital where such animal may be quarantined for a period of at least ten days
upon the request of any police officer, animal warden or other person charged with the enforcement
of this Division. The owner shall immediately furnish the Police Department, or other person
charged with enforcement of this Division with the name and location of said hospital and a
certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating whether or not such animal shows symptoms of rabies.
At the expiration of the quarantine period, and prior to the release of such animal, the owner shall
furnish the Police Department or other person charged with enforcement of this Division with a
certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that such animal does not have rabies. All costs of
maintaining animal in the veterinary hospital or impound facility shall be the obligation and
responsibility of the owner and shall be paid by said owner.
In all cases where any animal has bitten a person and is slain or dies within ten days from
the time of the bite, it shall be the duty of the person slaying such animal and the owner of such
animal to notify the Police Department or other person charged with enforcement of this Division
SEC. 17.8-13(Cont.1)
and to immediately deliver the carcass of such animal intact to such Department, or cause the same
to be done.
SEC. 17.8-14 DISTURBING QUIET AND DAMAGING PROPERTY. It shall be
unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or otherwise maintain a dog in the Town which shall disturb
the quiet of any person or neighborhood, or which shall attack any person, or which shall cause
danger or fear to any person or neighborhood.
SEC. 17.8-15 SANITATION. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of
any dog to permit such animal to deposit dung on any public street, alley, parkway or other public
place or on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. It shall be an
affirmative defense that the dung was immediately picked up and properly disposed of. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any premises to permit dung to accumulate on property such that it causes
noxious odors or flies to accumulate.
SEC. 17.8-16 FEMALE DOG IN HEAT. The owner of a female dog in heat shall not
keep, harbor or otherwise maintain such dog in the Town unless the same is confined in a kennel or
veterinary hospital or in an enclosed building on the owner’s property during the entire period such
dog is in heat. Any female dog in heat which is not confined is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded upon the order of the Chief of Police.
SEC. 17.8-17 RABIES. Any dog, cat, or other animal suffering from rabies is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and such dog, cat, or other animal may be slain by any police
officer, animal warden or such other person charged with the enforcement of this Division, if the
same cannot be safely apprehended and impounded. It shall be the duty of any person keeping,
harboring or otherwise maintaining any such dog, cat, or other animal to place it immediately in a
veterinary hospital, or upon demand, to surrender such dog, cat, or other animal to any police
officer, animal warden or other person charged with the enforcement of this Division.
It shall be the duty of every person who discovers that any dog, cat or other animal is
suffering with rabies or that any dog, cat, or other animal has been bitten by a dog, cat, or other
animal suffering with rabies to report such fact immediately to the Police Department. Such report
shall give the name, if known, and the place of residence of the person keeping, harboring or
otherwise maintaining any such dog or other animal, the place where the same can be found, and the
license number of any dog, if known. Any such dog or other animal shall be immediately confined
in a veterinary hospital or taken up and impounded and securely kept until it can be determined
whether any such dog, cat, or other animal is suffering with rabies.
SEC. 17.8-18 UNLAWFUL TREATMENT OF ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful for any
person to maliciously shoot, poison, kill, injure, abuse or ill-treat any animal. Any person who kills
or injures a dog or cat while driving a vehicle shall stop at the scene of the accident and render such
assistance as practicable and shall immediately report the incident to the Police Department.
SEC. 17.8-19 HINDERING ENFORCEMENT. It shall be unlawful to hinder or molest
any police officer, animal warden or person or corporation engaged in the enforcement of this
Division.
SEC. 17.8-20
SEC. 17.8-20 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs or cats
receiving treatment or temporary care in a veterinary hospital, boarding kennels or pet shops.
SEC. 17.8-21 ENFORCEMENT. The Chief of Police and such other persons as may be
designated by him are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this Division. The Town Council
may, from time to time, and upon such terms and conditions as it deems proper, contract with any
qualified person or corporation, and may, pursuant to said contract, provide said person or
corporation with the power to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. In the absence of the
appointment by the Town Council of any other person or company as poundmaster, the Chief of
Police shall be the poundmaster, the other members of the Police Department shall assist him under
this direction in carrying out the provisions of this Division.
SEC. 17.8-22 APPOINTMENT OF ANIMAL WARDEN. The Town Council may,
from time to time, and upon such terms and conditions as it deems proper, contract with any
qualified person or corporation, and may, pursuant to said contract, appoint such person, firm or
corporation, animal warden and he shall be ex-officio poundmaster of and for the Town.
SEC. 17.8-23 PENALTY. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be
considered as a separate an distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
SEC. 17. 8-24 TRAPPING CATS OR DOGS.
A. No person shall set a trap with the intention of capturing a cat or dog in the Town of
Normal except under the following circumstances:
1. The City manager or his designee has determined that a nuisance situation
exists, and;
2. The City Manager or his designee has authorized the trap; and
3. Notice has been sent either in writing at least five days in advance of the
placement of the trap to the property owners abutting the property upon
which the trap is to be placed, or a sign is placed in front of the property
where the trap is to be placed five days in advance of the placement
indicating that a trap will be set.
B. The foregoing shall not apply in the following situations:
1. To authorized persons attempting to catch suspected rabid, dangerous or
vicious animals, or animals which may be injured and in need of veterinary
treatment.
2. To authorized not-for-profit associations engaging in trap-neuter-release
programs in situations where those programs to not create or further a
nuisance in the Town of Normal.
SEC. 17.8-24(Cont.1)
3. In emergency situations where the trapping of cats or dogs is needed to
protect the health and safety of the public or its pets as determined by the
City Manager or his designee.
C. No person shall disturb any trap or release any animal from any trap placed pursuant
to this Section.
SEC. 17.8-25 IMPOUNDMENT PRACTICES.
A. Record of Impoundment. Immediately after receiving an animal for impounding,
the animal warden, or his designee, shall record a description of the animal
impounded, the date of the impoundment and whether such animal has a proper
rabies tag.
B. Search for Record Owner. The Animal Warden shall upon receiving an animal for
impoundment inspect the animal for a rabies tag, microchip, or other tag indicating
the owner of the animal.
C. Notice of Impoundment. The Animal Warden shall send written notice to a known
owner within two business days of receiving an animal for impoundment informing
the known owner of any animal being held by the animal warden.
D. Fees. The owner of any impounded dog may redeem the animal by paying a Town
of Normal release fee of $25.00, and all fees required by the impoundment facility.
The owner of any impounded cat or other animal except a dog may redeem the cat
or other animal by paying all fees required by the impoundment facility.
E. Required Inoculations. No dog or cat shall be released from impoundment until
proof of all required rabies inoculations has been presented or by paying for and
signing an agreement to have the animal inoculated against rabies.
F. Post-impoundment Hearing. An owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this
ordinance may request a hearing before the City Manager, or his designee, regarding
the authority of the impoundment facility to impound the animal. The hearing shall
take place within five business days of the request for hearing. The City Manager,
or his designee, may order the animal released from impoundment, with or without
payment of any fees, or held in compliance with this ordinance. At any hearing
pursuant to this Section, the City Manager of his designee may consider hearsay
evidence, including, but not limited to, reports of animal control officers. Upon
request for a hearing, the City Manager or his designee shall immediately give notice
to the Animal Warden. No animal may be disposed of until seven (7) days after the
decision of the City Manager or his designee.
G. Disposition of Unredeemed Animals. Animals not redeemed by the owner or any
other person are hereby declared a public nuisance. Animals for which the
impoundment facility has determined an owner may be disposed of in accordance
SEC. 17.8-25(Cont.1)
with the provisions of State law seven (7) business days after notice has been sent to
the owner. Animals for which the impoundment facility has not been able to
determine an owner may be disposed of in accordance with State law three (3)
business days after the animal was received by the impoundment facility. The
Animal Warden shall make reasonable efforts to find adoptive homes for
unredeemed animals prior to disposing of the animals. No dog deemed “dangerous”
or “vicious” or “subject to euthanasia” shall be adopted out of the impoundment
facility.
H. Reclamation of an Impounded Dangerous or Vicious Dog. Any dog that is declared
“dangerous” or “vicious” may be reclaimed from the impound facility upon the
performance of the following:
1. Signing an acknowledgement of ownership of the dog,
2. Providing a sufficient leash to remove the dog from the facility,
3. For vicious dogs, providing a muzzle for the removal of the dog from the
impound facility,
4. Payment of all fees required by the impoundment facility,
5. Purchasing and displaying a “dangerous” or “vicious” dog tag,
6. Proof of registration with McLean County Animal Control, and
7. For vicious dogs, signing an agreement that the dog will be spayed or
neutered and microchipped within fourteen days of release.
SEC. 17.8-26 NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
A. It is unlawful for more than two dogs, more than two cats, or more than two of any
species of animal to be owned, kept, harbored, or possessed in any one dwelling unit
or the premises surrounding a dwelling unit. It is unlawful for the owner of any
premises to permit more than two dogs, more than two cats, or more than two of any
species of animal to be owned, kept, harbored, or possessed in any one dwelling unit
or the premises surrounding a dwelling unit.
B. The restrictions set forth in Subsection A do not apply to the keeping of horses or
donkeys that are kept in accordance with the Town Code.
C. It is a defense by a person to a complaint alleging a violation of this Section if
person proves that (i) any animal in excess of the limitation in Subsection A is part
of a litter that is owned, kept, harbored, or possessed on the premises for a period not
exceeding four months from birth and (ii) that, in the 12-month period preceding the
complaint, there was not more than four litters owned, kept, harbored, or possessed
on the premises. (Amended 6/20/2011 by Ord. No. 5387)(Amended 9/8/2015 by
Ord. No.5595, effective November 1, 2015)
SEC. 17.9-1
DIVISION 9 – PENALTIES AND SETTLEMENTS
SEC. 17.9-1 PENALTY. Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any section
of this Chapter, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each
offense.
SEC. 17.9-2 FEES. The Town of Normal shall be entitled to the following fees:
A. For each defendant held to answer in any division of Circuit Court on a charge of an
ordinance violation, $10.00.
B. For each summons for an ordinance violation served by the Town of Normal, its
officers, agents or employees, a summons fee in the amount of $16.00.
C. The foregoing fees shall be taxed as costs to be collected from the defendant, if
possible, on conviction.
SEC. 17.9-3 SETTLEMENT OF CERTAIN ORDINANCE VIOLATION
CHARGES. Persons who have received a citation for violation of the Code sections hereafter listed
may settle an initial ordinance violation charge by paying the amount set forth in this SEC. 17.9-3.
Persons may not settle an ordinance violation charge pursuant to this Section if they have settled or
been convicted of any Town of Normal ordinance violation previously. The Corporation Counsel
or his designee may withdraw this offer for settlement, refuse payment or refund payments
previously made if the Corporation Counsel or his designee believes that such settlement would not
be in the best interest of the Town of Normal, would not lead to future compliance with the
Municipal Code, or would deprecate the seriousness of the offense. Citations issued for first time
violation of the following Sections of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended, may be settled, compromised, and paid in the respective amount set forth in the following
schedule:
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Over Capacity 1% - 10%
NFPA 101 Section 12.1.7 $100.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Over Capacity 11% - 30%
NFPA 101 Section 12.1.7 $275.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Over Cacacity 31% - 50%
NFPA 101 Section 12.1.7 $500.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Locked or Blocked Exits
NFPA 101 Section 7.1.10.1 $275.00
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.1)
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Propping Open Fire or Smoke Doors
NFPA 101 Section 7.2.1.8.1 $100.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Parking in Designated Fire Zones or Lanes
NFPA 1 Section 18.2.4.1 $100.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Fire Code Violation
Reinspection After First Inspection
FNPA 1 Section 1-16.5 $100.00
SEC. 6.4-2 Non-functioning Emergency Lighting
NFPA 101.7.9.1 $100.00
SEC. 6.4-17 Open Burning $150.00
SEC. 8.1-9 Obstructing Right-of-Way $100.00
SEC. 8.5-2 Cleaning of Street $200.00
SEC. 11.4-1 Occupancy Without a Permit $100.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Inoperable Vehicle
IPMC 302.8 $ 50.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Weeds Over Eight Inches (8”)
IPMC 302.4 $100.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Overflowing Garbage
IPMC 305.3.1 $100.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Non-functioning Smoke Detector/Alarm
IPMC 705.1 $100.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Non-functioning Fire Suppression System
IPMC 705.5 $100.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Non-functioning Fire Alarm
IPMC 705.6 $275.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Non-functioning Fire Extinguisher
IPMC 705.4 $ 50.00
SEC. 11.4-5 Non-functioning Exit Sign
IPMC 702.5 $100.00
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.2)
SEC. 11.4-6(A) Non-Licensed Multi-Family Structure $100.00
(Added 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 11.4-5(B) Indoor Upholstered Furniture Placed Outdoors $100.00
SEC. 11.4-6(E)(7) Missing Inspection Appointment $ 25.00
SEC. 11.4-6(E)(8) Re-inspection After First Re-inspection $100.00
SEC. 11.4-7(A) Non-Licensed Single-Family Structure $100.00
(Added 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.2-1(A) Disorderly Conduct (Breach of Peace) $100.00
SEC. 17.2-1(B) Disorderly Conduct (False Fire Alarm) $275.00
SEC. 17.2-1(C) Disorderly Conduct (False Bomb Alarm) $275.00
SEC. 17.2-1(D) Disorderly Conduct (False Police Report) $275.00
SEC. 17.2-1(E) Disorderly Conduct (Window Peeping) $275.00
SEC. 17.2-1(F) Disorderly Conduct (Public Urination) $100.00
SEC. 17.2-1(G) Fighting – Eighteen Years of Age and Over $275.00
Under Eighteen Years of Age $ 50.00
SEC. 17.2-1(H) Disorderly Conduct – Cross Burning $1000.00
SEC. 17.2-1(I) Disturbing, Disrupting, or Interrupting Meetings $ 50.00
(Added 4/18/2011 by Ord. No. 5381)
SEC. 17.2-2 Gambling $100.00
SEC. 17.2-3 Throwing or Placing Objects $100.00
SEC. 17.2-4 Discharge of Firearm, BB or Paintball Gun $100.00
SEC. 17.2-5 Public Nudity $100.00
SEC. 17.2-6 Climbing Telephone Poles $100.00
SEC. 17.2-7 Assault $100.00
SEC. 17.2-8 Battery – Eighteen Years of Age and Over $275.00
Under Eighteen Years of Age $100.00
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.3)
SEC. 17.2-9 Criminal Damage to Property $275.00
plus restitution
SEC. 17.2-10 Criminal Trespass to Land $100.00
SEC. 17.2-11 Criminal Trespass to Vehicle $100.00
SEC. 17.2-12 Resisting or Delaying an Officer $275.00
SEC. 17.2-13 Assisting Escape $275.00
SEC. 17.2-14 Failure to Comply with Subpoenas $200.00
(Amended 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.2-15 Obscuring Chalkmarks $150.00
SEC. 17.2-16 Fireworks $100.00
SEC. 17.2-17 Furnishing False Information $275.00
SEC. 17.2-18 Theft $275.00*
*plus restitution if value less than $300
$500.00**
**plus restitution if value more than $300
SEC. 17.2-19 Retail Theft $275.00*
*plus restitution if merchandise less than $150 in value
$350.00**
**plus restitution if merchandise more than $150 in value
SEC. 17.2-20 Skateboarding Prohibited in Uptown $ 50.00
(Added 9/21/09 by Ord. No. 5294)
SEC. 17.2-21 Bicycle Riding in Uptown $ 50.00
(Added 7/19/2010 by Ord. No. 5345)
SEC. 17.3-1(A) Possession of Open Alcoholic Liquor in a
Public Place $275.00
SEC. 17.3-1(B) Unlawful Possession of Alcohol
By a Person Under the Age of 21 $275.00
SEC. 17.3-1(C) Unlawful Consumption of Alcohol By a Person
Under the Age of 21 $275.00
SEC. 17.3-1(D) Misrepresentation of Age $275.00
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.4)
SEC. 17.3-1(E) Presenting False Identification $275.00
SEC. 17.3-1(F) Possession of Fraudulent I.D. $275.00
SEC. 17.3-1(G) Furnishing Alcohol to a Minor $350.00
SEC. 17.3-1(H) Unlawful Sale of Alcohol – Clerk $100.00
SEC. 17.3-1(I) Unlawful Sale of Alcohol - Unlicensed $750.00
(Amended 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.3-2 Possession of Cannabis $350.00
SEC. 17.3-3 Sale to and Possession of Tobacco by Minors $ 50.00
SEC. 17.3-4 Smoking Regulatory Act $100.00
SEC. 17.4-1 Harmful Materials to Minors $275.00
SEC. 17.4-1(E) Minor Falsifying Age to Obtain Harmful Material $150.00
(Added 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.4-1(F) Perusing by Minor $150.00
(Added 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.4-2 Curfew $ 50.00
SEC. 17.4-3 Truancy $ 25.00
SEC. 17.5-2 Violation of Noise Prohibitions $100.00
(Amended 11/7/2016 by Ord. No. 5663)
SEC. 17.5-3 Failure to Obtain Noise Permit $100.00
SEC. 17.5-4 Violation Noise Permit $100.00
SEC. 17.5-5 Noise Within Multiple Family Structure $100.00
SEC. 17.6-1 Use of Parks $100.00
SEC. 17.6-2 Constitution Trail Hours $100.00
SEC. 17.6-3 Horses on Trail $100.00
SEC. 17.6-5 Uptown Station Code of Conduct $ 50.00
(Added 5/21/2012 by Ord. 5441)
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.5)
SEC. 17.7-1 Burning Without a Permit $150.00
(Amended 4/20/09 by Ord. No. 5252)
SEC. 17.7-2 Posting of Bills $100.00
SEC. 17.7-3 Obstructing Exits $100.00
SEC. 17.7-4 Abandoned Refrigerator $100.00
SEC. 17.7-5 Inoperable Vehicle $100.00
SEC. 17.7-6 Littering $100.00
SEC. 17.7-7 Graffiti $100.00
SEC. 17.8-1 Cruelty to Animals $275.00
SEC. 17.8-2 Dangerous Animals At Large $350.00
SEC. 17.8-3 Noisy Animals $100.00
SEC. 17.8-4 Strays $100.00
SEC. 17.8-6 Diseased Animals $100.00
SEC. 17.8-7 Keeping Pigs, Pigeons, or Unclean Stable $100.00
SEC. 17.8-8 Horses in Park $100.00
SEC. 17.8-9 Disruption of Garbage $100.00
SEC. 17.8-10 Rabies Tag $100.00
SEC. 17.8-11 Permitting a Dog to Run at Large $100.00
SEC. 17.8-12 Dangerous Dogs $350.00
SEC. 17.8-13 Dog Bites $100.00
SEC. 17.8-14 Disturbing Quiet $100.00
SEC. 17.8-15 Sanitation $100.00
SEC. 17.8-16 Female Dog in Heat $100.00
SEC. 17.8-17 Rabies $100.00
SEC. 17.9-3(Cont.6)
SEC. 17.8-18 Unlawful Treatment of Dog $275.00
SEC. 17.8-19 Hindering Enforcement $275.00
SEC. 21.1-6(D)(1) Grass, Weeds in Excess of 8" $100.00
SEC. 21.1-6(D)(2) Trash and Debris $100.00
SEC. 22.3-2 Transient Merchant/Itinerant Vendors $275.00
SEC. 22.4-1 Solicitation $100.00
SEC. 22.4-11 Highway Solicitation $100.00
SEC. 23.3-29 Toys in Roadway $100.00
SEC. 23.3-52 Using Private Drive as a Thruway $100.00
SEC. 23.7-2 Low Speed Vehicle $ 50.00
(Added 5/4/09 by Ord. No. 5256)(Amended 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5261)
(Amended 9/19/2011 by Ord. No. 5395)(Amended 10/17/2011 by Ord. No.
5400)
SEC. 23.7-3 Low Speed Vehicle $ 50.00
(Added 5/4/09 by Ord. No. 5256)(Amended 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5261)
(Amended 9/19/2011 by Ord. No. 5395)(Amended 10/17/2011 by Ord. No.
5400)
SEC. 23.8-3 Provisions of Traffic Code Applicable to
Bicycle Riders $ 50.00
In the event timely payment is not received and an ordinance violation charge is filed with
the McLean County Circuit Clerk's Office, the Corporation Counsel may settle the charge as set
forth above, and may also collect the penalties and fees of SEC. 25.1-4(G) of the Municipal Code
are paid.
SEC. 17.9-4 SETTLEMENT OF SUBSEQUENT ORDINANCE VIOLATION
CHARGES. An individual charged with a violation of a Town ordinance who has previously
settled a charge pursuant to SEC. 17.9-3, or has received court supervision or been convicted of any
Town of Normal ordinance violation may settle the second violation by payment as set forth in
SEC. 17.9-3 of this Chapter. Any subsequent violation after a conviction or settlement of a second
violation may be settled by payment at City Hall only with the approval of the Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel or his designee may withdraw any offer for settlement, refuse payment or
refund payments previously made if the Corporation Counsel or his designee believes that such
settlement would not be in the best interest of the Town of Normal, would not lead to future
compliance with the Municipal Code, or would deprecate the seriousness of the offense.
SEC. 17.10-1
DIVISION 10 – IMPOUNDMENTS
SEC. 17.10-1 PENALTY, SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT. The use of motor
vehicles in certain criminal and traffic offenses is hereby declared a public nuisance. Vehicles used
in the offenses listed in Section 11-208.7(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b)
including any other felony or misdemeanor are hereby declared contraband and subject to seizure
and impoundment.
The impoundment of any vehicle used in the commission of any of the foregoing offenses
shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500.00 plus costs of towing and storage.
17.10-2 REMOVAL AND SEIZURE. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to
believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer may cause the vehicle to be removed and relocated to a secure location. The officer shall
inform any person in control of the vehicle of the seizure and the right to a prompt probable
cause hearing and an impoundment hearing. The officer shall also inform the driver that the
vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing unless the
owner, lessee or lienholder provides a bond equal to the administrative fee and pays for all
towing and storage costs.
The Town shall cause a written notice to be provided to the driver and sent to all record
owners, lessees and lien holders of any unclaimed vehicle within ten days of the impoundment.
The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the administrative impoundment hearing
which shall take place no later than forty-five days after the date of mailing the notice of hearing.
The parties may agree to extend the date of the impoundment hearing beyond forty-five days. In
person delivery of the notice of hearing to the person paying a bond for the release of the vehicle
shall be deemed to satisfy notice of hearing requirement issued to record owners, lessees or
lienholders.
17.10-3 PROMPT PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING. At any time prior to an
impoundment hearing, at the request of the owner of a vehicle or a person with authority from an
owner, the Police Chief or his designee shall hold a prompt probable cause hearing. Said hearing
shall occur within 24 hours of the request for a prompt probable cause hearing, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. At the hearing, any interested person shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Rules of evidence shall not apply, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible. At the prompt probable cause hearing, the Police Chief or
his designee shall determine whether probable cause exists for the seizure and impoundment of
the vehicle pursuant to this section and, if asserted by the owner, whether the vehicle was stolen
from the owner without the owner’s permission or knowledge. If the Police Chief or his
designee determines that probable cause exists for the continued impoundment of the vehicle, the
Police Chief or his designee shall order the vehicle held pending an impoundment hearing or
payment of the bond and any towing and storage fees due. If the Police chief or his designee
determines that probable cause does not exist or that the vehicle was stolen from the owner
without the owner’s permission or knowledge, the Police Chief or his designee shall order the
immediate release of the vehicle without payment of any penalties, fees or costs.
SEC. 17.10-4
17.10-4 IMPOUNDMENT HEARING. A hearing officer designated by the City
Manager shall hold an impoundment hearing within 45 days of the notice of impoundment
hearing sent pursuant to this Division. A person seeking the hearing may waive the foregoing
time restraint. At the impoundment hearing, any interested person shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. Formal Rules of Evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall
be admissible. The impoundment hearing shall comply with the requirement set forth in Section
11.2-8.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7. At the impoundment hearing, the
hearing officer shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether the vehicle was used
in violation of a listed offense or whether the vehicle was stolen from the owner without the
owner’s knowledge or permission. If by a preponderance of the evidence, the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was not utilized in violation of any offense listed in Section 17.10-1
or that the vehicle was stolen from the owner without the knowledge or permission of the owner,
the hearing officer shall order the immediate release of the vehicle without payment of any
administrative fee and the expeditious return of all bonds or fees already paid by the vehicle
owner or his agent. If the hearing officer determines the vehicle was used in the commission of a
listed offense, the hearing officer shall order the vehicle held pending payment of the fee and any
towing and storage fees which may be due. Any fee or bond returned shall be to the person who
paid the bond or fee, unless directed otherwise by that person.
17.10-5 INNOCENT DEFENDANT. In the event that a person is acquitted of all
charges stemming from the incident for which the vehicle was impounded or is not charged
within six months for any charge stemming from the incident for which the vehicle was
impounded, that person may apply to the Police Chief for a full refund of any bond or
administrative fee paid to release the vehicle. A disposition of court supervision will be
considered as a conviction and not an acquittal. Participation in a diversion program or similar
program to avoid judicial consequences shall not be considered an acquittal for purposes of this
Section. A plea agreement which calls for the dismissal of the charge for which the vehicle was
impounded in exchange for a guilty plea to any other charge shall not be considered an acquittal
for purposes of this Section. The Police Chief shall refund any bond or administrative fee paid,
excluding any towing and storage fees paid, if an acquittal occurs or if charges are not likely to
be brought within 6 months. Any fee or bond returned shall be to the person who paid the bond
or fee, unless directed otherwise by that person.
17.10-6 RELEASE OF VEHICLE. A vehicle seized and impounded by this Section
shall be released to the owner or the owner’s agent upon payment of the bond or administrative
fee and all towing and storage fees accrued. Payment of the bond or administrative fee and
towing and storage fees does not waive an owner's right to an impoundment hearing.
17.10-7 UNCLAIMED VEHICLE. Any vehicle not claimed by its owner or
other interested party within thirty-five days after the impoundment hearing shall be considered
abandoned and sold pursuant to state law. An owner or interested party may claim his/her
vehicle by paying the administrative fee, towing and storage fees any time prior to sale of the
vehicle.
17.10-8. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the holding, forfeiture or
impoundment of any vehicle pursuant to any other law or statute. (Amended 2/6/2012 by Ord.
No. 5427)
SEC. 17.11-1
DIVISION 11 - FORFEITURES
17.11-1 CONTRABAND AND SEIZURE OF MONEY. Any money obtained in the
unlawful sale of alcohol without a license in violation of SEC. 17.3-1(I) is hereby declared
contraband and subject to forfeiture. Any police officer of the Town of Normal is hereby authorized
to seize any proceeds of the sale of alcohol without a license in violation of SEC. 17.3-1(I) of the
Town of Normal and place said money in safekeeping in the Town of Normal.
17.11-2 NOTICE AND PROMPT PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING. The police officer,
upon seizure of money pursuant to SEC. 17.11-1, shall notify the person from whom it is seized of
the right to a prompt post-seizure hearing. Any person claiming a right to the money seized shall be
given a hearing in front of the Police Chief or his designee to determine if probable cause exists for
the seizure of the money. Said hearing shall occur within seven days of the request for the hearing
and shall be limited to whether probable cause exists to believe that the money was obtained in the
unlawful sale of alcohol. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay shall be permitted at
the hearing. If the Police Chief or his designee determines that probable cause does not exist to
believe that the money was obtained as a result of the unlawful sale of alcohol, the Town shall
return the money to its rightful owner. If the Police Chief or his designee finds that there is
probable cause to believe the money was the proceeds of the unlawful sale of alcohol, the Police
Chief or his designee shall order the continued holding of the funds until after a forfeiture hearing.
17.11-3 NOTICE AND FORFEITURE HEARING. Within 72 hours of seizure of
money pursuant to this Section, the Town shall send notice by ordinary mail to the person from
whom the money was seized and any other persons the Town reasonably believes may claim an
interest in the money seized. The notice shall include information explaining how to request a
forfeiture hearing in writing and that such request must be made within 21 days. If a written request
for a Forfeiture Hearing is received, the Police Chief or his designee shall hold a forfeiture hearing
no later than 21 days after receipt of the request for a forfeiture hearing. Said hearing shall be to
determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether the money, or any portion thereof, was
obtained as a result of the unlawful sale of alcohol. At the hearing, formal rules of evidence shall
not apply, and hearsay shall be permitted. Any person claiming an interest in the money shall be
given an opportunity to present evidence and be heard. If the Police Chief or his designee at the
forfeiture hearing determines that the money, or any portion thereof, was the proceeds of an
unlawful sale of alcohol as set forth in SEC. 17.3-1(I) of this Code, the Police Chief or his designee
shall declare the money forfeited to the Town and that any claim of any person to the money is
extinguished. If the Police Chief or his designee determines that the money, or any portion thereof,
was not the proceeds of an unlawful sale, the Town shall promptly remit the money (or portion
thereof) to the rightful owner. After 21 days after notice of seizure has been sent, pursuant to this
section, and no written request for a forfeiture hearing has been received, the money shall be
forfeited, and any claim to the money shall be extinguished.
(Comprehensive Amendment to Chapter 17 on 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 5249)
SEC. 17.12-1
DIVISION 12 - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
17.12-1 ESTABLISHMENT. There is hereby established an Administrative Hearing
System, the function of which is to expedite the prosecution and correction of violations of
various provisions of the Municipal Code, to adjudicate disputes between the Town and its
citizens, to determine the validity of parking citations and other debts owed to the Town and to
make a final determination on other matters as called for by Town ordinance or as designated by
the City Manager. Authority for the establishment of the Administrative Hearing System is
pursuant to Home Rule powers, Art. 7 Sec. 6 of the Illinois Constitution and the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1, et seq. and other authority as provided by law. The City
Manager shall have authority to hire hearing officers and other personnel to fulfill the purpose of
the Administrative Hearing System. Hearing Officers shall have completed training and have
requisite experience as required by Illinois law.
17.12-2 JURISDICTION. An administrative adjudication proceeding under this
Division may be initiated for any alleged Municipal Code violation and for impoundment
hearings as authorized by Section 17, Division 10 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal.
Additionally, the Town of Normal may utilize the Administrative Hearing System for
adjudication of parking citations, post-tow hearings, vicious dog declarations, taxes and fees due
the Town of Normal and other matters as delegated from time to time by the City Manager.
The following actions shall be outside the jurisdiction of Administrative Adjudication:
(1) proceedings not within the statutory or Home Rule Authority of the Town; (2) Any offense
under the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles; and (3) Any reportable offense under Section 6-
204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
The adoption of this chapter and establishment of an Administrative Hearing System does
not preclude the Town from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of the
Municipal Code, collect amounts due the Town or otherwise act on behalf of the Town,
including but not limited to seeking relief in McLean County Circuit Court or any other court
with jurisdiction over the subject matter or parties.
17.12-3 COMMENCEMENT OF AN ACTION.
A. Ordinance violations shall be commenced by the issuance of a complaint by an
authorized Town officer or employee. The original complaint shall be filed with
the Administrative Hearing Office and a docket number shall be assigned to the
case. The Complaint shall contain the following information:
1. The name and last known address of the Respondent;
2. The date and location at which the alleged violation occurred;
3. A statement indicating the type and nature of the violation;
SEC. 17.12-4
4. The chapter and section of the Municipal Code alleged to have been
violated, including adopted national and international codes;
5. The signature and identification number of the city official issuing the
complaint;
6. A certification of the accuracy of all information contained within the
complaint;
7. The fine, penalty, or corrective order being sought;
8. A statement of the penalty and order to be imposed for a failure to appear
at the Administrative Adjudication hearing; and
9. The date, time and location of the Administrative Adjudication hearing at
which the alleged violation shall be administratively adjudicated with
notice directing the Respondent to appear and failure to appear may result
in a default judgment.
B. Vehicle Impoundment Hearings shall be commenced by the issuance of an
Impounded Vehicle Notice as provided in Division 10 of this Chapter. A copy of
the Impounded Vehicle Notice shall be filed with the Administrative Hearing
Office and a docket number shall be assigned to the case.
C. Administrative Adjudication of other code matters assigned to the jurisdiction of
the Administrative Adjudication System by the City Manager shall be
commenced by the appropriate notice or appeal as provided in the ordinance
concerning the subject matter of the case.
17.12-4 POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICERS. The powers
and duties of Administrative Hearing Officers shall be as provided by law and include but not be
limited to the following:
A. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the
code violation or subject matter of the hearing;
B. Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the
hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
C. Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all exhibits and
evidence introduced at the hearing;
D. Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of
whether a code violation exists or a determination of the contested matter. The
determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact,
SEC. 17.12-4(Cont.1)
decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or action with which the
Respondent must comply;
E. Imposing penalties consistent with applicable Code provisions and assessing costs
upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except that in no event shall
the Hearing Officer have authority to (1) impose a penalty of incarceration, or (2)
impose a fine in excess of $50,000. The maximum monetary fine shall be
exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with the
applicable ordinances and such maximum fine shall not be applicable to cases to
enforce the collection of any tax or license fee imposed and collected by the
Town.
17.12-5 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION HEARING PROCEDURES. The
administrative adjudication of matters filed with the Administrative Adjudication Office shall
comply with the following procedures:
A. Notice. Respondents shall be given notice of the adjudicatory hearing in a
manner reasonably calculated to give the Respondent actual notice of the matter
no less than15 days before the date of hearing. Notice may include any of the
following methods as appropriate:
1. Personal service upon the Respondent or its employees or agents; or
2. Service by first class mail at the Respondent's last known address, or the
address listed in the Normal Tax Assessor’s office; or
3. Notice that is posted upon the property where the alleged violation
occurred when service by mail or certified mail has been unsuccessful; or
4. Certified or registered mail; or
5. By mail to the registered management company; or
6. Such other method as is reasonably calculated to provide the Respondent
with actual notice of the Administrative Adjudication Hearing
proceedings, or
7. Notice as mandated pursuant to the ordinance or state statute concerning
the subject matter of the case
The parties may waive notice and consent to jurisdiction of the Administrative
Hearing Officer.
It shall not constitute a defense or grounds for setting aside a default judgment
that a person has not received actual notice of the complaint if it is shown that a
SEC. 17.12-5(Cont.1)
reasonable means, comporting with the principles of due process, was used to
provide the Respondent with Notice of the Hearing.
B. Sufficiency of pleadings.
1. All pleadings shall be liberally construed with the view to doing
substantial justice between parties. A signed pleading initiating a case
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation charged, and the
truthfulness of the matters contained therein. A signed appeal initiating a
case shall place the matter in controversy and authorize the admission of
relevant evidence in order to determine the merits of the contested matter.
2. If any pleading is insufficient in substance or form, the hearing officer
may order a fuller or more particular statement.
3. No pleading is bad in substance which contains such information as
reasonably informs the Respondent of the nature of the claim which he is
called upon to meet.
4. All defects in pleadings, either in form or substance, not objected to prior
to the hearing are waived.
C. Conduct of Administrative Adjudication Hearings.
1. At any hearing conducted pursuant to this Division, the Respondent may
be represented by counsel, present witnesses or other evidence on his or
her own behalf, and cross-examine opposing witnesses.
2. Any party to a hearing conducted pursuant to this Division may request
the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas directing the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
3. All continued or adjourned hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable
promptness to commensurate with the nature and status of the proceeding.
4. The formal and technical rules of evidence do not apply in any hearing
under this chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted if it is of
a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
5. No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer except in cases
where a continuance is in the best interest of justice.
6. All administrative adjudication hearings conducted pursuant to this
Division shall be recorded.
SEC. 17.12-5(Cont.2)
7. The burden of proof in all matters adjudicated pursuant to this Division
shall be a preponderance of the evidence.
8. Any officer or employee of the Town with duties related to the subject
matter of the case in controversy, including but not limited to Inspectors,
Police Officers, Fire Inspectors, Parking Enforcement Officers, and
Attorneys may present a case for the Town.
9. All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
10. No Hearing Officer of the Administrative Hearing System may rule on the
constitutionality of any Town of Normal ordinance. If a person wishes to
challenge the constitutionality of a Town ordinance, the Hearing Officer
shall allow the person to make a record and shall notify the Town Legal
Department of such challenge. The Town shall be granted an opportunity,
with notice to the Respondent, to supplement the record in opposition to
the Constitutional challenge.
D. Failure to appear. If, on the date set for hearing, the respondent or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the Respondent in default
and may proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of
a Town code violation and impose any order or fine that the Hearing Officer may
have been able to impose had the Respondent appeared.
E. Defenses in Property Code Enforcement Matters.
1. It shall be a defense by a property owner or manager to a complaint
alleging a violation in the condition of property that the violation has been
corrected, but only if the complaint is the only complaint against the
respondent or concerning the property in the past 12 months.
2. It shall be a defense by a property owner or manager to a complaint
alleging a violation in the condition of property if the property owner or
manager proves all of the following:
a. The violation was caused by someone other than the owner or
manager; and
b. The location of the violation is inside the structure and in an area
exclusively controlled by the tenant; and
c. The owner has demanded access to the property to correct the
violation within 24 hours of receiving notice of the violation; and
d. The tenants have denied the owner access to correct the violation.
SEC. 17.12-5(Cont.3)
3. It shall not be a defense by the record title holder of property to a
complaint alleging a violation in the condition of property that the
property has previously or subsequently been transferred to another.
4. It shall not be a defense by a property owner to a complaint alleging a
violation in the condition of property that the condition existed prior to the
person obtaining ownership of the property.
5. It shall not be a defense by a property owner to a complaint alleging a
violation in the condition of property that the owner did not know of the
violation.
6. It shall not be a defense by a property owner to a complaint alleging a
violation in the condition of property that the condition was caused by a
co-owner.
F. Mitigating Factors in Imposing Sanctions. A Hearing Officer may consider the
following factors as mitigating factors in imposing sanctions:
1. The condition of the property that caused the violation has been corrected,
and the speed in which the condition was corrected.
2. The condition of the property that caused the violation was created by
others, beyond the reasonable control of the Respondent.
3. Any other fact which indicates that the Respondent acted swiftly and
promptly to correct a violation.
G. Findings, Decisions and Orders.
1. At the conclusion of an Administrative Adjudication Hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall make a determination whether a Municipal Code violation
occurred or otherwise decide the matter in controversy. The determination
shall be in writing and shall include the Hearing Officer's findings of fact,
a decision on the merits of the case, and if applicable an order imposing a
fine for a violation or an order implementing the decision, and assessing
costs. The decision may also order the respondent to correct any
continuing violation. In the event a violation is not proved, the Hearing
Officer shall dismiss the case. If a Municipal Code violation is proved, the
order shall impose the sanctions and costs that are provided in the
Municipal Code for the violation proved.
2. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be sent to the Respondent
within five days after it is issued if not served directly at the Adjudicatory
Hearing.
SEC. 17.12-5(Cont.4)
3. Any fine, costs or other monetary penalty imposed against a Respondent
shall be paid to the Town of Normal.
4. In the event that the findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer
directs the Respondent to correct the violation, the Hearing Officer may
also establish a status hearing date to determine compliance with the
corrective order. At such time, the Hearing Officer may hear testimony
and accept evidence relevant to the corrective actions of the Respondent.
If the Hearing Officer determines that the Municipal Code violation has
not been corrected as directed, additional sanctions may be imposed as
provided by the Municipal Code.
5. Upon a failure to appear by the Respondent, the Hearing Officer, upon
finding proof of proper notice, may enter a default order finding a
violation or making a determination as otherwise authorized by this
section.
H. Post-decision matters.
1. Petitions to Set Aside Default Orders. A party may petition to set aside a
decision and order of the Hearing Officer issued because the party failed
to appear by filing, in writing, with the Administrative Hearing Office,
within 21 days of the decision and order, a Petition to Set Aside Default
Order. The Petition may only be granted for good cause shown, or if the
Petitioner establishes lack of proper notice.
2. No Petitions for Rehearing. No Petitions for Rehearing shall be permitted.
17.12-6 JUDICIAL REVIEW. Final Decisions and Orders of the Administrative
Hearing Officer shall constitute a Final Decision for purposes of judicial review and shall be
subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
17.12-7 RECORD ON APPEAL. Any party appealing a decision of the Administrative
Hearing System must pay the Town of Normal the cost of preparing and certifying the record of
proceedings, including a transcript of the same. Failure to pay for the cost of preparing the
record shall permit the Town of Normal to move to dismiss the appeal pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Act, and in the case of an administrative decision which requires the
payment of money, the Town may move to have a judgment against the appealing party in favor
of the Town for the amount shown by the administrative decision to be due and for costs.
17.12-8 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT. After expiration of the period in which
judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act may be sought the findings,
decision and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in any manner allowed by law
including but not limited to the following:
SEC. 17.12-8(Cont.1)
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Act [735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.] are a debt due and
owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Act may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or
other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a
municipality to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to,
attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or
foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a
hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being
fixed by a hearing officer pursuant to this subsection (c), the municipality
shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall
appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine
whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice
shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be less than 7 days
from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the 7-day
period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the
mail.
D. Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code of
Civil Procedure [735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.] or by the Uniform
Commercial Code [810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.], a lien shall be imposed on
the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the Defendant in the amount
of any debt due and owing the municipality under this Section. The lien
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
17.12-9 EVICTION -- RIGHTS OF THE OCCUPANTS. No action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be
threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant files a
complaint with the Town of Normal or agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
(Division 12 of Chapter 17 Added 5/5/2014 by Ord. No. 5541)
SEC. 18.1-1
CHAPTER 18 - PERSONNEL
DIVISION 1 - PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
SEC. 18.1-1 DEFINITIONS.
A. Appeal. A written Application for review of an alleged grievance submitted or
instituted by an employee to a higher authority.
B. Applicant. An individual who has completed and submitted an Application for an
announced position of employment with the Town.
C. Calendar Week. A time period beginning at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and continuing
for seven (7) consecutive days.
D. Compensation Pay. The standard rates of pay which have been established for the
respective grades of work as set forth in the Salary Administration Program.
E. Compensatory Time. Time off work to offset one and one-half (l l/2) hours for
each one (1) hour of overtime.
F. Cost of Living. A percentage adjustment made in an employee's salary "to
compensate for an increase (or decrease) in the price of common goods
purchased.” This percentage is determined by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
G. Demotion. Assignment of an employee from one class to another which has a
lower maximum rate of pay.
H. Department. The primary organization unit which is under charge of a
Department Head.
I. Dismissal. Separation from Town employment for cause or any other reason not
prohibited by law.
J. Eligible. A person who has successfully met required qualifications for a
particular class.
K. Employee. An individual who is legally employed by the Town and who is
compensated through the Town payroll for his services. Individuals or groups
compensated on a fee basis are not included.
L. Immediate Family. An employee’s spouse, son, daughter, mother, father, stepmother,
step-father, brother, sister, grandmother or grandfather. (Amended
11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
M. Job Description. A written description of an employment position consisting of a
SEC. 18.1-1(Cont.1)
job title, a general statement of the level of work expected of the position, an
enumeration of the distinguishing features of the position, examples of the duties
and responsibilities of the position, an indication of the desirable qualifications for
the position and a designation of the appropriate grade into which the position
falls in the Salary Administration Program.
N. Job Grade. A level in the Salary Administration Program into which are grouped
various employment positions by job description, which are deemed to be
sufficiently alike to warrant the same pay range.
O. Layoff. The involuntary, non-disciplinary separation of an employee from a
position.
P. Leave. Approved type of absence from work as provided by these rules and
reported in hours to the nearest quarter (1/4) hour.
Q. Maximum Salary. The maximum salary attainable in any one pay grade.
R. Merit Pay Increase. An increase in compensation established in the Salary
Administration Program which may be granted to an employee for meritorious
service and completion of minimum prescribed periods of employment in grade.
Merit pay increases are step increases in the Salary Administration Program.
S. Minimum Salary. The minimum salary receivable in any one pay grade.
T. Non-Regular Employee. An employee who is hired into a position that is of a
short-term duration, seasonal in nature, or work hours are expected to be below 20
hours per work week. This employee is eligible for those benefits mandated by
State or Federal law.
1. Non-Regular Part-Time Employee. An employee hired on a part-time
basis to work in a classified position for no more than 999 hours in a fiscal
year.
2. Non-Regular Temporary Employee. An employee hired for a specific
purpose or program not to exceed 1300 hours in a fiscal year; or an
employee who is hired for a definite stated period to fill-in for an
employee on leave; or an employee hired to fill a vacant classified position
until such position is filled by a regular employee.
U. Overtime. Approved time actually worked in excess of the number of hours in a
regularly scheduled work day. A regularly scheduled work day varies based on
the position and the needs of the Town. Examples of a regularly scheduled work
day include, but are not limited to the following: 7.5 hours, 8 hours, 10 hours.
(Amended 12/19/11 by Ord. No. 5418)
SEC. 18.1-1(Cont.2)
V. Overtime Pay. Compensation pay to an employee for overtime work performed
in accordance with this Division, at a rate of one and one-half (l l/2) the regular
hourly rate.
W. Pay Period. A bi-weekly period of time commencing on a Sunday and ending on
the second Saturday thereafter.
X. Pay Rate. A specific dollar amount expressed as either an annual rate, a monthly
rate, a semi-monthly rate, a bi-weekly rate, or an hourly rate as shown in the
Salary Administration Program.
Y. Personnel Ordinance. An ordinance establishing general personnel policies and
providing rules for vacation, sick pay and establishing holidays, all for the general
administration of the Town's employees.
Z. Position. Any office or employment, whether occupied or vacant, full-time or
part-time, and consisting of duties and responsibilities assigned to one individual
by competent authority.
AA. Probationary Period. The working test or trial period of employment beginning
with the date of an employee's first appointment to the classified service.
BB. Promotion. Assignment of an employee from one class to another which has a
higher maximum rate of pay.
CC. Regular Employee. A person hired to work for the Town. Employees may be
classified as follows:
1. Regular Full-Time Employee. An employee hired to work 1950 hours in a
fiscal year (37.5 hours per week) or 2080 hours in a fiscal year (40 hours
per week).
2. Regular Part-Time Employee. An employee hired to work at least 1,000
hours but less than 1950 hours in a fiscal year. Participation and benefit
levels may be distinct or prorated from those of Full-Time Employees.
3. Regular Temporary Employee. An employee hired for a definite stated
period to work less than 1,000 hours in a fiscal year. Participation and
benefit levels may be distinct or prorated from those of Full-Time
Employees, or the employee may not be entitled to any benefits depending
on the position.
DD. Regular Hourly Rate. An hourly rate of pay used for purposes of calculating
overtime compensation. Such regular hourly rate of pay is calculated as follows:
Divide the pay rate by the number of hours which the pay rate is intended to
compensate to determine a regular hourly rate of pay.
SEC. 18.1-1(Cont.3)
EE. Regularly Scheduled Work Period. The number of regularly scheduled work
hours that fall within a pay period.
FF. Retirement. Separation from employment with the right to receive a pension
benefit check at the time of separation from employment.
GG. Salary Administration Program. The official or approved system of grouping
positions by job description into appropriate grades and specifying the various
steps therein.
HH. Step. A level within a job grade or pay grade in the Salary Administration
Program.
II. Suspension. An enforced leave of absence for disciplinary purposes or pending
investigation of charges made against an employee.
JJ. Transfer. Assignment of an employee from one position to another position.
Transfers can take place within a department, between departments, between
positions of the same pay range, between positions of the same grade, or between
positions of different grades.
KK. Working Day. Scheduled number of hours an employee is required to work per
day.
SEC. 18.1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Purpose. IT IS THE PURPOSE OF THESE PROVISIONS TO ESTABLISH
USUAL PROCEDURES WHICH WILL SERVE AS A GUIDE TO
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION CONCERNING THE VARIOUS PERSONNEL
ACTIVITIES AND TRANSACTIONS. THEY ARE INTENDED TO
INDICATE THE CUSTOMARY AND THE MOST REASONABLE
METHODS WHEREBY THE AIMS OF THE PERSONNEL PROGRAM CAN
BE CARRIED OUT. THESE POLICIES ARE NOT TO BE CONSIDERED
AS ESTABLISHING A CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT, NOR ARE
THEY TO BE CONSIDERED AS ESTABLISHING PROPERTY RIGHTS.
THE TOWN HAS THE AUTHORITY AND DISCRETION TO WAIVE
APPLICATION OF THESE POLICIES IN ANY INSTANCE.
B. Positions Covered. Subject to the following exceptions and those specified
elsewhere in this Code, this Chapter shall apply to all employees in the Town's
Salary Administration Program, including unclassified personnel:
1. Unclassified Personnel.
a. The City Manager shall be considered unclassified personnel and
shall not receive the benefits of, be subject to, or be regulated by
SEC. 18.1-2(Cont.1)
the following provisions:
(1) 18.1-3 Salary Administration Program, provided however,
if salary adjustments for unclassified personnel are to be
made, such adjustments shall be included by the City
Manager in the annual Budget Document which is subject
to review and approval by the Town Council;
(2) 18.1-4(A) Overtime;
(3) 18.1-11 Probation;
(4) 18.1-26 Grievances;
(5) 18.1-14 Separation and Disciplinary Action;
(6) 18.1-15 Promotions, Demotions and Transfers.
Vacation benefits for the City Manager may be supplemented from
those otherwise provided in SEC. 18.1-17 as approved by the
Town Council.
b. Bargaining Unit Employee. Employees in a bargaining unit
determined or contractually recognized by the Town Council
whose bargaining agent has negotiated, is negotiating or is
authorized to negotiate a contract or other agreement with the
Town concerning various aspects of the employer/employee
relationship shall not receive the benefits of, be subject to, or be
regulated by this Chapter, unless specifically provided in such
labor agreement.
2. Other Personnel.
a. Department Heads, Deputy City Manager, and Assistant City
Manager. All Department Heads, Deputy City Manager, and the
Assistant City Manager are considered classified personnel, but
shall not receive the benefits of, be subject to or be regulated by
the following provisions:
(1) 18.1-4(A) Overtime;
(2) 18.1-11 Probation.
C. Employee Conduct.
1. Employees are expected at all times to conduct themselves in accordance
with law, Town ordinances, directives and in a positive manner to promote
SEC. 18.1-2(Cont.2)
the best interests of the Town, the efficient operation of their department,
the performance of their job duties and the health and safety of
themselves, fellow employees and the public.
2. Employees have the responsibility for managing their behavior on and off
duty. An employee who exhibits conduct on or off duty which violates
state or local laws must promptly notify his or her supervisor.
D. Administration. These provisions shall be administered by the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-3 SALARY ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM. A job classification and
salary administration program is adopted with the objective of providing a fair day’s pay for a
fair day’s work, to attract and keep good employees and to reward employees for meritorious job
performance. A job description is provided for every full-time position and a job grade will cover
every full-time position in the Town except unclassified personnel.
A. The Salary Administration Program shall be adopted annually by the Town
Council as part of the annual budget. The Salary Administration Program
includes a salary range specifying the minimum salary and the maximum salary
attainable for each job grade. The Salary Administration Program also includes a
six (6) month, twelve (12) month, and twenty-four (24) month adjusted salary for
grades 30 through 47 inclusive. The Salary Administration Program also contains
additional steps in each grade.
1. Progression to the six (6), twelve (12), and twenty-four (24) month
adjusted salary levels is automatic, for employees starting at step one.
2. Progression to all other steps is dependent solely on merit.
3. Regular part time employees shall progress through the Salary
Administration Program in the same manner described above for regular
full-time employees.
B. The City Manager has the responsibility and authority to place employees in steps
for job grades with the Salary Administration Program and distribute salary
increases subject to the following restrictions:
1. No increase may be granted to an employee at or above the maximum of
job grade.
2. Except for movement to steps two, three, and four, all step increases are to
be totally dependent upon merit.
The City Manager shall report to the Council his recommendations for changes in job
grades, classification of new jobs, changes in salary ranges, and the general review of the
program.
SEC. 18.1-3(Cont.1)
C. Part-time and Seasonal/Temporary personnel shall receive an hourly wage based
on the wage schedule for such employee as determined by the City Manager.
D. Cost of Living Adjustments. If approved by the Town Council, Cost of Living
Adjustments shall be as provided below:
1. On October 1 of each year, the salary level then specified for each step in
the salary administration program will be adjusted up or down by the net
percentage change in the cost of living computed for the six month period
of time commencing January 1 and ending June 30 of that calendar year;
and
2. On April 1 of each year, the salary level then specified for each step in the
salary administration shall be adjusted up or down by the net percentage
change in the cost-of-living computed for the six month period of time
commencing July 1 and ending December 31 of the preceding calendar
year;
3. The cost-of-living increase or increases shall not be applied to the extent
that any single net percentage change in the cost-of-living exceeds, or the
sum of any consecutive October and April net percentage changes in the
cost-of-living exceed 5%;
4. No employee shall be compensated less than the minimum salary for that
employee’s particular job grade and step as adjusted in this paragraph.
SEC. 18.1-4 NON-REGULAR WORK TIME.
A. Overtime. Upon approval of the Department Head, employees shall receive
overtime pay or compensatory time for overtime work performed in accordance
with this Division. No employee shall work overtime absent department head
authorization. This Subsection A does not apply to employees excluded pursuant
to Subsection E of this Section.
B. Compensatory Time. Upon approval of the Department Head, employees may
receive compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay in accordance with this
Subsection:
1. The taking of compensatory time shall be scheduled and authorized by the
appropriate department head.
2. Employees may accrue not more than eighty (80) hours of compensatory
time, except the City Manager may authorize, in writing, the accumulation
SEC. 18.1-4(Cont.1)
of up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of compensatory time for the
following activities:
a. public safety,
b. emergency response,
c. seasonal.
3. Compensatory time shall not be accumulated and carried forward from
one fiscal year to the next without the written authorization of the City
Manager.
4. Overtime pay may be paid to an employee for accrued compensatory time.
Such overtime pay shall be calculated based on the regular hourly rate
earned by the employee at the time the employee receives such payment.
C. Call-Back. A regular employee called back to work after having completed a
working day shall receive credit for two (2) hours of work or the time actually
worked, whichever is greater. (Amended 12/19/11 by Ord. No. 5418)
D. Working Out of Rank.
1. Full time employees in Grade 39 and below except FLSA exempt
employees and Assistant Supervisors, who work out of rank to a higher
classified job for at least one (1) complete duty day but less than thirty
(30) complete duty days shall receive in addition to such employee’s
regular rate of pay one (1) hour of overtime for each complete duty day.
2. All full-time employees who work out of rank to a higher classified job for
thirty (30) or more complete consecutive days shall receive compensation
equivalent to the first step in the higher classified job pay grade which
results in an actual increase in pay.
E. Exempt Employees. Certain job classifications are exempt from overtime
compensation pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Any person
employed in any FLSA exempt job classification shall not receive monetary
compensation or compensatory time for overtime. FLSA exempt positions shall
be noted on the job description for such position.
SEC. 18.1-5 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY & NEPOTISM.
A. Equal Opportunity. The Town of Normal is an equal opportunity employer and
will comply with all applicable federal, state, and Town laws prohibiting illegal
discrimination in employment.
B. Nepotism. No person shall be hired as a regular employee in a department of the
Town in which there is a regular employee who has a degree of affinity
SEC. 18.1-5(Cont.1)
(marriage) or consanguinity (blood) to the Applicant as close as or closer than that
possessed by first cousins, except as required by law and except where the regular
employee enters into a nepotism agreement obligating the regular employee to
retire or resign from employment effective upon the new hire successfully
completing probation.
SEC. 18.1-6 RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT. It will be the responsibility of
each Department Head to notify the City Manager of any vacancies. The City Manager or
designee will have the responsibility for filling vacancies and employing personnel to fill newly
created positions.
SEC. 18.1-7 UNIFORM PROVISIONS. The City Manager shall have authority to
provide uniforms or cash allowances for uniforms.
SEC. 18.1-8 CONFERENCE ATTENDANCE. Expenses will be provided by the
Town for conference attendance in accordance with policy developed by the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-9 QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM. Subject to
available funding and in accordance with a written policy developed by the City Manager
meeting the requirements of Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code, the Town will provide
educational assistance to full-time regular employees. The educational assistance program and
policy developed by the City Manager shall include the following:
A. The Program must be a separate written plan set forth in a separate document or
documents providing only educational assistance meeting the definitions set forth
in Rules and Regulations implementing Section 127 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
B. Educational assistance shall mean the payment of expenses incurred by or on
behalf of an employee for education or the employer’s provision of education to
an employee, all as further restricted and defined pursuant to policy of the City
Manager.
C. Educational assistance does not include payment for or provision of any of the
items set forth in Section 1.127-2 C.3 of the Internal Revenue Service Code of
Regulations.
D. Education includes any form of instruction or training that improves or develops
the capabilities of an individual and is not limited to courses that are job-related or
part of a degree program.
E. The educational assistance program and policy shall prohibit discrimination in
accordance with Rules and Regulations of the Internal Revenue Service
interpreting Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code.
F. The educational assistance program and policy may contain requirements for
SEC. 18.l-9(Cont.1)
successful completion of a course, obtaining of a particular course grade or
satisfying reasonable conditions subsequent to receiving the benefits such as
remaining employed for a period of time after completing the course and other
reasonable restrictions and conditions as allowed by law.
G. That the City Manager shall generally give reasonable notice of the terms and
availability of the educational assistance program to eligible employees.
(SEC. 18.1-9 Amended 11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
SEC. 18.1-10 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS. Full-time employees of the Town
shall reside within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, the City of Bloomington, the
County of McLean, or within a twenty (20) mile radius of the intersection of Main and College
Avenue.
The City Manager, the Deputy City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, the Police
Chief, the Fire Chief, the Director of Public Works, the Corporation Counsel, the Director of
Water, the Parks and Recreation Director, and Finance Director, shall reside within the corporate
limits of the Town of Normal. The City Manager in writing for good cause may grant
exemptions from the foregoing residency requirements.
SEC. 18.1-11 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
A. Duration. The probationary period shall be six months for all newly hired regular
employees. Employees promoted, transferred or demoted will serve a three (3)
month probationary period. The City Manager may extend the probationary
period, not to exceed one year, in order to provide an opportunity for adequate
evaluation of the employee.
B. The probationary period is intended to provide an opportunity for department
heads and other supervisory personnel to monitor, evaluate and assess the skills,
abilities and attitudes of employees. This period affords an opportunity to
evaluate the capability of the probationary employee. It is recognized that
probationary employees may be removed from employment with the Town during
the probationary period for any reason whether or not such reason would
constitute sufficient grounds for removing full-time, non-probationary employees.
Such removal should not be deemed evidence of inefficiency, incompetency, or
unfitness, morally or otherwise, for other gainful employment. A department
head may, with the consent of the City Manager, reprimand, suspend or remove
any probationary employee within his or her department for any reason, including
but not limited to those specified in SEC. 18.1-14, as reasons justifying dismissal
or suspension of non-probationary employees. No probationary employee is
entitled to the hearing or appeal procedures afforded regular, non-probationary
employees by SEC. 18.1-14.
C. Transferred or promoted employees who are unable to perform satisfactorily on
their jobs during or at the end of their probationary period may, at the discretion
SEC. 18.1-11(Cont.1)
of the Town, be returned to their original jobs, if a vacancy exists.
SEC. 18.1-12 PART-TIME AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES. The City Manager
may employ part-time and temporary employees. Part-time and temporary employees shall be
entitled only to the benefits indicated on Chart A contained in this Chapter. Part-time and
temporary employees entitled to accrue leave benefits shall accrue such benefits proportionate to
the time actually worked in a Town recognized regularly scheduled work period or proportionate
to time actually worked in a fiscal year by a similarly classified full-time employee, as
determined by the City Manager. Part-time and temporary employees shall be paid straight time
pay and not overtime pay for all hours worked less than a regularly scheduled work week.
CHART A
PART TIME EMPLOYEE BENEFIT ELIGIBILITY
Part-Time Employees are eligible to participate in the following benefits in accordance with
Town Policy:
REG REG NON-REG NON-REG
BENEFIT P-T TEMP P-T TEMP
*IMRF(1) YES YES NO NO
HEALTH PLAN YES YES NO NO
DENTAL PLAN YES YES NO NO
VISION PLAN YES YES NO NO
SEC. 125 PLAN YES YES NO NO
VOL. 457k PLAN YES NO NO NO
HOLIDAYS YES YES NO NO
VACATION YES YES NO NO
SICK LEAVE YES YES NO NO
PERSONAL CONVENIENCE YES NO NO NO
UNIFORM PROVISIONS YES YES YES YES
EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE YES NO NO NO
EAP YES YES YES NO
FITNESS ROOM YES YES NO NO
JURY DUTY YES NO NO NO
BEREAVEMENT LV. YES NO NO NO
LEGAL CONSULTATIONS YES YES NO NO
WELLNESS REIMBURSEMENT YES NO NO NO
(Chart A Amended 11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
*These benefits may be required under applicable Federal and/or State statutes.
(1) All IMRF members may participate in Vol. IMRF Life Insurance Program.
YES means eligible to participate in the benefit in accordance with applicable policy.
SEC. 18.1-13
SEC. 18.1-13 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT. Any employee working for the Town of
Normal that is also receiving remuneration for some other employment or service is subject to
the following restrictions. All outside employment must be approved by the City Manager prior
to an employee accepting such employment or service. Appropriate records will be filed in each
employee’s personnel file, listing where employed, hours to be worked, and all other pertinent
information.
A. The outside employment must not interfere with an employee’s effectiveness in
employment for the Town of Normal.
B. Outside employment must not leave the employee tired or subject to injury on the
job.
C. Outside employment shall not be a conflict of interest with his Town
employment, nor shall it interfere with response to emergency calls.
D. No adverse public relations shall result to the Town because of an employee’s
outside employment.
E. Any other factor deemed pertinent by the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-14 SEPARATION AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
A. Separation of employees from positions in the Salary Administration Program
shall be designated as one of the following types and shall be accomplished in the
manner indicated:
1. Resignation. An employee may resign by submitting in writing the
effective date to his Department Head as far in advance as possible, but a
minimum of two weeks notice is desired. Failure to comply with this
requirement may be cause for denying future employment with the Town.
Employees who are absent from work for three (3) consecutive days
without proper notice will be considered as having voluntarily resigned.
2. Layoff. The Department Head with the approval of the City Manager may
lay an employee off in the classified service when he deems it necessary
provided, no regular employee shall be laid off when another person in a
classified position is employed on a provisional or seasonal basis in the
same position. Layoffs longer than one (1) year shall be deemed
termination from employment with no appeal rights.
3. Disability. An employee may be separated for disability when the
employee is unable, with reasonable accommodation, to perform the
essential functions of the job because of a physical or mental impairment.
Action may be initiated by the employee, or the Town, but in all cases, it
must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-14(Cont.1)
The Town may require an examination at its expense and performed by a
physician of its choice. Employees shall cooperate fully in such
determination. (Amended 11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
4. Death. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All
compensation due shall be paid to the estate of the employee, except for
such sums as by law must be paid to the surviving spouse.
5. Retirement. Whenever an employee meets the conditions set forth in
SEC. 18.1-22 and the retirement plan regulations, the employee may elect
to retire and receive all benefits earned under the retirement plan.
6. Dismissal. Separation from Town employment for cause or for any reason
not prohibited by law.
B. Disciplinary Action. Whenever employee performance, attitude, work habits or
personal conduct at any time falls below a desirable level, such employee’s
supervisor(s) may initiate appropriate disciplinary action.
1. If appropriate and justified, a reasonable period of time for improvement
may be allowed before initiating disciplinary action seeking suspension or
dismissal.
2. In some instances, a specific incident may justify severe disciplinary
action, or dismissal; however, the action depends on the seriousness of the
incident and the whole pattern of the employee’s past performance and
conduct.
3. Employees exempt from the payment of overtime pursuant to the Fair
Labor Standards Act shall not be suspended for less than one (1) work
week except for a major safety violation. Suspension of one (1) work
week or more or dismissal from employment shall be as otherwise
provided in this Code.
4. The Town may use traditional forms of disciplinary action including but
not limited to verbal counseling or coaching, written reprimands,
suspensions with or without pay, or dismissal. At the department head or
supervisor’s option, employees may be allowed employee assistance
counseling in lieu of disciplinary action. In order to participate in
employee assistance counseling in lieu of serious disciplinary action, the
employee must: (1) waive confidentiality related to attendance and
progress in completing any treatment plan recommended by the employee
assistance counselor and/or other professional; (b) attend all scheduled
meetings and complete follow-up recommendations and treatment plans.
Information received from the employee assistance counselor or other
professional shall be considered confidential and shared only on a need to
SEC. 18.1-14(Cont.2)
know basis in order to assure compliance with the terms and conditions of
referral. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the employee
assistance counseling or continued performance and behavior problems
will result in further disciplinary action.
C. Dismissal or Suspension – Regular – Non-Probationary Employees.
1. Grounds. The employee’s supervising officer(s) may dismiss or suspend
any employee for the good of the service. Reasons for dismissal or
suspension may include but shall not be limited to:
a. Failure to meet prescribed standards of work, morality and ethics
to an extent that makes an employee unsuitable for continued
employment in the position in which the individual is employed;
b. Theft or destruction of Town property;
c. Incompetency, inefficiency or negligence in the performance of
duty;
d. Insubordination that constitutes a serious breach of discipline;
e. Conviction of a felony;
f. Unbecoming personal conduct;
g. Unauthorized absences, or abuse of leave privileges;
h. Acceptance of any valuable consideration which was given with
the exception of influencing the employee in the performance of
his duties;
i. Falsification of records or use of official position for personal
advantage;
j. Inability to get along with fellow employees so that work quality
or quantity is affected;
k. Failure to follow the order of one's supervisor or Department
Head;
l. Failure to report on-the-job injuries;
m. Possessing or using alcohol or controlled substances on the job or
arriving on the job under the influence of alcohol or controlled
substances, or sale of controlled substances in the work place.
SEC. 18.1-14(Cont.3)
2. Hearing and Appeal Notice. The employee shall be furnished an advance
written notice containing the nature of the disciplinary suspension or
dismissal by the Disciplining Officer, the reasons for the discipline, duty
and pay status, and his right to answer the disciplinary action to the City
Manager or designee in writing by 5:00 p.m. on the close of the third
normal business day following receipt of advance notice. This Notice
shall be furnished at least one calendar week prior to the proposed
effective date of the disciplinary action. A copy of the advance notice
shall be provided to the City Manager. After receiving notice but prior to
the proposed effective date of dismissal or suspension, the employee may
be retained in one of the following employment statuses:
a. On duty with pay;
b. Suspended with pay;
c. Suspended without pay;
at the discretion of the disciplining officer. If the employee fails to
respond to the advance notice of the disciplinary action, it shall be
effective on the date specified with no need for additional action. If the
employee answers the charges in writing, the Manager or designee shall
afford the employee an administrative hearing and at the close thereof,
affirm, modify, increase, reduce or reverse the proposed dismissal or
suspension. Such hearings shall be commenced within seven (7) days
from the receipt of an appeal and shall be diligently pursued to disposition.
Continuances may be granted at the discretion of the Manager or designee
but only upon the execution of a salary claim waiver by the employee
initiating and pursuing the appeal.
3. Maximum Duration of Suspensions. No employee shall be suspended for
a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days for one occurrence, provided
however, this limitation shall not apply to or include the period of time
between the furnishing of the notice of charges and the effective date of
the suspension or disposition of an appeal if one is held.
SEC. 18.1-15 PROMOTIONS, DEMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS. All promotions,
transfers and demotions will occur in conjunction with the Salary Administration Program’s
merit system.
A. All recommendations for promotions and transfers will be based on merit and
shall be approved by the City Manager. When an employee is promoted, his
salary may be adjusted by the City Manager after consultation with the employee
and the Department Heads involved.
B. All recommendations for demotions based on lack of individual merit or the
phasing out of former positions, will be approved by the City Manager. Where a
regular employee accepts a voluntary demotion to a lower pay grade, his pay shall
SEC.18.1-15(Cont.1)
be set as determined by the City Manager. Where a regular employee takes an
involuntary demotion to a lower pay grade, he shall be placed in any appropriate
step rate in the lower range that is less than the existing salary. (Amended
11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
SEC. 18.1-16 HOLIDAYS. The following are considered actual holidays by the Town
of Normal:
The first day of January, commonly known as New Year’s Day; Memorial Day, the date
of celebration of which will be designated by the City Manager prior to the start of the calendar
year; the 4th of July; the first Monday in September, commonly known as Labor Day;
Thanksgiving Day; the day after Thanksgiving; one-half regular work day for Christmas Eve, but
only when Christmas falls on a Wednesday or Thursday; Christmas Day; one floating holiday,
the date of which will be designated by the City Manager prior to the start of the calendar year in
which the floating holiday is to be celebrated; and Martin Luther King Day, commonly
designated as the third Monday in January.
If an actual holiday occurs on Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed as the
holiday. If an actual holiday occurs on Sunday, the following Monday will be observed as the
holiday. All other holidays will be observed on the actual day.
For the purpose of computing overtime in a calendar week in which a holiday occurs, an
employee shall receive credit for the number of hours which the employee normally would have
worked on the observed holiday.
The pay rate for every full-time employee includes compensation for nine (9) holidays.
In addition to this compensation, certain employees who work on holidays or who observe
holidays on days which they would otherwise not work are entitled to the following benefits:
A. Employees whose weekend is defined as two (2) days other than a Saturday and
Sunday, shall, when an observed holiday falls on a day in this employee’s
weekend, be given additional time off equivalent to the observed holiday, (this
additional time off is considered an excused absence, but it is not considered an
observed holiday), as scheduled by the Department Head, or in lieu thereof,
monetary compensation equivalent to that paid for eight (8) hours of work at the
employee’s regular rate of pay for a full day holiday or four (4) hours of work for
a half-day holiday.
B. Employees who are required to work as part of their regularly scheduled work
period on an observed holiday, shall be compensated at their regular rate of pay
plus time and one-half compensation that may be taken as additional time off (this
additional time off shall be considered an excused absence, but is not considered
an observed holiday), as scheduled by the Department Head, or in lieu thereof,
monetary compensation for the time actually worked on the observed holiday.
SEC. 18.1-17
SEC. 18.1-17 VACATIONS.
A. The vacation year shall be from April 1 to March 31. Employees shall accrue
vacation benefits from date of hire based on the applicable accrual rate herein
provided, except that employees on original probation with the Town will
generally not be able to begin using their accrued vacation leave until successful
completion of their probationary period. Department Heads may consider and
approve a vacation leave request from an employee who is on original probation.
1. Employees working 40 hours per week shall accrue vacation time
according to the following schedule:
a. Less than six (6) completed years of employment, 6.67 hours per
month;
b. Six (6) but less than fourteen (14) completed years of employment,
10.0 hours per month;
c. Fourteen (14) or more completed years of employment, 13.33
hours per month.
2. Employees working 37 ½ hours per week shall accrue vacation time
according to the following schedule:
a. Less than six (6) completed years of employment, 6.25 hours per
month;
b. Six (6) but less than fourteen (14) completed years of employment,
9.375 hours per month;
c. Fourteen (14) or more completed years of employment, 12.5 hours
per month.
3. Part-time and Temporary Employees shall earn a pro-rated share of
vacation leave dependent on their work schedule as approved by the City
Manager.
B. Maximum Accrual. Absent approval from the City Manager, no employee shall
accumulate as of April 1, more than his or her annual accrual of vacation time
plus up to one additional week of vacation leave.
C. Disposition of Accrued Unused Vacation. The City Manager may by directive
provide for the disposition of accrued vacation time accumulated over the
maximum accumulation set forth above. Such disposition may include one or
more of the following:
SEC. 18.1-17(Cont.1)
1. Loss of all or portion of such time.
2. Continued accumulation for a specified period of time.
3. Payment in cash of all or a portion of such time.
D. Requests. Employees are required to submit their choice for their vacation period
at least five (5) working days prior to the date requested to their Department Head
or Supervisor. Employees may only request vacation if the leave time is available
in their leave bank. The Department Head may, but is not required, to accept
vacation requests less than five (5) days prior to the date requested.
E. Scheduling. Vacation periods shall be set by the Department Heads with due
regard to length of service with the Town and preference to the employees and
consistent with the requirements of efficient operation of the Town of Normal.
The Department Head may deny a requested vacation leave. Should working
conditions warrant, the Department Head shall have the right to cancel an
employee’s vacation and request him to submit a new date for his vacation,
provided the employee is notified of the decision at least one (1) week in advance
of the beginning of the previously approved vacation period. Request for
vacation period changes by employees shall not be considered by Department
Heads unless the employee desiring such a change has submitted his request for
such a change to his supervisor at least one (1) week in advance of the beginning
of his previously approved vacation time.
F. 1. Separation and Reinstatement. Employees who separate employment are
entitled to be compensated for all vacation time accrued as of the last day
actually worked. Compensation for any vacation accrued by an employee
who dies while still employed by the Town shall be paid to the spouse or
the estate of said employee.
2. Any employee who is reinstated following separation of employment may
be allowed full or partial prior service credit with the Town to include
vacation, sick leave and retirement benefits in accordance with I.M.R.F.
Rules and Regulations, as determined by the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-18 JURY DUTY. Employees are permitted to perform jury duty or
otherwise appear at required court appearances with the approval of the employee’s Department
Head. In the case of jury duty, the Town will compensate an employee performing jury duty,
provided all fees received from the Court system are turned over to the Town. For the purpose
of computing overtime in a regularly scheduled work period in which an employee performs jury
duty, the employee will be considered to have worked the actual number of jury duty hours
served or the number of hours the employee was regularly scheduled to work for the Town,
whichever is less. As used herein “fees” does not include reimbursement for travel expenses
incurred by the employee.
SEC. 18.1-19 SICK LEAVE. An employee shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one (1)
day for each month of service cumulative to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) working
SEC. 18.1-19(Cont.1)
days. An employee taking three (3) or more days of sick leave, shall be required to furnish a
Town approved physician’s statement to his Department Head and complete FMLA paperwork.
A. Eligibility. All regular employees who have been employed for over thirty (30)
days shall be eligible for earned sick leave.
B. Use. Sick leave may be used by eligible employees for paid leave in the
following circumstances:
1. Bona fide personal employee illness, injury or medical appointments.
Where possible, however, medical appointments should be scheduled
before or after an employee’s work shift or on a non-work day.
2. Bona fide personal illness, injury, or medical appointments of an eligible
employee’s spouse, child, or parent provided all of the following
conditions are met:
a. The employee’s presence with the spouse, child or parent is
required; and
b. Prior approval is obtained.
The foregoing age restriction shall not apply for children who, due to a
permanent disability, are incapable of caring for themselves. Medical
appointments should be scheduled before or after an employee’s workshift
or on a non-work day.
3. Use of sick leave for personal use or immediate family members does not
release any employee from their obligation in maintaining a satisfactory
attendance record. The abuse of sick leave, including evidence of patterns
of use around an employee’s weekend, as well as the excessive use of sick
leave on a frequent and recurring basis shall constitute just cause for
disciplinary action.
C. No employee shall be entitled to the benefit for more than one hundred twenty
(120) working days in a fiscal year.
D. Employees on payroll, receiving either a paycheck or Worker’s Compensation
benefits, will accrue sick leave.
E. Reinstatement. Employees hired before January 1, 2014, who have accrued one
hundred twenty (120) days of sick leave and who, due to illness, injury or
disability, take a minimum of ten (10) days up to a maximum of one hundred and
twenty (120) days of accumulated sick leave in a single occurrence and are able to
furnish a physician’s statement attesting to the employee’s illness, injury, or
disability and subsequent recovery, qualify to be reinstated the actual number of
sick leave days taken. Reinstatement will occur if the returning employee works
SEC. 18.1-19(Cont.2)
any twelve (12) consecutive months subsequent to having taken the above
described sick leave with no more than five (5) sick days during that twelve (12)
month period.
F. The Town may require an employee to submit documentation attesting to the
necessity of the employee to be absent from work on account of illness or injury.
Medical documentation shall be submitted in a form and manner acceptable to the
Town.
G. Employees not covered under the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, or a
collective bargaining agreement, with at least 20 years of service with the Town
shall be granted cash in exchange for the amount of that employee’s accumulated
and unused sick leave calculated at the time the employee enters into a retirement
agreement with the Town and at the exchange rate below:
For Police Employees
Accumulated Sick Leave Cash Exchange Rate
960 hours to 840 hours 50% of hours in Cash
839 hours to 720 hours 30% of hours in Cash
719 hours to 550 hours 20% of hours in Cash
549 hours or less 0% of hours in Cash
Only For FireFighters Subject to Career
Buyback Accumulated Sick Leave Cash Exchange Rate
1440 hours to 1260 hours 40% of hours in Cash
1259 hours to 1080 hours 30% of hours in Cash
1079 hours to 846 hours 20% of hours in Cash
863 hours or less 0% of hours in Cash
Any employee electing to exchange sick leave to cash shall enter into a retirement
agreement with the Town. Such retirement agreement shall include the following:
1. Effective date of agreement.
2. Number of hours converted to cash per this Section.
3. Number of other leave hours accumulated at the time of the agreement
such as vacation, compensatory time, personal convenience leave.
4. The date the employee with retire.
5. The employee’s status between the date of the agreement and the
employee’s retirement date. An employee shall use all accumulated leave
hours between the effective date of the agreement and the employee’s date
of retirement.
6. Election of any retirement benefits.
7. Other provisions as agreed.
SEC. 18.1-19(Cont.3)
In the event that State law allows police officers or firefighters to receive service
credit towards retirement for unused accumulated sick leave, this Section shall be
inapplicable for such police officers or firefighters and of no effect beginning the
date such law goes into effect.
H. Beginning June 1, 2007, employees who have accumulated a maximum of 120
working days of unused sick leave may continue to accrue sick leave at the rate of
1 day for each month of service cumulative to a maximum of 240 working days
provided; however, such additional accrued sick leave shall not be available for
use as sick leave, but shall be tracked and recorded solely for the purpose of
converting said sick leave to creditable service under the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund at the time said employee retires from active employment with
the Town of Normal.
(Sec. 18.1-19 Amended 11/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5514)
SEC. 18.1-20 COORDINATION OF ON-THE-JOB INJURY AND SICK LEAVE.
A. Any employee who is receiving compensation under the provisions of the
Workmen’s Compensation Act of the State of Illinois, will be eligible to take sick
days during this period and will be eligible to receive that portion of his regular
salary which will, together with Workmen’s Compensation income, equal his
regular total salary.
B. The use of sick leave in this fashion is at the employee’s option.
C. While Workmen’s Compensation is being received and the option of using the
sick days exercised, each day off is not considered one full sick day. Sick leave
usage will be computed by the employee’s present daily salary minus the amount
of Workmen’s Compensation payment received. This difference is then divided
by the employee’s hourly rate with that hourly amount subtracted from the
employee’s accumulated sick leave.
SEC. 18.1-21 INSURANCE PROGRAM. The Town shall provide group insurance
programs to Town employees and retirees with the level of benefits and the premium
contributions to be determined annually by the Town Council.
SEC. 18.1-22 RETIREMENT.
A. Employees are not required to retire at any designated age, except as may be
determined by state or federal law. Employees and the Town may determine the
retirement age of each employee based on their willingness, need, and ability to
continue performing their job duties competently.
B. IMRF Benefit Protection Leave. Employees covered under the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund are eligible to take Benefit Protection Leave upon proper
Application to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund and meeting all of the
SEC. 18.1-22(Cont.1)
qualifications for said leave imposed by the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
and subject to the following conditions:
1. The maximum amount of Benefit Protection Leave granted over an
employee’s IMRF career shall not exceed twelve (12) months.
2. The City Manager is authorized to certify an Application for Benefit
Protection Leave only if that employee meets all of the terms and
conditions established by the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund from
time to time for Benefit Protection Leave qualification.
(Subsection B Added 12/17/2012 by Ord. No. 5474)
SEC. 18.1-23 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS.
A. New Hires. A physical examination may be required for regular employees hired
by the Town of Normal. Such physical examination shall be at the Town’s
expense. A copy of the physician’s report shall be provided to the Town.
B. Required Periodic Examinations. A physical examination may be required at any
time to determine the ability of an employee to continue or return to work. The
expense of such physical examination shall be borne by the Town. A copy of the
physician’s report shall be provided to the Town.
SEC. 18.1-24 LEAVE PROVISIONS.
A. In accordance with City Manager directive, a maximum of three (3) days leave of
absence for all regular employees may be given for death of an immediate family
member or;
B. The City Manager may grant a regular employee leave without pay for a period
not to exceed one year when it is in the interest of the Town to do so. An
employee’s request shall be considered when they have shown by their record to
be of more than average value to the Town and where it is desirable to retain the
employee even at some sacrifice. During the employee’s approved leave, their
position may be filled by a temporary appointment, promotion or reassignment.
At the expiration of the leave without pay, the employee has the right to, and shall
be reinstated to, the position previously held, if the position still exists; or if not,
to any other vacant position in the same class at their previous salary level
adjusted up or down by the cost of living adjustment.
Approved leave without pay shall not constitute a break in service. Employees on
approved leave shall not accrue or be entitled to any benefits including sick leave,
vacation, P.C. days. Insurance coverage may continue at the Town’s option, at
the employee’s expense.
SEC. 18.1-24(Cont.1)
C. Employees shall be granted leave in accordance with federal or state mandated
leave requirements, pursuant to policy as determined by the City Manager.
SEC. 18.1-25 PERSONAL USE OF TOWN PROPERTY. The use of Town property
for personal purposes is prohibited, except the City Manager may, for the good of the service,
issue rules permitting the personal use of Town property.
SEC. 18.1-26 GRIEVANCES. Any inquiry, complaint, dissatisfaction or grievance of
any sort that directly affects an employee must be discussed with the employee’s Department
Head or Supervisor within one (1) calendar week of the event or occurrence directly affecting the
employee. If the employee cannot settle the grievance to his/her satisfaction, the employee may
request in writing through his Department Head that the decision be reviewed by the City
Manager. The decision of the City Manager will be final.
SEC. 18.1-27 PECUNIARY INTEREST. Except as hereafter provided, an employee
of the Town shall have no financial interest in the profits of any contract, service or work
performed for the Town of Normal. The City Manager has authority to waive any and all the
foregoing prohibitions in regard to the employment of a golf course manager at Ironwood Golf
Course. Except as prohibited by state law, a Town employee may contract with the Town
provided the following conditions are met: 1) prior approval is obtained from the City Manager;
2) the contract shall not exceed $500.00; and 3) the employee shall not enter into more than three
such contracts each fiscal year.
SEC. 18.1-28 POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Except as otherwise allowed by law,
employees may not engage in political activity on Town property, while at work, or use Town
resources for political causes.
SEC. 18.1-29 PERSONAL CONVENIENCE DAY. Any eligible employee may use a
maximum of three (3) working days per fiscal year (April 1 through March 31) at a full salary for
personal reasons. Such leave shall not be accumulated nor shall the employee be paid in lieu of
days not taken.
A. An employee may use such leave for any reason. Such leave shall be taken for a
minimum of one hour or more of the normal scheduled work day.
B. A request for such leave shall be submitted in advance on a form provided by the
Department Head. Such form shall be submitted three (3) days in advance of the
leave for personal business, except in emergency situations or other conditions
allowed by the Department Head.
C. Eligibility. Regular full-time employees employed as of April first shall be
granted three (3) days of personal convenience leave on April first of each year.
Newly hired regular full-time employees shall upon commencement of
employment be granted personal convenience leave hours based on the following
formula: number of days left in fiscal year divided by 365 times 24 or 22.5 hours.
SEC. 18.1-29(Cont.1)
D. Regular full-time employees shall be granted a fourth (4th) Personal Convenience
Day annually beginning April 1st of the fiscal year following completion of the
employee’s 20th year of employment.
E. Regular full-time employees shall be granted a fifth (5th) Personal Convenience
Day annual beginning April 1st of the fiscal year following completion of the
employee’s 25th year of employment.
SEC. 18.1-30 USE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR TOWN BUSINESS. The
City Manager may authorize the use of property owned by municipal employees for town
business and may establish reimbursement rates for the use of such personal property.
SEC. 18.1-31 GIFT BAN. Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in the State
Officials and Employee Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.) and the prohibitions contained in
Division 4 of Chapter 25 of this Code, no Town officer or employee shall accept or solicit any
gift from a prohibited source if such gift exceeds 25 dollars in value unless such gift qualifies as
a listed exception in 5 ILCS 430/10-15.
An officer or employee does not violate this provision if the officer or employee
promptly takes reasonable action to return the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt for income taxation under
Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered or succeeded.
(Entire Chapter Amended 10/21/91 by Ord. No. 4007)(Comprehensive Amendment Dated
11/21/11 by Ord. No. 5405)
SEC. 18.2-1
DIVISION 2 – PSEBA ADMINISTRATIVE ORDINANCE
SEC. 18.2-1 TITLE. This Division 18.2 may be cited as the Normal PSEBA
Administrative Ordinance.
SEC. 18.2-2 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Division 18.2 is to provide an impartial
and efficient method of determining the eligibility of an Applicant for PSEBA benefits through
an administrative process. The award of all PSEBA benefits will be consistent with the Act.
SEC. 18.2-3 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division 18.2:
Act. The Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/).
Applicant. Any person who files a written notice under Section 18.2-4 to receive PSEBA
benefit from the Town.
PSEBA benefit. A benefit set forth under Section 10 of the Act.
SEC. 18.2-4 APPLICATION.
A. Any person seeking to receive PSEBA benefits from the Town must file a written
Application with the Town Clerk. The Application under this Section must be
made on the form provided by the Town.
B. The Application must contain, at least, all of the following information:
1. the date, time and place of the injury;
2. the nature of the injury;
3. a description, in sufficient detail, of the factual circumstances surrounding
the incident giving rise to the claim for benefits;
4. witnesses to the incident;
5. witnesses that the Applicant intends to call at the administrative hearing;
6. information and supporting pension documentation filed with the pension
board and any pension board determination or ruling; and
7. a description of any health insurance benefits that are payable from any
other source.
C. In addition to the requirements under subsection B, the Application must be
accompanied by both of the following releases authorizing the collection of
SEC. 18.2-4(Cont.1)
information related to the incident, including without limitation, the disability
pension proceedings, workers’ compensation records, and medication records:
1. a medical release specifying the name and address for all pertinent health
care providers and hospitals; and
2. a general information release authorizing the collection of information
pertinent to the incident review process.
Each release must be signed by the public-safety employee or his or her
authorized representative along with legal proof of that representation and the
name and address of a witness.
D. The Application must be sworn and notarized to certify the truthfulness of the
content of the information.
E. Upon the Town’s receipt of a completed Application under this Section, the City
Manager must schedule an administrative hearing to determine the Applicant’s
eligibility for PSEBA benefits.
SEC. 18.2-5 APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER. The President is
authorized to appoint a hearing officer for each administrative hearing under this Division 18.2.
A hearing officer must be an attorney who has been licensed to practice law in Illinois for at least
3 years. In making the appointment, the President must consider a candidate’s ability to perform
the requirements of a hearing officer and his or her knowledge and experience in administrative
practice, the rules of evidence, civil procedure, and laws concerning the Act and other benefits
for public-safety employees.
SEC. 18.2-6 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF HEARING OFFICER. A Hearing
Officer under this Division 18.2 has all of the following powers and duties:
1. to preside over administrative hearings under this Division 18.2;
2. to administer oaths;
3. to hear testimony and accept evidence relevant to the issue of eligibility
for PSEBA benefits;
4. to issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
5. to rule on objections in the admissibility of evidence and on other matters
arising in the course of the hearing procedure;
SEC. 18.2-6(Cont.1)
6. to preserve and authenticate the record based on the evidence presented at
the hearing, the determination of which must be in writing and must
include a written finding of fact, decision, and order.
SEC. 18.2-7 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
A. The Administrative Hearings under this Division 18.2 shall be held on the date,
time, and place as established by the City Manager, or his or her designee, with
appropriate notice served upon the Applicant.
B. All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter, who shall make a
transcript of all proceedings.
C. The Town and the Applicant are entitled to representation by Counsel at the
Hearing and may present witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may
cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to
compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
documents.
D. The rules of evidence, as set forth in the Illinois Code of Evidence, apply.
E. The Applicant has the obligation and burden of proof to establish that he or she is
entitled to receive the PSEBA benefits.
F. The Hearing Officer’s determination of whether an Applicant is eligible for
PSEBA benefits constitutes a final administrative determination for the purpose of
judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.
(Entire Division 18.2 Added 11/17/2014 by Ord. No. 5566)
SEC. 19.1-1
CHAPTER 19 - AMUSEMENTS
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 19.1-1 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. The provisions of this Chapter, except
as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements
in the Town, whether specifically licensed in another article of this Chapter or not.
SEC. 19.1-2 PERMIT. No firm, corporation or person shall erect, construct, keep or
maintain any general amusement establishment, including theaters, for which an admission fee is
charged, within the Town of Normal, without first making application and obtaining a permit in the
manner hereinafter provided.
SEC. 19.1-3 APPLICATION. Application herein required shall be made to the Town
Council by the person, firm or corporation desiring to conduct an amusement establishment, and
shall in writing specify the proposed location of said establishment, describing the method of
conducting same and operation of the general amusement area itself. The Town Clerk shall issue a
permit herein provided for when said application has been received and approved by the Town
Council. Said application shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Insurance showing the applicant
has public liability insurance in the minimum amounts, as established by the Town Council. Said
Council may, from time to time, set forth standards for particular amusement operations and they
need not be the same for each type, but shall be based upon the proposed risk expected. Such
insurance shall be written in the name of the applicant with an endorsement carrying the Town of
Normal as an additional insured. Said applicant does further agree to indemnify and keep harmless
the said Town of Normal, and its officers and employees from any and all suits or actions at law or
equity, damages, costs, expenses and legal fees that may be incurred or sustained by said Town of
Normal for or on account of injuries or damages sustained by any person or persons, either as to
their person or property, occasioned in any manner by the granting of the license privilege or
permission asked for herein. Said agreement shall also be recited in the permit issued hereunder and
the acceptance of said permit shall be further agreement to so indemnify said Town, and a failure to
promptly indemnify said Town shall revoke the license or permit issued. Failure to provide the
necessary insurance or to indemnify said Town shall automatically revoke the permit or license
herein granted.
SEC. 19.1-4 STATE OF REPAIR. All such general amusement establishments shall be
kept in a good state of repair and in a condition so as not to endanger the safety of persons or
property. The manager of said establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of the participants
and shall see that said participants do not disturb the peace and quiet of others, and shall further see
that the establishment is maintained within reasonable hours only. If the amusements are such as to
require supervision, it shall be the duty of the management to provide adequate supervision at all
times and such supervisors shall be uniformed while on duty.
SEC. 19.1-5 FEES. Said permit shall not be transferable and shall be issued and valid for a
specified period of time, not exceeding a period of one year. (Amended 4/2l/75)
SEC. 19.2-1
DIVISION 2 - BOWLING ALLEYS
SEC. 19.2-1 LICENSE. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said
Town of Normal to keep any pin alley, ball alley or bowling alley for hire or profit, either directly or
indirectly, or where money or other thing of value is charged for the use of or for playing on the
same, without first having obtained a license for that purpose as hereinafter provided; and any
person violating this Section shall forfeit and pay not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for
each offense.
SEC. 19.2-2 FEE. License may be granted by the Town Council to the keeper of any such
pin alley, ball alley or bowling alley upon the payment of a license fee of $25.00 for each year for
each alley, payable in advance.
SEC. 19.2-3 CLOSING HOURS. No person having been granted a license as provided in
SEC. 19.2-2 shall permit his place of business to remain open to the public after the hour of one
o'clock A.M. on any day and shall not open or allow his place of business to be opened before
twelve o'clock noon on Sundays.
SEC. 19.3-1
DIVISION 3 - MOTION PICTURES; THEATRICALS
SEC. 19.3-1 PERMIT. No person, firm or corporation shall operate a movie house or
place where moving pictures are shown for profit without first obtaining a license to do so. This
section shall not apply to educational or religious institutions which show or cause to be shown
educational or religious films, the proceeds of which are to be used in the furtherance of their
respective institutions. Said section shall not apply to persons, firms or corporations showing
moving pictures for which no charge of admission is made.
SEC. 19. 3-2 APPLICATION. Application for said license shall be made to the Town
Council of said Town and shall contain the name of the person, firm or corporation who will operate
or manage said movie house, the name of the owner or lessor and lessee of the building or structure
to be used as such, the seating capacity of said movie house, the number of exits located in said
house and a floor plan showing their location.
SEC. 19.3-3 LICENSE. No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation
unless the building in which said moving pictures are to be shown meets with all the requirements
of the State Fire Marshal of Illinois and the laws of the Town of Normal, Illinois, relative to fire
hazards.
SEC. 19.3-4 ASSIGNMENT. No license, after being granted, shall be assignable.
SEC. 19.3-5 ADMISSION. The price of admission shall be printed upon the tickets used
for admission to said movie house. No more than the number of persons for which such place has
seating capacity shall be allowed to enter or occupy such movie house at any one time. All doors in
said movie house shall open outward.
SEC. 19.3-6 TERM. Said license to run for one year from the date of its issuance.
(Amended 2/4/08 by Ord. No. 5170)
SEC. 19.3-7 RESTRICTION. No picture shall be shown to the public in said movie
house which is immoral or tends to invite racial or class hatred.
SEC. 19.3-8 REVOCATION. Said license may be revoked by a three-fourths vote of the
Town Council for the violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or the laws of the State of
Illinois pertaining thereto.
SEC. 19.4-1
DIVISION 4 - TRAMPOLINES
SEC. 19.4-1 PERMIT. No firm, corporation or person shall erect, construct, keep or
maintain any trampoline established for which an admission fee is charged within the Town of
Normal without first making application and obtaining a permit in the manner hereinafter provided.
SEC. 19.4-2 APPLICATION. Application shall be made as provided for in this Chapter.
SEC. 19.4-3 STATE OF REPAIR. All trampoline establishments shall be kept in a good
state of repair and in a condition so as not to endanger the safety of persons or property and the
manager of said establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of the participants and shall see
that said participants do not disturb the peace and quiet of others and shall see that said
establishment is open only within reasonable hours.
SEC. 19.4-4 SUPERVISION. It shall be the further duty of the management of a
trampoline establishment to see that qualified personnel is on hand at all times to administer and
over-see the operations of the establishment. There shall be at least one instructor or over-seer for
each eight individual trampoline units, or fraction thereof, while in operation or use in said
establishment. Such instructor shall be uniformed as such.
SEC. 19.5-1
DIVISION 5 - MINIATURE GOLF LINKS
SEC. 19.5-1 PERMIT. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, keep or
maintain any miniature golf links for which an admission fee is charged, even though on private
property, within the Town of Normal, without first making application and obtaining a permit in the
manner hereinafter provided.
SEC. 19.5-2 APPLICATION. Application shall be made as provided for in this Chapter.
SEC. 19.5-3 CONSENT OF NEIGHBORING PROPERTY OWNERS. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or maintain any miniature golf links where
an admission fee is charged even though upon private property in said Town in any block in which
one-half of the buildings on both sides of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes,
regardless of the existing zoning classification at the time of the application, without first obtaining
the consent in writing, of a majority of the property owners according to the frontage on both sides
of the street in said block such written consent shall be presented to the Town Council with the
application herein provided for.
SEC. 19.5-4 STATE OF REPAIR. Any miniature golf links shall be kept in a good state
of repair and in a condition not to endanger the safety of persons or property. The manager, or
person in charge of said golf links, shall be responsible for the conduct of players, and shall see that
the players do not disturb the peace and quiet of others.
SEC. 19.6-1
DIVISION 6 - PENALTY
SEC. 19.6-1 PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined in the sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each
offense. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be considered as a separate and
distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 20.1-1
CHAPTER 20 - FOOD DEALERS
Chapter 20 - Food Dealers, of the "Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969", be and
hereby is repealed in its entirety, effective January 1, 1974.
(Rev. 5/21/73)
SEC. 21.1-1
CHAPTER 21 - REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1
SEC. 21.1-1 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases, when used in this
Chapter, shall have the meaning given to them in this Section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
A. Ashes. Residue from fires used for cooking, recreational fires, or heating buildings.
B. Brush. Trimmings from shrubs, trees or other woody plants. (Amended
12/7/76)(Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935)
C. Bulky Waste. Individual items of furniture, equipment or machinery or parts thereof,
including as illustrative examples the following: auto parts, tires and wheels,
mechanical equipment, stoves, refrigerators, furniture pieces, individual items which
but for their weight would constitute rubbish, individual items of construction and
demolition waste, freezers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers, trash
compactors, water heaters, furnaces, carpeting, bed mattresses, bed box springs,
lawn mowers, etc. (Amended 12/7/76) (Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935)
D. Construction and Demolition Waste. Any lumber, plywood, paneling, plastic board,
roofing scraps, sheeting scraps, plastic, glass, concrete, rubble, conduit, pipe, wire,
or other wastes generated from the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of
the building, dwelling, structure, or portion thereof and includes bulky waste.
(Amended 3/21/2016 by Ord. No. 5629)
E. Garbage. Wastes resulting from the handling, packaging, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food.
F. Other Waste. Any item not specifically other-wise enumerated in the definition
section.
G. Recyclable Material. Containers and mixed paper products identified from time to
time by the City Manager or his designee as acceptable for collection and disposal
pursuant to the Town of Normal single stream curbside recycling program. The City
Manager or his designee shall post the list of acceptable recyclable material on the
Town webpage and otherwise make the list available to residents of Normal.
H. Refuse. Garbage, rubbish, ashes, brush, construction and demolition wastes, and
other wastes. (Amended 3/21/2016 by Ord. No. 5629)
I. Refuse Collection and Disposal Service. The combined collection and disposal of
refuse and recyclable material.
SEC. 21.1-1(Cont.1)
J. Refuse Collector. Town employee under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works, or a person, firm or corporation licensed as a refuse
collector by the Town of Normal.
K. Rubbish. Combustibles such as paper, cardboard cartons, wood, boxes, excelsior,
plastic, rags, cloth, bedding, leather, rubber, or non-combustibles such as metal, tin
cans, metal foil, dirt, stone, bricks, ceramics, crockery, glass, bottles, or
combinations thereof. (Amended 12/7/76) (Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935)
L. Landscape waste. Leaves, yard trimmings and garden waste. Grass, grass clippings,
turf, sod, and soil are not eligible for collection. (Added 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935)
M. Single Stream Curbside Recycling Program. That program, together with all
applicable rules and regulations, developed by the City Manager or his designee, for
the regular curbside collection of mixed recyclable material from one and twofamily
dwellings within the Town.
SEC. 21.1-2 TOWN SERVICE.
A. Service Provided. The Town of Normal shall provide by its agents, contractors or
employees a refuse collection and disposal service to persons owning or residing in
one and two-family dwellings within the Town of Normal, in manner and to the
extent provided in this chapter. The Town shall not provide such service to any
commercial, manufacturing, industrial, or business enterprise, to persons residing in
residential buildings containing more than two dwelling units, or within any mobile
home park, except, the Town shall provide construction and demolition waste,
brush, landscape waste, and leaf collection for persons residing in residential
buildings containing more than two dwelling units and mobile home parks, but only
in the manner and to the extent provided in this chapter. The delivery of municipal
refuse service by the Town is a mandatory service, and owners or occupants of any
dwelling shall not have the right to refuse such service. From and after September
12, 2011, owners and occupants of any one and two-family dwelling shall use only a
Town provided waste receptacle. From and after July 9, 2012, owners and
occupants of any one- and two-family dwelling shall use only a Town provided
container for recyclable material. (Amended 9/21/87)(Amended 2/15/93 by Ord.
4109) (Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935) (Amended 3/21/2016 by Ord. No. 5629)
B. Manager’s Authority. The Municipal Manager of the Town of Normal is hereby
authorized to publish schedules for collection by the Town of refuse and recyclable
material and to establish and promulgate rules and regulations governing the actions
of refuse collection and disposal services within the Town of Normal.
C. Service Fee. A service fee for weekly collection of refuse collection and disposal
services is imposed upon the owner and occupant in the following amounts: Before
April 1, 2018, the fee is $18 per month; On April 1, 2018 through March 31, 2019,
the fee is $24 per month; On April 1, 2019 through March 31, 2020, the fee is $26
SEC. 21.1-2(Cont.1)
per month; On April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021, the fee is $30 per month; On
and after April 1, 2021, the fee is $32 per month. (Amended 2/4/08 by Ord. No.
5172)(Amended 4/23/2012 by Ord. No. 5437) (Amended 3/2/2015 by Ord. No.
5585) (Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5734)
There shall be a charge for weekly collection of construction and demolition waste
only to the owner of the following:
1. Such fee shall be in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per month per
dwelling with more than two units but less than five units.
2. Such fee shall be in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per month per
dwelling with more than four units but less than nine units.
3. Such fee shall be in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month per
dwelling with more than eight units.
For Townhouse-style dwelling units in a Planned Unit Development not receiving
Town refuse collection service, but receiving Town construction and demolition
waste collection service, a fee of $1.25 per month for each unit. (Amended
3/21/2016 by Ord. No. 5629)
The service fee shall be payable on a monthly basis. Failure to pay the fee upon
billing by the Town may result, at the Town’s option, in the placement of a lien
against the real estate or may result in the filing of a complaint in Circuit Court
seeking a personal judgment against the owner or persons interested in the property
subject to such service fee, termination of refuse collection and disposal services,
termination of water service, or other remedies. The election of a particular remedy
shall not constitute a waiver of any other remedy available to the Town for
collection of the service fee.
The owner of the dwelling unit, the occupant thereof and the user of the services
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay such fee, and the services are furnished to
the dwelling unit by the Town only on the condition that the owner of the dwelling
unit, occupant thereof and user of the service are jointly and severally liable. The
fee for such collection shall be paid in advance for which the Town of Normal shall
provide collection service to the dwelling unit at least once each week. (Amended
12/7/76)(Amended 8/15/77)(Amended 3/5/79)(Amended 3/21/81, eff.
4/1/81)(Amended 2/15/93 by Ord. No. 4109) (Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935)
(Amended 03/05/18 by Ord. No. 5734)
If the service fee is not paid on or before the due date stated on the bill, a penalty of
ten percent (10%) shall be added to the bill. Failure to receive a bill does not entitle
an owner or occupant to remission of any penalty. Any person contesting a bill may
do so by filing a written appeal with the Town pursuant to the appeal process for
water bills set forth in SEC. 7.7-4 of this Code.
SEC. 21.1-2(Cont.2)
D. Drop-Off Service. In addition to the refuse collection and disposal services described
herein, the City Manager is authorized to provide drop box recycling services, dropoff
electronic recycling services and other drop-off self-serve refuse and recycling
services. The City Manager is authorized to establish and promulgate rules and
regulations governing all drop-off services described herein.
SEC. 21.1-3 REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILIZATION OF TOWN’S REFUSE
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE.
A. Any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit in a one or two-family dwelling desiring
to utilize the Town’s refuse collection and disposal service shall do so in the
following manner.
1. Preparation of Recyclable Material, Garbage, Rubbish, Construction and
Demolition Wastes, and Ashes.
a. All garbage shall be thoroughly drained of all liquid and recyclable
containers shall be emptied and rinsed.
b. Any sharp object constituting rubbish shall be securely wrapped in
paper.
c. Ashes shall be extinguished so that no hot coal or fire remains.
d. No ashes shall be mixed with garbage, rubbish, construction or
demolition waste, or brush.
e. Needles, sharps, or lancets shall be securely placed in a puncture
proof container.
2. Receptacles.
a. Standards. Except as provided in Paragraph 3, all garbage, rubbish,
ashes, and individual items of construction and demolition waste,
after being prepared in the manner required by Paragraph 1 of this
Section, shall be placed in a refuse receptacle meeting the following
requirements and shall be placed for collection at the time and
location provided in Paragraph 3(a).
(1) Approved Refuse Receptacles. From and after September
12, 2011, the only refuse receptacle authorized for use shall
be a Town supplied receptacle. One 95-gallon refuse
receptacle shall be supplied free of charge by the Town to
each single and two-family dwelling unit as of September 12,
2011. Additional refuse receptacles may be purchased from
the Town. After September 12, 2011, new and replacement
SEC. 21.1-3(Cont.1)
refuse receptacles must be purchased from the Town. No
other kind of refuse receptacle is allowed.
(2) Approved Receptacles for Recyclable Material. From and
after July 9, 2012, the only receptacle authorized for
recyclable material shall be a Town supplied receptacle. A
receptacle for recyclable material will be available for
purchase for $30.00 until May 25, 2012. After May 25,
2012, the fee for such receptacle shall increase to the cost
paid by Town for such receptacle.
b. Responsibility for Maintenance. It is the joint obligation of the
owner and occupant of any dwelling unit in a one or two-family
dwelling utilizing the Town’s refuse collection and disposal service
to provide approved refuse containers and maintain same in good
repair. Whenever any receptacle shall become defective, it is the
responsibility of the owner or occupant to repair or replace same.
c. Procedure for Disposal of Defective Receptacles. The Town shall
have the right to condemn any defective receptacle by placing
thereon a red tag or sticker which shall be notice to the owner or
occupant of its defective nature. The owner of such receptacle shall
replace or repair the same before it is used again, and the Town shall
have the right to dispose of the defective receptacle during any
subsequent collection.
3. Placement of Receptacles and Contents for Pick-Up.
a. Time and Location. No later than 5:00 a.m. of the day of collection
and not earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection, any
owner, operator or occupant of any family dwelling utilizing the
Town’s collection service shall place or cause to be placed
receptacles, individual items constituting rubbish, individual items
constituting construction or demolition wastes, individual items
which, if they weighed 35 pounds or more, would constitute bulky
wastes, and brush on the curb line behind the curb of a public street
or alley, so placed that the contents will not be scattered by the wind
or animals. Receptacles shall be returned to the premises within
twelve hours after having been emptied.
b. Quantities. The Town’s weekly refuse service shall include
collection of:
(1) The contents of receptacles meeting the requirements of SEC.
21.1-3(A)(2)(a).
SEC. 21.1-3(Cont.2)
(2) Individual or combination of items from single and twofamily
dwellings weighing no more than five hundred (500)
pounds which constitute or would other-wise constitute
rubbish or construction or demolition wastes.
(3) Individual or combination of items from occupant owners in
dwellings with more than two units weighing no more than
five hundred (500) pounds which constitute or would
otherwise constitute rubbish or construction or demolition
wastes.
(4) Individual or combination of items from tenant occupied
dwellings with more than two units weighing no more than
two thousand (2000) pounds which constitute or would
otherwise constitute rubbish or construction or demolition
wastes.
(5) One pile of brush not exceeding six feet in any dimension
from each dwelling.
(6) One or more flattened cardboard boxes. (Amended 12/15/75,
effective 4/1/76)(Amended 6/21/76)(Amended 12/7/76)
c. Eligibility for Brush and Bulky Waste Collection. No brush or
construction of demolition wastes shall be collected which is created
by any person, firm, or corporation doing work as a contractor for
any other person. (Added 6/7/82 by Ord. 3102)
d. Other Wastes. The Town of Normal’s refuse disposal and collection
service does not include the collection and disposal of “other
wastes.”
(Amended 12/7/76)(Entire SEC. 21.1-3 Amended 3/1/04 by Ord. No. 4935) (Entire SEC. 21.1-3
Amended 3/21/2016 by Ord. No. 5629)
SEC. 21.1-4 REQUIREMENTS FOR REFUSE RECEPTACLES.
A. Owners Obligation and Specifications. The owners of business, commercial,
manufacturing, industrial, mobile home parks, or residential structures other than
one or two-family dwellings in which refuse is accumulated for disposal shall
provide or cause to be provided refuse receptacles meeting the following
requirements and shall collect said refuse at least on a weekly basis and shall further
provide for private refuse collection of the contents thereof. (Amended 1/18/82)
1. Refuse bins. (Referred to from time to time in this Chapter as “dumpsters”)
first placed in service after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance,
shall meet or exceed the most current standards, rules and regulations of the
SEC. 21.1-4(Cont.1)
Consumer Product Safety Commission. All others (being refuse bins
currently in service) shall be securely fastened with safety chains to
permanently fixed objects to prevent them from tipping over. (Amended
3/5/79)
2. Roll-Off Boxes. Open metal attachable containers commonly known and
referred to herein as “roll-off boxes,” provided, however, such roll-off boxes
shall not be used for the storage or disposal of garbage, rubbish or other
refuse, the accumulation of which in such an open container would constitute
a nuisance, cause an offensive odor, or be difficult because the contents
would be scattered by the wind.
3. Exceptions. When the use of dumpster or roll-off box would otherwise be
required and where conditions exist which would make the use of such a
device impossible or impractical, the Director of Public Works may permit
the use of other receptacles. Any person desiring to utilize a receptacle other
than a dumpster or roll-off box where the use of one would otherwise be
required shall submit a written application to the Director of Public Works
specifying the nature of the impossibility or impracticality and describing the
proposed type of receptacle. The Director may condition his approval in
writing as necessary to provide a safe and sanitary refuse disposal procedure.
B. Location.
1. One and Two-family Dwellings.
a. Except when lawfully set out for collection, no accumulated refuse
recycling receptacle or refuse container shall be stored in the front
yard or in the front or side yard of any corner lot.
b. Refuse and recycling material not in receptacles shall be neatly
stacked and screened from view until lawfully set out for collection.
2. Other Uses or Occupancies.
a. Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall not be permitted in the front yard or in
the front or side yard on corner lots, and in business and multiplefamily
zoning districts, dumpsters shall not be permitted in the front
yard, corner side yard, or side yards. Dumpsters shall be screened
from view at all times. (Amended by Ord. 3930, 10/15/90)
b. Roll-Off Boxes. Roll-off boxes shall not be permitted in a front yard
or on a dedicated street right-of-way, provided, however, the
Director of Public Works may issue temporary permission for a rolloff
box to be located on the public right-of-way, or the Building
SEC. 21.1-4(Cont.2)
Commissioner may issue temporary permission for a roll-off box to
be placed in a required front or side yard.
c. Other Receptacles. Other receptacles shall be placed and stored as
specified in the permit received from the Director of Public Works.
d. Exceptions. Any person desiring to locate a dumpster or roll-off box
on the dedicated public right-of-way or in a yard where the
placement of such a receptacle would otherwise be prohibited, other
than temporarily, may submit a request to the Director of the
Department of Public Works specifying the proposed location,
justifying the location, and detailing how the receptacle will be
screened so as to shelter and protect surrounding properties to the
same or a greater extent than if the receptacle was located in a yard
where it would otherwise be permitted.
e. Pad. Dumpsters and roll-off boxes shall be located on a concrete or
asphalt pad.
SEC. 21.1-5 PRIVATE REFUSE COLLECTORS.
A. Subject to Supervision – Interference With.
1. No person shall engage in the business of collecting or removing refuse
within the Town except as an employee of the Town under the direction of
the Director of the Department of Public Works or as a private refuse
collector operating in compliance with this Section.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or obstruct the
removal of refuse by any person authorized to do so.
B. Operating Regulations.
1. Hours of Collection. Private refuse collectors may make collections only
during the time specified as follows:
a. Collections from single-family or two-family uses during the hours
of 6:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., prevailing time, on Monday through
Saturday, inclusive;
b. Collections from multiple-family, business, commercial, industrial,
or manufacturing uses shall be made only between the hours of 4:00
A.M. to 6:00 P.M., prevailing time.
(Sub-Paragraph B-1 Amended 9/21/87)
SEC. 21.1-5(Cont.1)
2. Vehicle Covers. All private refuse collectors’ vehicles used in the collection
of refuse shall have a tight cover for that portion of the vehicle in which such
refuse is carried. Such cover may be made of metal or canvas or similar
material and shall be so designed and constructed as to prevent odor or
materials from escaping therefrom. Such cover shall be closed at all times
while the vehicle is in transit anywhere within the limits of the Town or in
route to a disposal or landfill site. (Amended 12/7/76)
3. Removal of Dumpster. No private refuse collector shall allow their dumpster
or refuse receptacle to remain on a customer’s property more than six days
following termination of service to the customer or stoppage of service due
to non-payment of charges by the customer.
SEC. 21.1-6 DEPOSITING OR STORAGE OF REFUSE.
A. Depositing or Permitting Refuse to Remain. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit, bury, throw, place, or cause to be deposited, buried, thrown, or placed any
refuse within the corporate limits of the Town. It shall be unlawful for any property
owner, lessee, or tenant to permit any refuse placed, deposited, buried, or thrown on
any property owned, leased, used, occupied, or in which such person otherwise has
an interest to remain on such property after such material has been placed, deposited,
buried, or thrown thereon.
B. Storage or Disposal of Refuse.
1. Burning Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to burn or set fire to or cause to be burned or cause to set fire to any refuse
within the Town of Normal unless such material shall be burned in an
incinerator or furnace properly constructed for such purpose and approved
by the Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Requirements as to the Storage of Food. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to store human or animal food or feed within the Town
limits in other than a rat-free and rat-proof container, compartment or
building.
3. Refuse of Recyclable Material Placed out for Collection in Violation of this
Chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to place out for collection or
cause to be placed out for collection any refuse or recyclable material within
the corporate limits of the Town in a manner violating any provision of this
chapter. (Chapter 21 – Refuse and Recyclable Material Collection and
Disposal). (Added 9/21/87)
4. Refuse or Recyclable Material Placed out for Collection on Street Medians.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place out for collection or cause to be
SEC. 21.1-6(Cont.1)
placed out for collection any refuse or recyclable material on any street
median within the Town of Normal. (Added 9/21/87)
5. Storage of Refuse and Recyclable Material Between Collection Dates. It
shall be unlawful for any person, property owner, or lessee to permit refuse
or recyclable material to be placed on such person’s property other than in a
Town approved receptacle, except bulky trash which must be neatly stacked
in the rear yard in a manner not creating a nuisance to adjoining property
owners or the public.
C. Storage of Lumber, Boxes, Barrels, Etc. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to store any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, or similar
materials evenly piled or stacked on open racks that are elevated not less than 18
inches above the ground, so that such materials will not afford a harborage for rats.
D. Disturbing Refuse or Recyclable Material of Another. It shall be unlawful for any
unauthorized person to remove, disturb or damage any refuse, recyclable material or
receptacle properly set out for collection; provided, however, any person may
remove refuse or recyclable material set out for collection on property owned,
rented, leased, or in which such person otherwise has a legal interest. (Amended
12/7/76)
E. Demolition Refuse. All refuse resulting from the demolition of any building must
be removed from the building site within seven (7) days following demolition.
(Added 5/5/86)
F. Prohibited Refuse. No person shall place out for collection nor shall the Town or
any private refuse hauler collect any refuse prohibited by state or federal law from
entering a landfill.
SEC. 21.1-7 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof
shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day
upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such violation to exist.
(Amended 12/15/75, eff. 4/1/76)
(Entire Division 1 Amended 4/16/2012 by Ord. No. 5436)
SEC. 21.2-10
DIVISION 2 - MULTI-FAMILY RECYCLING
SEC. 21.2-1 PURPOSE. The purpose of this new Division 2 is to establish requirements
for the collection and recycling of recyclable materials generated from multi-family dwellings that
are not served by the Town recycling-collection services.
SEC. 21.2-5 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division 2:
Collector. A refuse collector who collects recyclable material from multiple-family
dwellings and transports it to a processor.
Multi-family dwelling. A mobile home park or residential structure other than a one or twofamily
dwelling.
Management agent. The person required to provide refuse receptacles and collection for the
multi-family dwelling under Sec. 21.1-4 of this Code.
Person. An individual or entity.
Processor. A “recycling center” as defined under Section 3.375 Of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/3.375).
Recyclable material. Has the definition set forth in Sec. 21.1-1 of this Code.
Recycling receptacle. A dumpster, roll-off box, or refuse tote used for the purpose of the
collection of recyclable materials.
Refuse tote. A 2-wheeled mobile waste/recycle container with a capacity of at least 65
gallons and with lid able to be loaded automatically with appropriate equipment.
Storage area. Any outside area of a multi-family dwelling designated for the location of
recycling receptacles for the collection and storage of recyclable material prior to removal
by the Collector.
SEC. 21.2-10 RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLINGS.
A. On or before August 1, 2019, the management agent of a multi-family dwelling shall
institute an on-site recycling program and provide a collection system for the
collection of recyclable materials. The recycling program must include all of the
following components: (1) recycling receptacles that are located in a storage area;
and (2) a contract with a collector for collection of the recyclable materials and
transport to a processor.
B. For a multi-family dwelling other than a mobile home park, a storage area must be
located at each location with a solid waste receptacle. If a mobile home park
provides centralized solid waste receptacles at locations other than at each mobile
SEC. 21.2-10(Cont.1)
home location, then a storage area must be located at each location with a solid
waste receptacle. For all other mobile home parks, a storage area must be located in
a centralized location that is accessible and convenient to the residents of the mobile
home park.
C. The management agent shall provide, at the storage area, a sufficient number of
recycling receptacles.
D. Each storage area and location of any recycling receptacle must comply with all
Town zoning, building, and subdivision laws, except that any requirement for the
screening of recycling receptacles does not apply until August 1, 2022.
E. The storage area must be kept clean and orderly, such that no materials are left on
the ground around the recycling receptacles and shall otherwise comply with all
applicable existing solid-waste ordinances.
F. The recycling material must be collected by a collector at least once per week. The
restrictions set forth in Sec. 21.1-5 apply to collectors under this Division 2. All
collection must be performed on the site of the multi-family dwelling; recycling
receptacles may not be placed on the curb of a public street or alley for collection
unless approved by Director of Public Works.
SEC. 21.2-12 RECYCLABLES COLLECTION AND PROCESSING.
A. Each collector may deliver the recyclable materials only to a processor. The
collector shall ensure that the processor meets the provisions of this Division 2,
which includes sufficient processing facility, equipment, labor, and management to
perform the sorting, preparation, processing, and recovery of materials in a matter
that will maximize the quality and quantity of recyclable materials.
B. Each collector must file a report with the McLean County Solid Waste Coordinator
concerning the amount of recyclable materials collected. The report must be in the
form and manner as required by the McLean County Solid Waste Coordinator. The
report must be filed annually and must, at a minimum, specify amount and type of
material collected.
SEC. 21.2-15 NEW MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
A. Prior to construction, the site plan for each new multi-family dwelling must provide
for the exterior storage areas of the recycling receptacles.
B. The storage area:
(1) must be located with the residential solid waste receptacles.
(2) may be located in a parking area, if the proposed use provides at least the
minimum number of parking spaces required for the use after deducting the
areas used for the storage area.
SEC.21.2-15(Cont.1)
(3) Must otherwise comply with all applicable zoning, subdivision, and solidwaste
ordinances then in effect.
(4) must be accessible for collection vehicles and located so that the storage area
will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic movement on the site or on
public streets or sidewalks adjacent to the site.
C. Any site plan submitted after the effective date of this Division 2 may not be
approved unless it includes provisions for recycling storage areas in accordance with
this Section.
D. The management agent of a multi-family dwelling constructed after the effective
date of this Division 2 must institute an on-site recycling program meeting the
requirements of Sec. 21.2-10 within 30 days after the date of initial occupancy.
SEC 21.2-20 PENALTIES.
A. A violation of this Division 2 shall subject the violator to a penalty of $100 per day,
and each day a violation continues to exist constitutes a separate violation.
B. The Division 2 may be enforced through any remedy available at law for the
enforcement of ordinances, including the institution of an appropriate action for an
ordinance violation in circuit court or before the Town’s administrative adjudication
system. The Town may also institute any appropriate action in the circuit court for
injunctive relief to restrain any actual or threatened violation of this Division 2.
SEC. 21.2-25 EXEMPTION FOR TOWN-COLLECTED DWELLINGS. The recycling
requirements under this Division 2 do not apply to any multi-family dwelling for which the Town
provides weekly collection of refuse and recycling.
SEC. 21.2-30 EVALUATION OF RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS. On or before
April 1, 2022, Town staff shall evaluate this Division 2, including the screening requirements and
any other zoning, building, and subdivision laws affecting this Division 2, and shall recommend any
amendments to the Town Council to this Division 2 that it deems necessary and appropriate. But
nothing in this Section requires or prohibits any amendments to this Division 2.
(Entire Division 2 Added 07/02/18 by Ord. No. 5743)
SEC. 21.3-1
DIVISION 3 - NUISANCES
SEC. 21.3-1 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION. When the existence of a public
nuisance is brought to the attention of the City Manager, he shall cause an inspection and
investigation to be made by the appropriate agencies to determine whether removal is necessary.
SEC. 21.3-2 NOTICE TO ABATE. After inspection and investigation, under the
provisions of the preceding section, The City Manager shall cause a notice in writing to be served
upon the person who is responsible for the existence of the nuisance. If personal service of the
notice cannot be made, then such notice shall be left at the residence or usual place of business of
the person found to be responsible or on the property on which the nuisance is located.
The notice shall indicate the date of the inspection and investigation and the hours and
location where the inspection was made. The notice shall set forth what the nuisance consists of
and indicate the abatement or remedy required.
SEC. 21.3-3 FAILURE TO ABATE AFTER NOTICE; ABATEMENT BY TOWN;
COST. After the expiration of 5 days from the time the notice is served, if the nuisance is not
abated or other remedy made as required, it shall be abated pursuant to the nuisance abatement
process set forth in this Division.
SEC. 21.3-4 ABATEMENT IN CASE OF EMERGENCY. If the nuisance constitutes
an emergency, the time for abatement may be reduced in the notice which specifies that the
emergency exists.
SEC. 21.3-5 ABATEMENT BY OWNER, AGENT OR OCCUPANT WHERE
RESPONSIBLE PERSON IS UNKNOWN. When any nuisance, or anything likely to become a
nuisance, may be found upon any premises, and the person causing such nuisance is unknown or
cannot be found, the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall be notified to abate the same. If
such owner, agent or occupant, whose duty it is hereby made to abate such nuisance, shall not
promptly comply with such notice, it shall be abated by the City Manager as provided in this
Division, and the owner, agent, or occupant shall be subject to the penalty as hereinafter provided.
SEC. 21.3-6 THINGS INTERFERING WITH PEACE OR COMFORT. Sound,
animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of any person in the
Town are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Anything which is made, permitted, used, kept, maintained, or operated, or any building or
any animal that is kept in the Town or outside of the Town, but within one-half mile of its limits, in
a manner which is offensive, nauseous, dangerous to life, limb, or property or detrimental to the
health of the persons residing in that area shall be a public nuisance.
Whoever shall, within the limits of the Town, establish or maintain any tallow, chandlery,
tannery, bone, or soap factory, or shall steam, boil or render any tainted lard, tallow, offal, or other
unwholesome animal substance shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance; and whoever shall, without
SEC. 21.3-6(Cont.1)
the Town limits and within one mile thereof, establish or maintain any such chandlery, factory,
tannery, or rendery without first obtaining the consent of the Town Council; or whoever, having
obtained such permission and consent, shall so conduct or carry on any such business so as to taint
the air and render it offensive or unwholesome, or so as to affect the health or comfort of persons
residing in the neighborhood thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance.
Whoever shall, within the Town, place or throw or permit to be discharged or to flow from
or out of any house or premises any filthy, foul, or offensive matter or liquid of any kind into any
street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground or shall allow or permit the same to
be done by any person connected with the premises under his control, shall be deemed guilty of a
nuisance.
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be
exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited by this Code.
SEC. 21.3-7 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES. In addition to what
is herein declared to be a nuisance, those offenses known to the common law or of the statutes of
the state as nuisances may, in case the same exists within the Town, be treated as such and
proceeded against as in this Chapter provided.
SEC. 21.3-8 NUISANCES. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances and subject
to abatement as provided in this Division:
A. Graffiti. Any wall or exposed surface marked with graffiti as defined herein shall
constitute a public nuisance. The owner of real or personal property marked with
graffiti shall completely remove or permanently cover any and all graffiti placed on
such real or personal property within seven (7) days of the date the graffiti was
placed upon the property. As used in this section, graffiti shall mean any drawing,
inscription, writing, figure, or mark made upon a wall or other exposed surface,
including but not limited to, any house, garage, rock, bridge, fence, gate, tree,
monument, motor vehicle, sidewalk, street, lamppost, street sign, underpass, or
retaining wall, whether publicly or privately owned with paint, chalk, dye, ink,
pencil, wax, or other similar substance or by etching, scratching, cutting, burning, or
carving without the express consent of the owner of said wall or other exposed
surface. (Entire SEC. 21.3-8 Added by Ord. No. 4074 August 3, 1992)
B. Standing Water as Public Nuisance. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes can
multiply is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. All items containing stagnant
water which can serve as a breeding ground for mosquitoes are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance. This includes, but is not limited to, bottles, cans, buckets,
swimming pools, clogged gutters, or any other places containing stagnant water.
The outdoor storage of tires for more than seven (7) consecutive days is declared a
public nuisance. The foregoing declarations of public nuisances shall not apply to
ditches, drainage ways, detention basins, lakes, streams, and natural land formations
where water may collect.
SEC. 21.3-8(Cont.1)
C. Prohibited Plants. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in control
of any lot, place, or area within the Town of Normal, or the agent of such owner or
person in control of any lot, place, or area to permit the growth of any noxious
weeds or to permit the growth of turf grass to a height exceeding eight (8) inches.
Such growth is hereby declared to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to be a nuisance. “Lot, place, or area” includes all the lot and
the land between the curb and sidewalk adjacent to the lot, place, or area controlled
by the above designated persons or agents.
Noxious weeds means any plant now or hereafter listed by the State of Illinois as a
Noxious Weed pursuant to the Illinois Noxious Weed Act, 5 ILCS 100/1 et seq., any
plant now or hereafter listed as an exotic weed by the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, 525
ILCS 10/1 et seq., and poison ivy (Toxicodendron Radicans), poison oak
(Toxicodendron Quericofolium), and poison sumac (Toxicodendron Vernix).
Turf grass means any grass except grasses being grown for food or agricultural
purposes and ornamental grasses which are intentionally, occasionally, and
sporadically planted as part of a landscape design.
D. Garbage, Rubbish, Ashes, Bulky Wastes, Brush, Construction and Demolition
Wastes, Fill, Excavation Dirt, and Other Wastes. The presence upon land within the
corporate limits of the Town of Normal of accumulated garbage, rubbish, ashes,
bulky wastes, brush, construction and demolition wastes, fill, and excavation dirt
mounded above the natural terrain, and other similar wastes, is hereby declared to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare and is declared to be a
nuisance.
E. Refuse Placed Out for Collection in Violation of this Chapter. Refuse placed out for
collection in violation of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the non-timely
placement of bulky waste at the curb-line for collection is hereby declared to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare and is declared to be a
nuisance.
F. Neglected Weeds, Grass, Trees, and Bushes all as Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7.
G. Pests all as Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8.
H. Infected Trees all as Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12.
I. Garbage, Debris, and Graffiti all as Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13.
SEC. 21.3-9 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
A. In the event any of the nuisances identified in this Division exist within the Town of
Normal, the City Manager or his designee shall notify, in writing, such owner,
occupant, person in control, or agent to remove such public nuisance. In the event
such owner, occupant, person in control, or agent cannot be located after reasonable
SEC. 21.3-9(Cont.1)
inquiry, posting shall be sufficient notice. The notice shall state that unless such
nuisance is so abated or removed by a specified date, the Town will cause it to be
abated or removed, that the cost thereof will be charged to the owner, occupant, or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and that such cost shall be a
lien upon the real property where the nuisance was abated or removed. Such notice
shall also state that the failure of such owner, occupant, person in control, or agent to
abate the nuisance as required by such notice shall be deemed an implied consent for
the Town to abate or remove such nuisance. Such implied consent shall be deemed
to form a contract between such owner, occupant, person in control, or agent and the
Town. If such owner, occupant, person in control, or agent fails to abate any
nuisance within the time limit specified in such notice, the Town may proceed to
abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement as to each
particular lot or tract, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner,
occupant, person in control, or agent.
B. Administrative Expense. In addition to the expenses set forth in SEC. 21.3-9(A), the
Town shall charge a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fee to cover a portion of the administrative
costs incurred for removal of the nuisance. Where the Town causes the removal of
pubic nuisances from more than one lot in the same subdivision, and said lots are
owned by the same persons, then the Town shall charge a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fee
for the first such lot and a five-dollar ($5.00) fee for each additional lot.
C. Lien or Personal Judgment. If the costs of abating or removing the nuisance remains
unpaid, the Town, at its option, may file a lien upon the real property where the
nuisance was abated or removed, or commence proceedings in the Circuit Court
seeking a personal judgment from the owner of or persons interested in such
property where the nuisance was abated or removed.
1. Lien. When the Town exercises its right to file a lien upon the real property
where the nuisance was abated or removed, the Town must file a Notice of
Lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County. Such Notice
shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service, and;
c. The date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred by the
municipality. This lien shall be superior to all other liens except
taxes, provided, however, it shall not be valid as to any purchaser
whose right in and to such real estate have risen subsequent to the
date on which such costs were incurred and prior to the filing of such
Notice, and a lien of the Town shall not be valid as to any mortgages,
judgment, creditor, or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arise prior to the filing of such Notice. Upon payment of the
SEC. 21.3-9(Cont.2)
costs and expenses by the owner or any other person interested in
such property after the Notice of Lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the Town, and the release may be filed of records as in
the case of filing the Notice of Lien. The lien may be enforced by
proceeding to foreclosure, as provided by law.
2. Personal Judgment. When the Town exercises its right to obtain a personal
judgment against an owner, occupant, person in control, or agent for the cost
of abatement or removal of a nuisance, the Town shall file an action in the
Circuit Court against any person or persons to whom notice was sent as
authorized in SEC. 21.3-9(A).
Said action shall be based upon the implied consent by said persons to form
a contract with the Town for the abatement or removal of said nuisances.
The action authorized by this paragraph shall be in addition to, and without
waiver, of any other remedy.
SEC. 21.3-10 PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee, tenant, or
other person otherwise in control of property to allow a public nuisance as set forth in SEC. 21.3-
9(A) to exist on any property owned, leased, used, occupied, or in which such person otherwise has
an interest to remain on such property.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to
comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter,
except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall
continue any such violation or permit any such violation to exist.
(SEC. 21.3-9 and SEC. 21.3-10 Added 10/7/02 by Ord. No. 4816)
SEC. 21.4
DIVISION 4 - USE OF TOWN DUMP
(Deleted 10/6/80 by Ord. No. 1994)
SEC. 21.5-1
DIVISION 5 - RAT CONTROL
SEC. 21.5-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
Business Buildings. The term business buildings shall mean any structure, whether public
or private, that is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or
merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor.
Ratproofing. The term ratproofing applies to a form of construction to prevent the ingress of
rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business building or establishment
to another. It consists, essentially, of treating all actual or potential openings in the exterior
walls, ground or first floors, basements, roof, and foundations that may be reached by rats
from the ground by climbing or by burrowing with material impervious to rat gnawing.
Rat Harborage. The term rat harborage shall mean any condition which provides shelter or
protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside of a structure of any kind.
Rat Eradication. The term rat eradication means the elimination or extermination of rats
within buildings so that the buildings are completely freed of rats, or there is no evidence of
rat infestation remaining by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning,
fumigation, trapping, and clubbing.
Owner. The term owner shall mean the actual owner of the business building, whether
individual, partnership or corporation, or the agent of the building or other person having
custody of the building or to whom rent is paid. In the case of business buildings leased
with a clause in the lease specifying that the lessee is responsible for maintenance and
repairs, the lessee will be considered in such cases as the owner for the purpose of this
division.
Occupant. The term occupant shall mean the individual, partnership or corporation that has
the use of or occupies any business building or a part or fraction thereof, whether actual
owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or any vacant portion of a business
building, the owner, agent, or other person having custody of the building shall have the
responsibility of an occupant of a building.
SEC. 21.5-2 BUSINESS BUILDINGS TO BE RATPROOFED AND FREED OF
RATS WHEN DIRECTED. It is hereby provided and required that all business buildings in the
Town shall be ratproofed and freed of rats when directed by the Health Inspector or as required in
this Division.
SEC. 21.5-3
SEC. 21.5-3 NOTICE TO OWNER TO RATPROOF; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
Whenever the Health Inspector notifies the owner of any business building in writing that there is
evidence of the need for ratproofing of the building, such owner shall take immediate measures of
ratproofing the building. Unless such work has been completed by the owner, then the owner shall
be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this Division.
SEC. 21.5-4 NOTICE TO OCCUPANT OF RAT INFESTATION; DUTY TO
INSTITUTE RAT ERADICATION MEASURES. Whenever the Health Inspector notifies the
occupant of a business building in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building,
such occupant shall immediately institute rat eradication measures and shall continuously maintain
such measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises are rat free.
SEC. 21.5-5 MAINTENANCE OF RATPROOFED BUILDINGS. The owner of all
ratproofed business buildings is required to maintain the premises in a ratproof condition and to
repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing without a specific order of the Health
Inspector.
SEC. 21.5-6 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS; NOTICE OF EVIDENCE OF RATS.
The Health Inspector is hereby empowered to make unannounced or announced inspections of the
interior and exterior of business buildings as, in his opinion, may be necessary to determine full
compliance with this Division. When any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or
openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the Health Inspector shall serve the
owners or occupants, or both, with notices or orders to abate the conditions found.
SEC. 21.5-7 FUTURE CONSTRUCTION TO BE RATPROOF. It is hereby made
unlawful for any person to hereafter construct, repair or remodel any business buildings, unless such
construction, repair or remodeling shall render the building ratproof, provided, that only such repairs
or remodeling as affect the ratproof condition of any such building shall be considered as subject to
the provisions of this section.
SEC. 21.5-8 REQUIREMENTS AS TO STORAGE OF FOOD. All human food or
animal food or feed within the Town shall be stored in rat free and ratproof containers,
compartments or rooms, unless stored in a ratproof building.
SEC. 21.5-9 DISPOSAL OF WASTE, GARBAGE AND REFUSE. Within the Town,
all waste, garbage or refuse upon which rats may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed
and stored until collected in covered metal containers of the type prescribed by Division 1 of
Chapter 21 of this Code.
SEC. 21.5-10 REQUIREMENTS AS TO LUMBER, BOXES, BARRELS, ETC. It is
hereby unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate on any private or
public premises, improved or vacant, or on any open land, street or alley in the Town, any lumber,
boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, or similar materials unless the same shall be placed on open
racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked so that
these materials will not afford harborage for rats.
SEC. 21.5-11
SEC. 21.5-11 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Division or fail to comply with any notice given by the Health Inspector shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day that any such violation or
failure continues shall be considered as a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as
such. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 21.6
DIVISION 6 - RATES AND CHARGES FOR THE COLLECTION
OF GARBAGE, ASHES, REFUSE, AND RUBBISH
(Division 6 Deleted 2/19/79 by Ord. No. 1808)
(Comprehensive Amendment to Chapter 21 – 7/6/11 by Ord. No. 5390)
SEC. 21.7-1
DIVISION 7 - POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY
SITING ORDINANCE
SEC. 21.7-5 DEFINITIONS.
A. As used in this Division 7.
Act. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/) and all
Administrative rules adopted in accordance with that statute.
Agency. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
Applicant. Any person, firm, or corporation who files an Application under this
Div. 7.
Clerk. The Clerk of the Town of Normal.
Hearing participant. The Applicant, the Town, any person who files notice under
subsection (A)(1) of Sec. 21.7-40, and any person who registers in person with
the hearing officer to participate in the hearing under subsection (E) of
Sec. 21.7-50.
Person. Any “person, firm, or corporation”, as that term is defined under Section
27.1-2 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal of 1969.
Pollution Control Board. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
Pollution control facility. As the meaning set forth under Section 3.330 of the Act
(415 ILCS 5/3.330).
Town. The Town of Normal, acting through its elected officers and authorized
agents.
Town Council. The President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
B. All other terms that are used in this Division 7 and that are defined in the Act
have the same definitions as set forth in the Act.
SEC. 21.7-10 TOWN SITING APPROVAL REQUIRED; HOST AGREEMENT.
A. No person may operate a pollution control facility in the Town without obtaining
both (i) a permit issued under the Act and (ii) local-siting-review approval by the
Town Council, as provided in the Act and in this Division 7.
SEC. 21.7-10(Cont.1)
B. In addition to any federal, State, or local requirement for the siting and permitting
of a pollution control facility, it is the policy of the Town to require each applicant
proposing either (i) the expansion of an existing pollution control facility or (ii)
the siting of a new pollution control facility to enter into a Host Agreement with
the Town prior to filing a siting application. The Host Agreement may include,
without limitation, any or all of the following:
1. The payment of a host fee to the Town.
2. An indemnification agreement to indemnify the Town and its officers,
agents, employees, and other appropriate parties from liability associated
with any operation of the pollution control facility.
3. A prohibition on the acceptance, for final deposit at the pollution control
facility, of any regulated hazardous waste.
4. An authorization for the Town to approve or disapprove of any transfer of
controlling ownership or other interest in the pollution control facility or
site, but only with the requirement that the Town may not unreasonably
withhold its approval of any requested transfer.
5. A requirement, if the pollution control facility is not publicly owned, for
the establishment of an environmental contingency fund or an alternative
environmental protection insurance policy. Any such fund or policy is
required in addition to any financial-assurance requirement of federal or
State regulations.
6. The requirement for a property-value-protection program for existing
homes within a mutually-agreed distance from the site.
7. For waste disposal sites, the requirement for a domestic-water-wellprotection-
plan for existing water wells within a mutually-agreed distance
from the site.
8. A provision allowing the Town reasonable access to all non-financial
records associated with the pollution control facility.
9. A provision for enforcing the terms of the Host Agreement that includes,
without limitation, specific performance and other equitable relieve
without the need to pursue any remedy at law.
10. A provision addressing the disposal of non-hazardous solid waste and nonhazardous
special waste generated within the Town and handled by the
Town.
11. Any other provision mutually agreed upon by the Applicant and the Town.
SEC. 21.7-15
SEC. 21.7-15 PRE-NOTICE OF APPLICATION REQUIRED.
A. At least 14 days before the filing date of an application for site-location approval
under Sec. 21.7-25, the Applicant must provide written notice of the application
to all of the following:
1. each owner of property that is located within the subject area and that is
not solely owned by the Applicant;
2. each owner of property that is located within 250 feet of the lot line of the
subject property; and
3. each member of the General Assembly from each legislative district in
which the proposed facility is to be located.
B. In addition to the written notice required under subsection (A), the Applicant must
publish notice of the application in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
C. The notice required under subsections (A) and (B) must contain all of the
following information:
1. the name and address of the Applicant;
2. the location of the proposed site;
3. the nature and size of the development;
4. the nature of the proposed activity;
5. the probable life of the proposed activity;
6. the date when the application for site approval will be submitted to the
Clerk; and
7. a description of the right of persons to comment on the application.
D. To determine notice requirements under subsection (A), the owners of property
shall be determined as the persons or entities that appear on the authentic tax
records of McLean County. The number of all feet occupied by public roads,
streets, alleys, and other public ways are excluded in computing the 250-foot
requirement, but in no event does this requirement exceed 400 feet, including
public roads, streets, alleys, and other public ways.
E. The notice required under subsection (A) must be made by personal service or by
registered mail, return receipt requested.
F. The Applicant must include, in the application, proof of compliance with all of
the pre-filing notice requirements under this Section.
SEC. 21.7-20
SEC. 21.7-20 APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENTS.
A. To request siting approval for a pollution control facility in the Town, an
Applicant must file an application with the Clerk. The Applicant must submit 20
paper copies of the application and 5 copies of the application on CD or DVD
format. The application must contain the required contents set forth under this
Section.
B. The application must include a description of the proposed facility sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with the Act and Pollution Control Board administrative
rules. This description includes all site plans, engineering (including calculations),
exhibits, and maps and all additional documents, if any, to be submitted to the
Agency as of the filing of the application.
C. The application must be consecutively paginated, and it must be accompanied by
all site plans, exhibits, maps, and documents that are required by the Act and by
this Division 7.
D. The application must include all of the following information:
1. The name and address of the Applicant and of each direct and indirect
owner of the Applicant with more than a 10% ownership interest and a
description of the ownership interest held by each such owner.
2. The address of the site on which the pollution control facility is proposed
to be located, the name and address of each person or entity with more
than a 5% ownership interest of that site, a description of the ownership
interest held by each such owner, and if the site is owned in a land trust,
all beneficiaries of the land trust by name and address and a description of
the ownership interest held by each beneficiary.
3. The (i) legal description of the proposed site and (ii) street address or other
reasonable description of the location of the site.
4. A narrative description of (i) the proposed pollution control facility, (ii) its
expected manner of operation and useful life, and (iii) the nature and
quantity of the wastes that are proposed to be accepted each day, month,
and year of operation.
5. A complete and thorough description of (i) the area to be served by the
proposed pollution control facility, (ii) the waste needs in the area, and
(iii) why the facility is necessary to accommodate those waste needs.
6. A description of why the proposed pollution control facility is consistent
with the Solid Waste Management Plan, adopted and in effect at the time
of the application, in McLean County.
SEC. 21.7-20(Cont.1)
E. The application must include site plans describing and showing, in concept, the
proposed pollution control facility. The site plans must include, without
limitation, all of the existing and proposed:
1. cross sections;
2. fences, buildings, and other structures;
3. roads, entrances, and driveways;
4. pollution control equipment, including any (i) air pollution control
equipment, (ii) solid wastewater treatment works, and (iii) storm water
management improvements, including, for each of these, all compliance
and monitoring points; and
5. emergency response equipment and control systems.
F. The application must include a topographic survey of the site of the proposed
pollution control facility and surrounding area within 100 feet of the site. The
survey must indicate land use, contours, and if applicable, the boundary of any
100-year flood plain.
G. The application must include the plan of operation for the proposed pollution
control facility. The plan must include all of the following comprehensive details:
1. the means, manner, and methods of waste storage, treatment, disposal,
consolidation, transfer, or other processes;
2. the proposed hours of operation;
3. the job descriptions for all personnel;
4. the means, manner, and method of litter, vector, dust, and odor control,
along with a plan for monitoring and compliance with the plans;
5. the management of surface and storm water drainage and discharge;
6. the operation of the fire control system; and
7. corrective and response actions for spills and other operational accidents.
H. The application must include a traffic study for traffic within a two-mile radius of
the proposed facility. The study must include all of the following:
1. the proposed traffic routes for entering and exiting the proposed site, along
with (i) all traffic control points, (ii) the location of any school, church,
medical-care facility, and residential use along those routes, and (iii) any
other significant feature or characteristic of those routes;
SEC. 21.7-20(Cont.2)
2. the daily traffic patterns, number of vehicles, the nature of the vehicles,
and the location of any regular traffic delay or slowdown or of any
area of high incidents of traffic accidents;
3. all projected changes to existing traffic patterns due to the proposed
pollution control facility, including the number of vehicles, the nature of
the vehicles, and the effect of the traffic patterns on the location of any
regular traffic delays and slowdowns and of any areas of high incidents of
traffic accidents.
I. The application must include financial assurance or insurance with coverages,
limits, and exclusions, each of which are reasonably acceptable to the Town , in
amounts or limits that are sufficient to cover (i) property damage, personal injury,
sudden and non-sudden accidental occurrences, and pollution impairment arising
out of the operation of the pollution control facility, (ii) workers compensation in
the statutorily required amount, and (iii) umbrella coverage with limits that are
reasonably acceptable to the Town.
J. The application must include a statement describing the past operating experience
of the Applicant (and any subsidiary and parent corporation) in the field of solid
waste management within the preceding 10 years.
K. The application must include a statement describing the past record of all
convictions or admission of violation of the Applicant (and any subsidiary and
parent corporation) in the field of solid waste management within the preceding
10 years.
L. The application must include a copy of all pre-filing notices required by Section
39.2 of the Act and by Section 21.7-15 of this Division. The Applicant may
submit the proof of service of the pre-filing notices on the first day of the public
hearing under Section 21.7-50.
M. The application must include a copy of any host agreement entered into between
the Applicant and the Town.
N. The application must include all additional pertinent documentary support for the
application that the Applicant wants the Town Council to consider when making
its siting decisions under this Division 7. It is intended that the Application
provide a full and complete disclosure of its case to facilitate early review and
analysis by all parties. The Applicant, however, is not precluded from
introducing, at the public hearing under Section 21.7-50, any documentary
support for the request that was not included in the application if those documents
were not reasonably available at the time that the application was filed.
Additionally, the Applicant is not precluded from introducing and using
demonstrative exhibits at the public hearing that were not included in the
application.
SEC. 21.7-20(Cont.3)
O. In submitting the application, the Applicant may redact any trade secrets in
accordance with Section 7.1 of the Act. If it is not reasonable to redact those trade
secrets from a document, the Applicant may withhold that document. The
Applicant must submit a log that reasonably identifies any document that is
withheld because of trade secrets. Prior to the public hearing under Sec. 21.7-
50, the Applicant must submit to the Clerk and hearing officer any additional
document that was submitted to the Agency pertaining to the proposed pollution
control facility.
SEC. 21.7-25 FILING THE APPLICATION.
A. For the purpose of all-time limitations, the filing date of the application is the date
on which the Applicant files, with the Clerk, a complete application in the proper
form, along with the applicable filing fee and proof of escrow deposit required
under Sec. 21.7-30.
B. The Applicant may file one amended application. The amended application must
be filed before any summary statement is made at the public hearing under Sec.
21.7-50. Any amended application must be filed along with the payment of all
additional fees under Section 39.2 of the Act and Sec. 21.7-30 of this Division 7.
If an amended application is filed, the time limitation for final action under
Section 39.2 of the Act and Sec. 21.7-65 of this Division 7 is extended for an
additional period of 90 days.
C. The Applicant may not file an application that is substantially the same as an
application that was disapproved by the Town Council, within the preceding two
years, pursuant to a finding against an applicant for failing to meet the criteria set
forth under subsection (a) of Section 39.2 of the Act.
D. Upon receipt of the complete application, along with the required fees, the Clerk
shall date stamp all copies and shall deliver two copies to the Town President, two
copies to the City Manager, and one copy to each of the following:
1. each member of the Town Council;
2. the Public Works Director;
3. the Zoning Administrator;
4. the Town Engineer;
5. the McLean County Health Department;
6. the Community Solid Waste Coordinator; and
7. the McLean County State’s Attorney.
The Clerk shall retain one copy for public review. The Clerk must retain three
copies for distribution to the hearing officer appointed under Sec. 21.7-35.
E. Within 14 days after the filing date, the Clerk must notify all of the following in
writing of the filing of the application:
SEC. 21.7-25(Cont.1)
1. each municipality within 1.5 miles of the proposed facility;
2. each township supervisor representing the area in which the proposed
facility will be located;
3. each township highway commissioner representing the area in which the
proposed facility will be located;
4. each fire protection district within the area in which the proposed facility
will be located; and
5. each member of the Illinois General Assembly who represents the area in
which the proposed facility will be located.
SEC. 21.7-30 FILING FEE.
A. At the time of filing the application under Sec. 21.7-25, the Applicant must
deposit with the Town Treasurer, a filing fee in the amount, form, and manner set
forth in this Section.
B. The amount of the initial filing fee for each type of proposed facility is as follows:
1. For any new or expanded pollution control facility, other than a waste
transfer station, handling non-hazardous waste, that accepts, handles,
transfers, treats, stores, or disposes of only non-hazardous waste,
including, but not limited to, a mixed municipal waste composting facility,
mixed waste processing facility, organic waste composting facility,
municipal waste incinerator, or sanitary landfill: $100,000;
2. For any new or expanded waste transfer station that accepts, handles, and
transfers disposes of only non-hazardous waste: $100,000; and
3. For any new or expanded pollution control facility that that accepts,
handles, transfers, treats, stores or disposes of hazardous waste: $500,000.
C. The appropriate methods for payment of filing fees include only the following:
wire transfer to a Town of Normal bank account, cashier’s check, negotiable
money order, or certified check with “Treasurer, Town of Normal, Illinois” listed
as the payee.
D. The filing fee is intended to defray the Town Siting Costs. The Town shall use the
moneys collected from the filing fee to pay the Town Siting Costs. The Applicant
is required to pay all Town Siting Costs in excess of the initial filing fee set forth
in subsection (B) of this Section.
SEC. 21.7-30(Cont.1)
E. As security for the payment of potential Town Siting Costs that exceed the initial
filing fee, the Applicant must provide proof of deposit into a joint order escrow
account in a financial institution in the Town of Normal in the amount of
$100,000. If moneys are withdrawn from the escrow account to pay any Town
Siting Costs, and if, at any time, the balance of the escrow account becomes less
than $50,000, then the Applicant must deposit moneys in the account to establish
a balance of $100,000 within 10 business days of the date on which the balance
became less than $50,000.
F. If the Applicant elects to file an amended application under subsection (B) of Sec.
21.7-25, then the Applicant must pay a supplemental filing fee of $50,000 in the
same manner as set forth in subsection (C) of this Section.
G. The Town shall refund to the Applicant any portion of the initial filing fee that
was not expended to pay Town Siting Costs. This refund may not be made until
the final resolution of the application process, including, but not limited to, any
appeal or complaint filed with the Pollution Control Board or any State or federal
court challenging the siting decision of the Town Council.
H. For the purpose of this Division 7, the term “Town Siting Costs” means all
reasonable and necessary costs of processing the application, including, but not
limited to costs for: site inspection, clerical expenses, copying, space rental,
hearing officer compensation, court reporter expenses, transcription costs, public
notice expenses, reasonable staff review time, costs to engage Town consultants
(such as qualified professional engineers, planners, appraisers, environmental
counsel, etc.), tests, exhibits, and testimony, if any, provided by said consultants,
and other relevant costs incident to the consideration of an application. Town
Siting Costs include costs incident to preparing the record for appeal, and, other
than for an appeal brought by the Applicant, the cost of representing the Town on
appeal (including but not limited to all costs, fees and expenses for any and all
appeals to the Illinois Pollution Control Board, Appellate Court, Illinois Supreme
Court, and any complaint filed in Federal Court challenging the siting decision of
the Town Council including all appeals therefrom).
SEC. 21.7-35 APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER, CONSULTANTS.
A. Prior to the public hearing under Sec. 21.7-50, the President, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees, must appoint a hearing officer to preside over the public
hearing.
B. The President may also retain consultants to advise the Town with respect to (i)
the application, (ii) evidence adduced at the public hearing, and (iii) comments
received by the Town. The consultants are authorized to present testimony at the
public hearing and to present reports and recommendations in response to the
application and to any written comments received by the Town. The consultants’
reports and recommendations concerning the application that the Town intends to
SEC. 21.7-35(Cont.1)
enter into the record of the public hearing must, to the extent reasonably possible,
be filed with the Clerk at least 10 days before the public hearing commences.
C. The compensation of the hearing officer and the consultants is Town Siting Costs
payable as Town Siting Costs in accordance with Sec. 21.7-30.
SEC. 21.7-40 PRE-HEARING FILINGS.
A. At least 10 days before the public hearing under Sec. 21.7-50, the following must
be filed with the Clerk:
1. Three copies of all reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence, other than
oral testimony, that any person other than the Town or Applicant desires
to submit for the record to be used at the public hearing, along with a list
of identifying witnesses to be called to testify at the public hearing;
2. Three copies of all reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence (other than
oral testimony) that the Town desires to submit for the record to be used at
the public hearing, along with a list identifying the witnesses to be called
to testify at the public hearing; and
3. Three copies of the Applicant’s witness list, identifying the Applicant’s
witnesses to be called to testify at the public hearing in the Applicant’s
case in chief.
B. The application and all reports or studies that it contains are deemed to be
admitted as evidence and may be used by any person as an exhibit at the public
hearing.
C. If the 10th day prior to the date set for the public hearing falls on a day that the
Clerk’s Office is not open, then all submittals made pursuant to this Section must
be filed on the next day that the Clerk’s Office is open for regularly scheduled
business hours.
D. Upon receipt by the Clerk, all submittals under this Section must be date stamped.
A copy of the submittals must be given to the hearing officer and any Town
consultants. All the submittals must be available for public inspection at the office
of the Clerk during regular business hours. A copy of the submittals or any part
thereof must be available from the Town Clerk.
SEC. 21.7-45 PUBLIC HEARING; SCHEDULE AND NOTICE.
A. The Town must hold at least one public hearing on the application for the
pollution control facility site location approval. The hearing must be held no
sooner than 90 days and no later than 120 days after the filing date established
under subsection (A) of Sec. 21.7-25. The President shall determine the date,
SEC. 21.7-45(Cont.1)
time, and location of the public hearing. The hearing may be scheduled during the
day or the evening, but it may not be held between the hours of 10:00 p.m through
8:00 a.m.
B. The Applicant must publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town. The notice must be published at least 14 days before the
hearing. The Applicant must also provide notice of the public hearing by public
mail, return receipt requested, to: (i) all members of the Illinois General Assembly
representing a district in which the proposed site is located; (ii) the County Board
of McLean County; (iii) the governing authority of every municipality that is
contiguous to the proposed site; and (iv) the Agency.
C. All notices under subsection (B) must contain all of the following information:
1. The name and address of the Applicant;
2. The owner of the site and, if the ownership is in a land trust, the names
and address of each beneficiary of the land trust;
3. The legal description of the site;
4. The street address of the site and, if there is no street address, a description
of the site with reference to the location, ownership, or occupancy or some
other reasonable identification of the property to area residents;
5. The nature and size of the proposed development;
6. The nature and probable life of the proposed activity;
7. The time, date, and location of the public hearing;
8. A statement that all documentary evidence, other than oral testimony, to
be submitted at the public hearing and a list identifying witnesses must be
filed with the Clerk at least 10 days before the date of the hearing;
9. A statement that all persons, including members of the public, who intend
to testify or cross examine witnesses must submit notice of their intent to
the Clerk or register with the hearing officer on or before the first day of
the public hearing;
10. A statement that written comments must be received by the Clerk or
postmarked no later than 30 days after the last day of the public hearing.
11. A statement that the application is available to the public in the Clerk’s
Office, a description of the right of persons to comment on the application,
SEC. 21.7-45(Cont.2)
and a statement that copies of the application are available in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Act.
SEC. 21.7-50 CONDUCTING THE PUBLIC HEARING.
A. The hearing officer appointed under Sec. 21.7-35 shall preside at the public
hearing and shall, subject to this Division 7, make any decisions concerning the
admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted. The
hearing officer shall make all rulings and decisions in accordance with the
principle fundamental fairness. The hearing officer may exclude irrelevant,
immaterial, incompetent, or unduly repetitious testimony or other evidence. No
ruling of the hearing officer concerning admissibility of evidence or procedural
issues at the public hearing is appealable to the Town Council. Issues of
jurisdiction shall be determined by the Town Council.
B. Members of the Town Council may, but are not required to, attend the public
hearing.
C. The Applicant has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the proposed pollution control facility meets the criteria set forth in the Act and
this Division 7 for siting a pollution control facility.
D. Any person wishing to participate at the public hearing has the rights, obligations,
and opportunities that are set forth in this Division 7 and that are consistent with
Section 39.2 of the Act and with the principles of fundamental fairness.
E. Any person intending to participate in the hearing, including members of the
public, must submit written notification of their intent with the Clerk at least 10
days before the first day of the public hearing or register in person with the
hearing officer prior to the close or adjournment of the first day of the public
hearing. Any person who has submitted a timely notification of intent to
participate at the public hearing has the right to present testimony and witnesses
and to orally comment on whether the proposed pollution control facility meets
the requirements of the Act and this Division 7 for site approval. If the public
hearing is continued past the first day, then any person not of record as of the first
day is not allowed to present testimony or cross examine witnesses, except as
authorized by the hearing officer for cause shown, consistent with the principles
of fundamental fairness. The failure to file a notice of intent or to register in
person with the hearing officer does not prevent any person from commenting
orally at the conclusion of the evidence, subject to the discretion of the hearing
officer.
F. Any person testifying at the public hearing has the right to be represented by an
attorney. Participants who are represented by an attorney have the right to
reasonable cross examination, subject to the hearing officer’s judgment and
consistent with principles of fundamental fairness. Participants who are not
SEC. 21.7-50(Cont.1)
represented by an attorney may submit written cross-examination questions to the
hearing officer, who shall exercise discretion to direct relevant and nonduplicative
cross-examination questions to the applicable witness. The cross
examination of witnesses is permitted only during that period immediately
following each witness’ testimony. If a list of cross-examination questions is
extensive or it requires technical answers, the hearing officer may permit the
witness to answer the questions in writing within the time period set by the
hearing officer. The time period set by the officer may not be longer than 15 days
after the conclusion of the witness’ testimony. The witness must, within the time
period, present a copy of the written answers to the person presenting the crossexamination
questions. The hearing officer must enter the written answers into the
record of the public hearing.
G. Unless otherwise agreed to by all participants or otherwise directed by the hearing
officer, the public hearing must be conducted in substantially the following
manner:
1. Call to order.
2. Introduction of the hearing officer.
3. The hearing officer identifies the Applicant and the application. The
hearing officer admits the application into the record.
4. Applicant submits proof of compliance with all requirements concerning
fees, notices, and filing of the application. The hearing officer admits the
proper proof of this compliance into the record.
5. The hearing officer admits into the record all of the reports, exhibits, and
other evidence properly submitted to the Clerk under Sec. 21.7-20 and
Sec. 21.7-40.
6. The Applicant, the Town, and any participant who is represented by
counsel may make an opening statement.
7. The Applicant presents its case. Upon the completion of the Applicant’s
case, the Town may present its case. Upon the completion of the Town’s
case, any person who filed with the Clerk under subsection (A) of Sec.
21.7-40 may present oral testimony. The hearing officer shall decide the
order of the presentation of testimony. All witnesses must testify under
oath. Testimony may include the use of exhibits. Witness testimony shall
be conducted in the following format: direct testimony, cross-examination,
re-direct testimony, and re-cross-examination. The hearing officer may, in
his or her discretion, allow rebuttal and sub-rebuttal after all parties have
presented testimony.
SEC. 21.7-50(Cont.2)
8. After the conclusion of all testimony, each participant may make a
summary statement in the order that the cases were presented under
paragraph (7). After the conclusion of all of the summary statements, the
Applicant may make a rebuttal statement. All summary statements and
rebuttals are subject to reasonable limitations set by the hearing officer.
9. The hearing officer establishes a schedule for the filing, with the Clerk, of
briefs, any proposed findings of fact, and written public comments.
10. The hearing officer closes the public hearing.
11. After all documents are filed with the Clerk under paragraph (9), the
hearing officer shall prepare and forward, to the Clerk, a recommended
finding and order regarding the Applicant’s request for siting approval.
The hearing officer’s recommendation must be guided by the Act, this
Division 7, and all other relevant law.
H. If any issue, fact, datum, or other evidence arises during the course of the public
hearing that were not apparent or not reasonably foreseeable by a participant,
then, upon request of any participant, the hearing officer may recess the public
hearing for a period of time not to exceed five days.
I. If, prior to making a final local-siting decision, the Town has entered into a host
agreement with the Applicant, then the terms and conditions of that host
agreement, whether oral or written, must be disclosed and make a part of the
hearing record for that local siting proceeding. In the case of an oral agreement,
the disclosure must be made in the form of a written summary, jointly prepared
and submitted by the Town and the Applicant.
SEC. 21.7-55 PUBLIC COMMENT.
A. Any person may file a written comment with the Clerk concerning whether the
proposed pollution control facility complies with the criteria of the Act and this
Division 7. The written comment must be submitted or postmarked no later than
30 days after the date that the public hearing is closed under Sec. 21.7-50. The
Clerk must date stamp the written comments and the postmarked envelope, if any,
in which the comment is received.
B. All public comments submitted under subsection (A) are included in the record of
the public hearing. The hearing officer must consider all public comment
submitted under subsection (A), but those comments are not entitled to the same
evidentiary weight as testimony that is provided under oath and subject to cross
examination.
SEC. 21.7-60
SEC. 21.7-60 PUBLIC HEARING RECORD.
A. The Clerk is responsible for assembling and keeping the record of the public
hearing. The record of the public hearing must consist of all of the following:
1. The application, including proof of all required notice, that is admitted as
an exhibit at the public hearing.
2. Proof of all required notices admitted into evidence at the public hearing.
3. All written comments properly filed under Sec. 21.7-55.
4. All reports, studies, exhibits, or documents received into evidence at the
public hearing.
5. The transcript of the public hearing.
6. The proposed findings of fact and recommendations of the hearing officer
and any objections or exceptions thereto made by any party to the public
hearing.
B. The Clerk is responsible for certifying all copies of the record of the public
hearing as true and correct copies of the record maintained by the Clerk.
C. When the record is complete with all of the items set forth in subsection (B), the
Clerk shall submit a copy of the record to the Town Council.
SEC. 21.7-65 SITING DECISION BY TOWN COUNCIL.
A. After receiving the record from the Clerk under Sec. 21.7-60, the Town Council
shall consider the application. First, the Town Council must determine whether
the application is complete and includes all of the information and documents that
are required under the Act or this Division 7. If the application is complete, the
Town Council must evaluate the application to determine whether the proposed
pollution control facility complies with the siting criteria set forth in the Act and
in this Division 7.
B. In making its decision on the application, the Town Council must base its decision
on the record and on whether the proposed pollution control facility complies with
the criteria set forth in this Section.
C. In accordance with Section 39.2 of the Act, the Town Council may not grant local
siting approval unless the proposed pollution control facility meets all of the
following criteria:
SEC. 21.7-65(Cont.1)
1. The proposed facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area that it is intended to serve.
2. The proposed facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected.
3. The proposed facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect of the value
of the surrounding property.
4. For a proposed facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site,
the proposed facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain, or is flood-proofed. For a proposed facility that is a sanitary
landfill or waste disposal site, the proposed facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year floodplain or, if the proposed facility is a facility
set forth in subsection (b) of Section 22.19a of the Act, the site is floodproofed.
5. The plan of operation for the proposed facility is designed to minimize the
danger of the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operation
accidents.
6. The traffic patterns to and from the proposed facility are so designed to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
7. If the proposed facility will be treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the proposed facility that
includes notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to be used
in case of any accidental release.
8. The proposed facility is consistent with the Solid Waste Management Plan
adopted by McLean County.
9. If the proposed facility will be located within a regulated recharge area,
then the facility must meet all applicable requirements specified by the
Pollution Control Board for that area.
D. The Town Council may consider, as evidence, the previous operating experience
and past record of convictions or admissions of the Applicant and any subsidiary
and parent corporation in the field of solid-waste management when considering
the criteria set forth in subsection (B).
E. The Town Council must issue a final written decision within 180 days after the
application filing date established under subsection (A) of Sec. 21.7-25. The
SEC. 21.7-65(Cont.2)
written decision must specify the reasons for the Town Council’s decision, and
those reasons must be in conformance with the Act and with this Division 7.
F. The application may be conditionally approved as allowed by law.
G. The Town Council may not reconsider its written determination.
H. Within three days after the Town Council issues its written decision, the Clerk
must send a copy of the decision to each of the participants of the public hearing
and to the Agency.
I. If the Town Council fails to issue a written decision within 180 days after the
application filing date, the application is deemed to be approved.
SEC. 21.7-70 APPEAL PROCEDURE. Any appeal of the Town Council’s written
decision under Section 21.7-65 must be made in accordance with Section 40.1 of the Act.
SEC. 21.7-75 FEES AND COSTS. In accordance with Sec. 21.7-30, the Applicant shall
pay for all Town Siting Costs that exceed the initial filing fee. The Town shall periodically
submit to the Applicant a detailed accounting and summary of all Town-Siting Cost expenditures
and requests for reimbursement. The Applicant shall remit payment to the Town within 30 days
after the submittal of the accounting and request for reimbursement. If the Applicant fails to
remit the payment, then the Town, after three-days written notice to Applicant, may deem the
Application withdrawn and of no further force or effect, and the Town may discontinue any
further consideration of the Application.
SEC. 21.7-80 WAIVER OF RULES. In order to insure fundamental fairness in the
siting process and in order to protect the public interest, the Town Council may waive any
requirement of this Division 7, but only if that waiver in not inconsistent with any provisions of
the Act.
SEC. 21.7-85 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE. The application and all other documents and
records submitted to the Clerk under this Division 7 are subject to the provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.
SEC. 21.7-90 SEVERABILITY. If any provision or application of this Division 7 is, for
any reason, held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then that invalidity does not affect
any other provision or application that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and, to this end, the provisions of this Division 7 are severable.
(Entire Division 21.7 Added 7/6/2014 by Ord. No. 5552)
SEC. 22.1-1
CHAPTER 22 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
SEC. 22.1-1 APPLICATION. Applications for all licenses and permits required by this
Chapter shall be made in writing to the City Manager in the absence of provisions to the contrary.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to
be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the Town officials in issuing the
permit or license applied for. (Revised 4/7/72)
SEC. 22.1-2 PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE. Whenever in this Code a license is
required for the maintenance, operation or conducting of any business or establishment, or for doing
business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being
engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the Town.
SEC. 22.1-3 LICENSE YEAR. The license year for the Town shall begin on the first day
of January and end on the last day of December of each year, unless such specific license designates
a different period.
SEC. 22.1-4 FORMS. Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be
prepared and kept on file by the City Manager. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-5 SIGNATURES. Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the
President of the Town Council and the City Manager in the absence of any provision to the
contrary. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-6 INVESTIGATIONS. Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit,
where the ordinances of the Town necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such a permit or license, the City Manager shall refer such application to the proper officer for
making such investigation within 48 hours of this time of such receipt. The officer charged with the
duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise,
within 10 days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The Health Inspector shall make, or
cause to be made, an inspection in regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling
of food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of health; the
Building Commissioner shall make, or cause to be made, any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise
provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by the City
Manager. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-7 FEES. In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to the City
Manager. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the
SEC. 22.1-7(Cont.1)
current license year, the license fee shall be pro-rated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter,
or fraction thereof, during which the business has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise
provided, all license fees shall become a part of the corporate fund. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-8 TERMINATION OF LICENSES. All annual licenses shall terminate on the
last day of December, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The City Manager shall mail all licensees of the Town a statement of the time of expiration
of the license held by the licensee, if annual, three weeks prior to the date of such expiration.
Provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not
excuse the licensee from the failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a
defense in an action for operation without a license. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-9 BUILDING AND PREMISES. No license shall be issued for the conduct of
any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be
used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the Town. No such license or
permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would
involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the Town.
SEC. 22.1-10 CHANGE OF LOCATION. The location of any licensed business or
occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided 10 days notice thereof is given to the
City Manager, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided that the building and zoning
requirements of the ordinances are complied with. (Revised 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-11 NUISANCES. No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or
operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
SEC. 22.1-12 INSPECTIONS. Whenever inspections of a premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision, or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises
to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of
the Town who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that
admission is required.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure
conformance with any ordinance provision, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee of the municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give any authorized
officer or employee of the Town requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or
commodity for such analysis upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the President of the Town Council
may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the Town who refuses
to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such
samples to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
SEC. 22.1-12(Cont.1)
inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made
upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the Town, stating that such
inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.
SEC. 22.1-13 REVOCATION. Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked
by the President of the Town Council or Board of Trustees at any time during the life of such
license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee of the chapter provisions relating to
the license or permit, or to the premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine
imposed.
SEC. 22.1-14 POSTING LICENSE. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a
licensed business in the Town to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times.
SEC. 22.1-15 VEHICLE TAG. Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a
license fee, the City Manager, or his delegated assistant, shall furnish each licensee with a tag or
sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is in use. (Amended 4/17/72)
SEC. 22.1-16 PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense. Each day that
any such violation or failure continues shall be considered as a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable as such. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 22.2-1
DIVISION 2 - JUNK DEALERS
SEC. 22.2-1 LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the
business of junk dealer, or to keep any junk shop, store or place for the purchase or sale of junk,
rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper, empty bottles, old automobiles, or other
items of any nature, without first having secured a license therefor.
SEC. 22.2-2 APPLICATION. Application for such license shall be made in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter relating to licenses.
SEC. 22.2-3 FEE. The fee for such license shall be $50.00 for an annual license and $5.00
for a daily license.
SEC. 22.2-4 STOLEN GOODS. Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or be in
possession of any books, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall, upon
demand, produce such article or thing to any member of the Police Department for examination.
SEC. 22.2-5 VEHICLES. Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his
business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor
thereof. No junk or miscellaneous rubbish of any sort shall be transported over any of the streets or
alleys within the Town, except in vehicles so constructed as to prevent the dropping or falling of any
part of the contents therefrom during transportation.
SEC. 22.2-6 LOCATION OF JUNK YARDS. No junk yard shall be located on any
premises unless all the provisions of the zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances are
complied with.
SEC. 22.3-1
DIVISION 3 - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS/ITINERANT VENDORS
SEC. 22.3-1 DEFINITION. As used in this Division, the following words shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
A. Transient Merchant. Any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale, lease, or
rental of goods, wares, or merchandise within the Town of Normal, and who for the
purpose of conducting such business, displays such goods, wares, or merchandise to
the public outside a building on property in which such person holds a temporary
interest. (Amended 9/5/89)
B. Temporary Interest or Temporary Sale, Lease, Or Rental. For purposes of this
definition, it shall be prima facie evidence that a person is engaged temporarily in
the retail sale, lease, or rental of goods or holds a temporary interest in property if
the person does not own or lease or otherwise have the right to use for a term of at
least six (6) months the property from which business is conducted. (Amended
9/5/89)
C. Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm association, or other
entity.
D. Building. A building is any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the ground.
E. Itinerant Vendor. Any person who transports tangible, personal property for retail
sale, lease, or rental within the Town of Normal who does not maintain in the Town
of Normal an established office, distribution house, saleshouse, warehouse, service
center or residence from which such business is conducted and such person does not
meet the definition of transient merchant. (Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-2 PROHIBITION. No person either as principal or agent shall conduct
business as a transient merchant within the Town of Normal without first obtaining a license
pursuant to the requirements of this Division. No person either as principal or agent shall conduct
business as an itinerant vendor within the Town of Normal without meeting the requirements of
SEC. 22.3-9.
SEC. 22.3-3 APPLICATION. Any person desiring a transient merchant license shall file
an application with the Town Police Chief or his designee. Such application shall contain the
following information: (a) Name and permanent residence address of applicant; (b) Date of birth of
applicant; (c) Social Security number of applicant; (d) Name and permanent residence address of
person or entity employing applicant; (e) Location at which applicant intends to do business; (f)
Nature of business applicant intends to conduct; (g) Copy of applicant's Certificate of Registration
under State of Illinois Retailer's Occupation Tax Act; (h) Copy of applicant's Certificate of
Registration (or application) under the Town of Normal Purchase Tax Ordinance; (i) Copy of
SEC. 22.3-3(Cont.1)
applicant's Certificate of Registration (or application) under Town of Normal Business Registration;
(j) A complete inventory of goods the applicant intends to offer for sale, lease or rental; (k) A list of
all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant obtained by the applicant in this state in the
twelve (12) months preceding the date of the filing of the application; (l) A surety
bond or cash deposit shall accompany the application equal to fifty-percent (50%) of the wholesale
value of the merchandise the applicant intends to offer for sale, lease, or rental, however the amount
of the bond or deposit shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00); (m) A non-refundable filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall accompany the application; (n) An affirmation that the information contained in the
application is true and correct. (Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-4 LICENSE. The Police Chief or his designee shall review the license
application and issue a license to the applicant provided: (a) All of the information requested in
SEC. 22.3-3 has been supplied; (b) The applicant has not been convicted of any criminal offense
involving fraudulent commercial transactions within the past twenty-four (24) months; (c) The
intended sales location is within a zoning district permitting such sales; (d) The proposed activity
complies with state and local laws.
SEC. 22.3-5 TERM. A license issued under this Division shall be valid for seven (7) days
including date of issue.
SEC. 22.3-6 BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT. The bond or cash deposit posted by applicant
shall be transferred to the Attorney General of the State of Illinois within fourteen (14) days after the
applicant ceases to do business in the Town. Such bond or cash deposit shall be held by the
Attorney General pursuant to terms provided in 225 ILCS 465/4(e). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No.
4143)
SEC. 22.3-7 INVENTORY SEIZURE. If any person makes retail sales, leases, or rentals
as a transient merchant without having obtained a license under this Division, the Police Chief or his
designee may hold the inventory, truck or other personal property of the person until he obtains a
license to conduct business as a transient merchant. If the property has been held by the Town for
more than sixty (60) days and the person whose property is being held has not made application for
a license under this Division, the Police Chief or his designee may petition the Circuit Court for an
order for the sale of the property being held. If the Court finds that the person whose property is
being held has not made application for a license under this Division, the Court may order the
Police Chief or his designee to sell the property. Proceeds of the sale of the property, less
reimbursement to the Town of the reasonable expenses of storage and sale of the property, shall be
deposited in the treasury of the Town. (Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-8 SUSPENSION. Any transient merchant's license may be immediately
suspended by the Chief of Police or his designee if he has reasonable cause to believe the license
holder filed a false or incomplete application, violated any provision of this Division, or any other
law in connection with sales, leases, or rentals under the license. The Chief of Police or his
designee shall immediately notify the license holder of the suspension and the reason therefore. The
license holder may appeal the suspension to the City Manager or his designee. The City Manager or
his designee shall promptly schedule a hearing on such appeal and provide the license holder with
SEC. 22.3-8(Cont.1)
necessary notice. The license holder shall have the burden of proof to show, by a preponderance of
the evidence, the suspension is not justified. If the hearing officer finds in favor of the Chief of
Police, the permit will be revoked. If the hearing officer finds in favor of the license holder, the
license will be reinstated. Failure to appeal the suspension is deemed an automatic revocation of the
license. All decisions of the City Manager are final and reviewable in the manner provided by law.
(Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-9 ITINERANT VENDORS. Itinerant vendors are subject to Division 4 of this
Chapter if entering upon residential property for the purpose of making sales, leases, or rentals and
subject to the Town Business Registration Act if entering upon non-residential property for the
purpose of making sales, leases, or rentals. (Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-10 VEHICLES. Any person selling, leasing, or renting from a vehicle in a
public right-of-way whether such vehicle is propelled by an engine motor or human power, shall
maintain in legible characters on such vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, words,
letters, pictures or designs allowing persons to readily identify such vehicle and its use, an
admonition to motorists to be watchful for children in the area of such vehicles, and while parked
and in use shall have in operation flashing amber lights visible from the front of the vehicle.
(Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.3-11 EXEMPTION. This Division shall not apply to the following: (a) Any
person selling on public property pursuant to Town authorization; (b) Any person selling
vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products at any place or market where such articles are usually
sold.
SEC. 22.3-12 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
Division shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate and distinct offense
shall be deemed committed each day such violation continues.
(Entire Division 3 of Chapter 22 Amended 6/5/89)
SEC. 22.4-1
DIVISION 4 - SOLICITORS
SEC. 22.4-1 REGISTRATION REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person to
solicit within the Town of Normal without first having obtained a Registration Certificate from the
Chief of Police or his designee. Registration Certificate will be issued in a nondiscriminatory,
nonarbitrary manner. Registration shall apply to nonprofit, religious, charitable, and commercial
activities alike. Registration Certificates are valid for thirty (30) days including the date of issue,
unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided herein. (Amended 3/2/98 by Ord. No. 4496)
SEC. 22.4-2 DEFINITIONS.
Solicit. As used in this Division, solicit means to enter without prior express invitation, upon
residential property for the purpose of selling, leasing, or renting any property real or
personal, for the purpose of obtaining monetary donations, or for the purpose of taking
orders for the sale, lease, or rental of property real or personal. (Amended 9/5/89)
SEC. 22.4-3 TIME CONSTRAINTS. Soliciting shall be limited to the hours between
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. prevailing time everyday.
SEC. 22.4-4 APPLICATION. Any person desiring to register for the purpose of soliciting
shall apply therefor in writing over his or her signature to the Chief of Police or his designee on
forms provided by the Town of Normal. Information required shall include: (1) the name and
address; (2) the name and address of the person, firm or corporation by whom the applicant is
employed; (3) a complete physical description of the applicant; (4) date of birth of the applicant; (5)
the Social Security number of the applicant; (6) the nature or character of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant; (7) the complete description and license
number of the vehicle to be used; (8) copy of Certification of Registration under Illinois Retailer's
Occupation Tax Act; (9) registration pursuant to Town of Normal Business Registration Act; (10)
registration pursuant to Town of Normal Home Rule Purchase Tax Act.
SEC. 22.4-5 APPLICATION REVIEW. The Police Chief or his designee shall review
the Registration Application and issue a Registration Permit to the applicant provided: (a) All
requested registration information has been supplied; (b) The applicant has not been convicted of
any criminal offense involving fraudulent commercial transactions within the past 24 months; and
(c) The proposed activity complies with state and local laws.
SEC. 22.4-6 CERTIFICATE. Each person shall at all times, while soliciting in the Town
of Normal, carry upon his person a copy of the Registration Certificate and the same shall be
exhibited by such registrant whenever he or she is required to do so by any police officer or by any
person solicited.
SEC. 22.4-7 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING. Every person desiring to secure
the protection intended to be provided by this Section pertaining to soliciting shall comply with the
following directions, to-wit:
SEC. 22.4-7(Cont.1)
Notice of the determination by the occupant of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any
residence shall be given in the manner following:
A weatherproof card, no smaller than three inches by four inches in size shall be
exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by
the occupant, containing the words, as follows:
"NO SOLICITORS INVITED"
The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height.
Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the
determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon.
SEC. 22.4-8 DUTY OF SOLICITORS. It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going
onto any premises in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first examine the Notice
provided for in SEC. 22.4-7 of this ordinance. If the Notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED",
then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
SEC. 22.4-9 PROHIBITED SOLICITING. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall
constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting in defiance of the Notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of
SEC. 22.4-6 of this ordinance.
SEC. 22.4-10 SUSPENSION. Any solicitor's permit may be immediately suspended by
the Chief of Police or his designee if he has reasonable cause to believe the permit holder filed a
false or incomplete application, violated any provision of this Division, or any other law and such
violation arises out of solicitation or other commercial activities. The Chief of Police or his
designee shall immediately notify the permit holder of the suspension and the reasons therefore.
The permit holder may appeal the suspension to the City Manager or his designee. The City
Manager or his designee shall promptly schedule a hearing on such appeal and provide the permit
holder with necessary notice. The permit holder shall have the burden of proof to show, by a
preponderance of the evidence, the suspension is not justified. If the hearing officer finds in favor
of the Chief of Police the permit will be revoked. If the hearing officer finds in favor of the permit
holder the permit shall be reinstated. Failure to appeal the suspension is deemed an automatic
suspension and revocation of the permit. All decisions of the City Manager are final and reviewable
in the manner provided by law.
SEC. 22.4-11 HIGHWAY SOLICITATION. No person shall stand on a highway (the
highway excludes the Parkway) for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle, except upon the following terms and conditions:
SEC. 22.4-11(Cont.1)
A. Solicitation on highways shall be allowed only at the following intersections:
Willow and School Adelaide and Hovey
Raab and Towanda College and Cottage
Linden and Shelbourne
(Amended 9/3/02 by Ord. No. 4809)(Amended 9/17/07 by Ord. No. 5153)
(Amended 11/7/11 by Ord. No. 5401)
B. The solicitor shall be soliciting for a charitable organization registered with the
Attorney General as provided in 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq. as it now stands or as
hereafter amended.
C. The charitable organization is engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.
D. The soliciting organization assumes liability for any injuries to any person or
property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agent.
E. The solicitor or any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age
or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
F. The solicitor or soliciting charitable organization shall submit proof of liability
insurance in a minimum amount of three hundred fifty thousand dollars
($350,000.00), naming the Town of Normal, its officers and employees as additional
insureds.
G. Solicitation may take place from one half hour after sunrise until one half hour
before sunset.
H. If Town of Normal high visibility vests are used, a deposit shall be submitted with
the application of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per vest used.
I. A completed application form shall be submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to
the requested date of solicitation.
J. No person or charitable organization shall be allowed to solicit more than two (2)
days per calendar year.
K. Only one solicitation permit shall be issued for any one calendar week (Sunday
through Saturday).
L. Within two weeks following the solicitation event, the permittee shall submit
evidence that 100% of the funds raised were disbursed to the charitable organization
named in the application. Failure to provide satisfactory evidence shall be sufficient
grounds to deny any future permit requests by the named permittee.
SEC. 22.4-11(Cont.2)
M. Clear identification at the solicitation site showing name of soliciting organization
and its cause.
The City Manager shall develop forms and be responsible for issuing permits
pursuant to this Section.
(Sec. 22.4-11 Added 2/6/84 by Ord. No. 3276)(Sec. 22.4-11 Amended 3/17/91 by Ord. No. 4446)
SEC. 22.4-12 PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Division
shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine or not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each
day that any such violation or failure continues shall be considered as a separate, distinct offense
and shall be punishable as such.
(Entire Division 4 of Chapter 22 Amended 6/5/89)
SEC. 22.5
DIVISION 5 - SECOND HAND STORES
(Entire Division 5 of Chapter Deleted 11/2/81 by Ord. No. 3035)
SEC. 22.6
DIVISION 6 - MOVING BUILDINGS
(Entire Division 6 of Chapter 22 deleted and transferred to Chapter 11, 11/16/81 by Ord. No. 3038)
SEC. 22.7-1
DIVISION 7 - AUCTIONS
SEC. 22.7-1 LICENSE. It shall be unlawful within the Town of Normal for any person to
act as an auctioneer or to offer to exercise a business or trade of an auctioneer or to vend or sell or
offer to sell at public auction any goods, wares or merchandise or any interest therein without first
having obtained a license from the Town of Normal for that purpose as hereinafter provided;
EXCEPT that none of the provisions of this Division shall apply to any judicial sale whatsoever, nor
to any officer or person executing any process or order of any court selling any property or effects
directed by law to be sold at public auction, or to the property or effects of any deceased person
when sold by order of the personal representative, or to any sale by a trustee in bankruptcy, or to the
sale of any real estate.
SEC. 22.7-2 FEES. The license fee for auctioneers shall be Five Dollars ($5.00) per day
and a like sum per day thereafter during the continuance of any sale, except as follows:
A. In auction sales where more than one auctioneer conducts the sale, the license fee for
each auctioneer shall be Three Dollars ($3.00) per day.
B. An Annual License Permit may be obtained for auctions contained at one specified
location on the payment of a Two Hundred Dollar ($200.00) fee.
Except in the case of an Annual Auction License, a separate license must be secured for
each sale, showing the location of sale and the date on which the sale is to be held. (Amended
12/16/85)
SEC. 22.7-3 TIME AND PLACE. It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or his agent to
sell or offer for sale at public auction any goods, wares or merchandise upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground. It shall further be unlawful to conduct any public auction before eight
o'clock a.m. and after six o'clock p.m., except in the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing Zoning District,
auctions may be conducted within an enclosed structure between the hours of eight o'clock a.m. and
eleven o'clock p.m. (Amended 8/20/79)(Amended 12/16/85)
SEC. 22.7-4 FRAUD. Whoever shall offer for sale at auction any article and induce its
purchase by any bidder and afterwards secretly substitute any other article for the one so exhibited
with the intent to deceive and defraud the bidder, or shall in any other manner be guilty of any
device, trick or fraudulent practice intended to deceive a bidder, shall, upon conviction of such
practice, be guilty of a violation of this Chapter and, in addition, thereafter shall be no longer
eligible for a license.
SEC. 22.7-5 EXCEPTIONS. This Division shall have no effect or extend to public
auction sales sponsored by or under the auspices of any church, school, War Veterans or charitable
organizations, except that the aforementioned organizations enumerated in this paragraph shall first
secure written permission form the Town Council for the holding of such public auction.
SEC. 22.8-1
DIVISION 8 - MOBILE HOME PARK
SEC. 22.8-1 DEFINITION.
A. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and phrases in this
Ordinance shall have the meaning as set forth in SEC. 22.8-1(D).
B. The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
1. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present;
3. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The definition of any word not included in this Section shall be construed to be the
same as defined in Chapter 15 of said Town of Normal Code, being the Town
Zoning Code.
D. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall be
construed as herein defined:
1. Accessory Structure. A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal
building or mobile home that contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile home.
a. Anchoring Equipment. Straps, cables, turnbuckles and chains
including tension devices which are used with ties to secure a mobile
home to ground or pier anchors. (Added 5/21/79)
b. Anchoring System. The combination of ties, anchoring equipment,
stand and ground or pier anchors that will, when properly designed
and installed, resist overturning and lateral movement of the mobile
home from wind forces. (Added 5/21/79)
2. Driveway. A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a
mobile home lot or used for common access to a small group of lots of
facilities.
3. Dependent Mobile Home. A mobile home which does not contain toilet and
bath or toilet and shower facilities.
SEC. 22.8-1(Cont.1)
4. Family. Either one person or two or more persons each related to each other
by blood, marriage or legal adoption and any foster children residing with
such person or persons in a “foster family home” as that term is defined in
the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as amended, and an aggregate of not
more than one roomer or boarder, whether or not gratuitous, maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit or a group of two persons not so
related maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. (Amended
5/21/79)
a. Footer. That portion of the support system that transmits loads
directly to the soil. (Added 5/21/79)
b. Ground Anchor. Any device at the mobile home stand designed to
transfer mobile anchoring loads to the ground. (Added 5/21/79)
5. Health Department. The McLean County Health Department or its
authorized representative.
6. License. A written license issued by the Town of Normal allowing a person
to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this
Ordinance and regulations issued hereunder.
7. Mobile Home. Any vehicle or similar portable structure which contains toilet
and bath or toilet and shower facilities that is used, or so constructed as to
permit its use as a conveyance upon public streets or highways and
designated to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or
more persons.
8. Mobile Home Lot. A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home
which is designated for the exclusive use of the occupants.
9. Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land which has been developed for the
placement of two (2) or more mobile homes and is owned by an individual,
firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.
10. Mobile Home Stand. That part of a mobile home lot which has been reserved
for the placement of one mobile home, accessory structures or additions.
11. Park Manager. The person who owns or has charge, care or control of the
mobile home park.
12. Park Street. A private way which affords principal means of access to
individual mobile home lots or service buildings.
13. Permit. A written certification issued by the Town of Normal or its duly
authorized representative permitting the construction, alteration or
SEC. 22.8-1(Cont.2)
extension of a mobile home park under the provisions of this Ordinance and
regulations issued hereunder.
14. Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association
or corporation.
a. Pier. That portion of the support system between the footer and the
mobile home exclusive of cap and shims. (Added 5/21/79)
15. Service Building. A structure housing toilet, lavatory, park manager’s office,
laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be required by this
Ordinance.
16. School District. Any district created or operated under the provisions of “The
School Code” approved May 1, 1945, as amended.
17. Sewer Connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile
home lot.
18. Sewer Riser Pipe. That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically
to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.
a. Stabling Devices. All components of the anchor and support
systems, such as stand, piers, footers, ties, anchoring equipment,
ground anchors and any other equipment which supports the mobile
home and secures it to the ground. (Added 5/21/79)
b. Tie. Strap, cable or securing device used to connect the mobile home
to ground or mobile home stand anchors. (Added 5/21/79)
c. Tie, Diagonal. A tie intended to primarily resist horizontal or sheer
forces and which may secondarily resist vertical updraft and
upturning forces. (Added 5/21/79)
d. Tie, Vertical. A tie intended to primarily resist uplifting and
overturning forces. (Added 5/21/79)
19. Water Connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
20. Water Riser Pipe. That portion of the water supply system serving the
mobile home park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.
SEC. 22.8-1(Cont.3)
21. Town. The Town of Normal, Illinois, whose actions and duties herein
prescribed shall be carried out through its Mayor or President, or such other
official as may be delegated by the Town Council or Board of Trustees.
22. Trailer Coach or Mobile Home. Any vehicle or similar portable structure
used, or so constructed as to permit its being used, as a conveyance upon the
public streets or highway and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling place for one or more persons.
23. Dependent Trailer Coach or Dependent Mobile Home. A trailer coach
which does not have toilet and bath or shower facilities.
24. Independent Trailer Coach or Independent Mobile Home. A trailer coach
with self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities.
25. Trailer Coach Park or Park. An acre of land upon which two or more
occupied trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such trailer coach park.
26. Trailer Coach Space or Trailer Coach Site. Any portion of a trailer coach
park designated for the use or occupancy of one trailer coach.
27. Town. The Town of Normal, Illinois, whose actions and duties herein
prescribed shall be carried out through its Mayor or President, or such other
officials thereof as the same may be delegated by the Town Council.
28. School District. Any district created or operated under the provisions of
“The School Code” approved May 1, 1945, as amended.
When used in this Division, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in
the plural number include the singular; the word “Building” includes the word “Structure” and the
word “shall” is mandatory and not directory. The definition of any word not included in this section
shall be construed to be the same as defined in Chapter 15 of said Town of Normal Code, being the
Town Zoning Code.
SEC. 22.8-2 PERMITS.
A. New, Altered or Expended Parks.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile
home park within the corporate limits of the Town unless he holds a valid
permit issued by the Town in the name of such person for the specific
construction, alteration or extension proposed.
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.1)
2. Any person seeking a permit shall deliver four copies of the permit
application to the Town Clerk. All applications shall contain the following
information with respect to the proposed construction, alteration or
expansion:
a. Name and address of the applicant;
b. The location and legal description of the tract of land;
c. Complete plans and specifications of the proposed mobile home
park, area altered or proposed expansion, delineating the following:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
(2) The number, location and size of all mobile home lots;
(3) The location, width, and type of surface material of all park
streets, walkways and driveways;
(4) The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(5) Plans and specifications of the water distribution and refuse
and sewage disposal facilities;
(6) Plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed
within the area;
(7) Plans and specifications of lighting and other electrical
systems;
(8) The location and use of all structures outside of, and within
two hundred (200) feet of the proposed park boundary line;
(9) The location and size of all public utility lines and the
location, width of all public streets and sidewalks outside of,
and within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed park
boundary line;
(10) The location, size and type of material for each mobile home
stand;
(11) Existing topography at two (2) foot contour intervals;
(12) The location and type of fire extinguisher equipment; and
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.2)
(13) The location of all underground utilities such as telephone
cables, gas mains and TV cables.
The above plans shall be drawn on tracing paper or tracing cloth having a
minimum size of 24 inches by 18 inches, in a manner that clear and legible
prints can be made. Said plan shall be drawn to a scale that shall be not less
than a ratio of one (1) inch to 100 feet.
3. All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of One
Hundred Dollars for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction thereof, proposed
to be included in the construction, alteration or expansion of the mobile
home park. Each application fee shall be paid to the Town Treasurer by
certified check or United States money order in the amount of the application
fee only, and said fee, once paid to the Town Treasurer, shall not be
refunded. (Amended 9/19/83)
4. When, upon review of the application, the Town is satisfied that the
proposed plan meets the requirements of this Chapter, including specifically
all Mobile Home Park Development Standards (specified in Sec. 22.8-3),
and other applicable law, rules or regulations, a permit shall be issued. The
McLean County Board of Health is empowered to enforce all Municipal
Ordinances regarding public health. When the Town of Normal has
approved an application for a permit, it shall retain the original and keep a
file copy thereof; one copy shall be returned to the applicant and one copy
shall be sent to the Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois.
5. The issuance of a permit does not relieve the applicant from securing any
other permit required or from complying with any other Ordinance of the
Town or from complying with the park operating or annual licensing
requirements of this Code.
6. Any person whose application for a permit under this Chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Town Council or Board of Trustees under the procedure provided in Sec.
22.8-7 of this Chapter.
B. Existing Parks coming within the jurisdiction of the Town after construction and
after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance (June 2, 1979).
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park which at
the time of construction was lawfully constructed, altered or expanded
without a Sec. 22.8-2(A) Permit, unless he holds a valid permit issued by the
Town in the manner provided in this subparagraph (B) or comes within the
exceptions of subparagraph C of this section.
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.3)
2. Any person seeking a permit shall, within 90 days from the date on which
the park first comes under the Town’s Mobile Home Park Ordinances or
regulations, deliver four copies of the permit application to the Town Clerk.
All applications shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of the applicant:
b. The location and legal description of the tract of land;
c. Complete plans and specifications of the existing mobile home park
delineating the following:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
(2) The number, location and size of all mobile home lots;
(3) The location, width and type of surface material of all park
streets, walkways and driveways;
(4) The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(5) Plans and specifications of the water distribution and refuse
and sewage disposal facilities;
(6) Plans and specifications of all buildings in or to be
constructed within the mobile home park;
(7) Plans and specifications of lighting and other electrical
systems;
(8) The location and use of all structures outside of, and within
two hundred (200) feet of the park boundary line;
(9) The location and size of all public utilities lines and the
location, width of all public streets and sidewalks outside of,
and within two hundred (200) feet of the park boundary line;
(10) The location, size and type of material for each mobile home
stand;
(11) Existing topography at two (2) foot contour intervals;
(12) The location and type of fire extinguisher equipment, and
(13) The location of all underground utilities such as telephone
cables, gas mains and TV cables.
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.4)
(14) A list of the changes or alterations to the park which will be
made to make it conform in every respect with the
requirements of the Town.
The above plans shall be drawn on tracing paper or tracing cloth, having a
minimum size of 24 inches by 18 inches, in a manner that clear and legible
prints can be made. Said plan shall be drawn to a scale that shall be not less
than a ratio of one (1) inch to 100 feet.
3. All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of One
Hundred ($100) Dollars for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction thereof,
proposed to be included in the construction, alteration or expansion of the
mobile home park. Each application fee shall be paid to the Town Treasurer
by certified check or United States money order in the amount of the
application fee only, and said fee, once paid to the Town Treasurer shall not
be refunded. (Amended 9/19/83)
4. When, upon review of the application, the Town is satisfied that the
proposed plan meets the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable
laws, rules or regulations, a permit shall be issued. Where the Town of
Normal finds that compliance with provisions of this Chapter would result in
undue hardship, an exemption may be granted by the Town of Normal
without impairing its intent and purpose. Deviations from the Mobile Home
Development Standards specified in Sec. 22.8-3 shall be brought into
compliance with this Chapter within a reasonable period of time, based on
economic feasibility of improvement, nature, significance, and extent of
deviation, depreciation of material improvement and layout in use and other
similar factors, within a minimum period not exceeding one year and a
maximum period not exceeding five years. The McLean County Board of
Health is empowered to enforce all municipal ordinances regarding public
health. When the Town of Normal has approved an application for a permit,
it shall retain the original and keep a file copy thereof; one copy shall be
returned to the applicant and one copy shall be sent to the Department of
Health of the State of Illinois.
5. The issuance of a permit does not relieve the applicant from securing any
other permit required or from complying with any other Ordinance of the
Town or from complying with the park operating or annual licensing
requirements of this Code.
6. Any person whose application for a permit under this Chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Town Council or Board of Trustees under the procedure provided by Sec.
22.8-7 of this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.5)
C. Existing Parks within the Corporate Limits of the Town Constructed Prior to
Comprehensive Town Mobile Home Park regulation:
1. The following mobile home parks may be maintained in the condition which
exists on the effective date of this ordinance (June 2, 1979) or in some other
condition which more closely conforms with the then current mobile home
park regulations:
a. Northmeadow Village
b. Royal Acres
(Subsection (1) Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
Such parks shall be deemed to have a park permit authorizing the continued use and
occupancy of the park as is subject to the operating requirements of this Code.
D. Exemptions.
1. Where the Town of Normal finds that compliance with provisions of this
chapter would result in undue hardship, an exemption may be granted by the
Town of Normal without impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
Any such exemption shall be noted on the appropriate mobile home park
permit.
E. Agreements.
1. Any owner filing an application for a mobile home park permit shall submit
an agreement which shall state that the improvements required by this Code
shall be completed by the owner in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Town Engineer. All inspection fees required by the Town
shall be paid to the Town and all plans and specifications showing said
improvements as installed shall be filed with the Town within two (2) years
following the issuance of a license by the Town and prior to the release of
bond.
2. The owner shall have filed with the Town Clerk a surety bond to insure the
construction of such improvements in a satisfactory manner and within the
period specified by the Council, such period not to exceed two (2) years and
guaranteeing the improvements against faulty materials and workmanship
for a period of one (1) year following acceptance by the Town Engineer in
writing. No bond shall be accepted unless it be enforceable by and payable
to the Town in a sum at least equal to the cost of constructing the
improvements as estimated by the Town Engineer.
Or, the owner shall provide an escrow account to be held by a local bank or
loan association conditioned upon the satisfactory construction of the
improvements, the amount of the escrow account to be equal to the estimated
SEC. 22.8-2(Cont.6)
cost of said improvements, as estimated by the Town Engineer, plus ten
percent (10%) additional. All withdrawals from the escrow account shall be
made subject to the release of the Town of Normal by the Town Engineer,
and the same may be paid as work progresses and is completed, subject also
to the said Engineer's approval. Upon the completion of the improvements
and acceptance of the Town Engineer, the additional ten percent (10%) of
the escrow account shall remain upon deposit until the expiration of the one
(1) year guarantee herein provided, and upon approval and final release by
the Town Engineer. The form of such surety bond or escrow receipt shall be
comparable to that required by the Town's subdivision ordinances.
SEC. 22.8-3 MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. General Requirements. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and
topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the
occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or
other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden
flooding, sinking or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose
persons or property to hazards.
B. Conformance with Town Plans. All mobile home parks shall be de-signed in such a
manner as to conform to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, major street
plan, trunk sewer plan, water distribution plan and the other major storm drainage
plan as approved by the Town of Normal. The owner shall dedicate all rights-ofway
and construct his proportionate share of all major or collector streets, sewers,
feeder water mains and storm drainage facilities as required under Chapter 16 of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, 1969, as amended, entitled “Subdivision
Regulations”. All construction of the above public improvements shall be
completed in accordance with the applicable Town construction standards.
C. Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be paved, or covered with other solid material, or protected
with a vegetation growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust.
D. Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home
park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner. Proposed drainage improvements shall maintain any natural water courses
and shall prevent the collection of water at any low spot. A storm sewer system
shall be constructed and connected to an adequate outfall as approved by the Town
Engineer.
E. Service Buildings, Community Facilities and Nonresidential Uses.
1. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.1)
uses that are required for the direct servicing and well being of park residents
and for the management and maintenance of the park, including without
limitation the following:
a. Park management offices;
b. Community laundry facilities;
c. Community sanitary facilities;
d. Indoor community recreation areas;
e. Repair shops and storage buildings;
f. Postal pick-up and delivery facilities.
2. Required Community Service Facilities. Every park operated or intended to
be operated, shall be provided with the following:
a. For emergency sanitary accommodations, each 100 mobile home
spaces or fractional part thereof, shall have one flush toilet and one
lavatory for each sex. The service building containing such
emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile homes.
b. A park management office.
c. Community laundry facilities.
d. Postal pick-up and delivery facilities as approved by the U.S. Post
Office.
3. Construction Requirements.
a. Community service building or buildings shall be conveniently
located, well constructed, having good natural and artificial lighting
and adequate ventilation. Floors in laundry areas shall be
constructed of concrete or similar impervious materials. Concrete
curbing shall extend at least six inches above the floor, and the floor
shall be sloped to adequate drains of impervious material where
subject to splash. Such building shall be maintained at a temperature
of at least 60 degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1 to
May 1.
b. The community service building shall provide rest rooms for each
sex, plainly marked by appropriate signs, in which shall be installed
water closets and lavatories adequate in number to serve the
reasonable needs of occupants as required in Sec. 22.8-3(E)(1). Each
water closet shall be placed in a separate compartment, properly
separated from other water closets and shall not be less than three (3)
feet wide and shall be enclosed with proper partition.
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.2)
c. A laundry room or building shall be provided, containing two
automatic washers and one dryer. (Amended 11/18/85)
d. Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of
this Section, community service building or buildings or portions
thereof constructed or installed after the effective date of this
amendatory ordinance (June 2, 1979) shall have concrete block or
poured concrete walls.
F. Required Lot Area and Separation Between Mobile Homes.
1. All mobile home lots shall contain a minimum of 3,200 square feet. Mobile
homes, detached garages and accessory structures shall be separated from
each other by at least ten (10) feet, provided this distance may be reduced to
five (5) feet if a one hour fire rating is provided on the exterior wall of the
structure and provided further no mobile home, detached garage or accessory
structure shall be located closer than five (5) feet from mobile home lot line,
provided, however, that accessory structures with a base not exceeding 144
square feet shall be located only behind the front line of the mobile home.
(Amended 10/16/89)(Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
2. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport,
windbreak and porch which has a floor area exceeding 25 square feet, or has
an opaque top or roof, shall for purposes of all separation requirements, be
considered to be part of the mobile home.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Section,
mobile home lots in parks established or in new areas of parks expanded
after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance (June 2, 1979) shall
meet the following minimum requirements:
a. Double lots shall contain not less than 5,800 square feet and shall
have a minimum lot width of not less than 60 feet;
b. Single lots shall contain not less than 5,000 square feet and have a lot
width of not less than 54 feet.
G. Required Recreation Areas.
1. In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more mobile
homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily
accessible to all park residents.
2. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 5% of
the gross land area of the mobile home park. No out-door recreation area
shall contain less than 2,500 square feet.
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.3)
3. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and
should be centrally located.
H. Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips and Screening.
1. All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park property
boundary line or at least 40 feet from any park property boundary lines
which are adjacent to the side or rear lot lines of parcels of land which are
zoned R-1AA, R-1A or R-1B, Single Family Residence District.
2. There shall be a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between the mobile
home and abutting park street. (Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
3. All mobile home parks shall be provided with a screening buffer strip at least
five (5) feet wide along all property boundary lines, except those boundaries
which are adjacent to a public street. Where effective visual barriers do not
exist, the buffer strip shall be furnished with screening at least five (5) feet
high and shall consist of fences, freestanding walls or natural growth. Such
growth shall consist of a compact growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens
or other suitable planting sufficient to serve as an effective visual screen.
I. Park Street System.
1. General Requirements. All parks shall provide safe, continuous and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home space. For purposes of this ordinance, all streets or roads
providing such vehicular access shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Park
Street System”.
2. Primary Entrance Road. The primary entrance road connecting the Park
Street System with a public street or road shall have a minimum road
pavement width of 40 feet, where guest parking is permitted at both sides, or
a minimum road pavement width of 32 feet where guest parking is limited to
one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than 100 feet long and
does not provide access to abutting property within such distance, the
minimum road width may be 24 feet, provided parking is prohibited at both
sides.
3. Secondary Entrance Road. In addition to the required primary entrance road,
all parks containing 25 or more acres in total area and/or providing for the
accommodation of 200 or more mobile homes, shall have at least one
secondary entrance road connecting the Park Street System with a public
street or road. Such a secondary road or roads shall have a minimum
pavement width of thirty (30) feet. Where primary and secondary entrance
roads connect to the same public street or road, there shall be a minimum
separation of 150 feet between such access points. Where this is not feasible
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.4)
or possible, clearly marked one-way entrance and exit lanes with at least a
15-foot wide median strip are acceptable provided the pavement of each oneway
road is at least thirty (30) feet wide. (Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No.
4319)
4. Interior Streets. All interior streets in the park street system shall have a
minimum pavement width of thirty (30) feet. All streets shall connect with
other streets or terminate in a cul de sac with a minimum diameter of 40 feet.
(Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
5. Street Construction and Design Standards.
a. Pavements. All street shall be provided with a smooth, all weather
dust-free surface which shall be durable and well drained under
normal use and weather conditions. Street surfaces shall be
maintained free of cracks, holes, raveled edges and other hazards.
b. Intersections. Street intersections shall be at approximately right
angles. A distance of at least 80 feet shall be maintained between
center lines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than
two streets at one point shall be avoided.
6. Street Signs and Mobile Home Lot Numbers.
a. Street signs conforming to the specifications of the Town of Normal
shall be installed by the owner so as to identify every street in the
mobile home park.
b. Each mobile home lot shall be designated by a number as a means of
identification. Each number shall be a minimum of four (4) inches
high and shall be displayed at all times on a weather resistant surface
and be of contrasting color and located in such a manner as to permit
identification from the park street. (Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No.
4319)
7. Car Parking. Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes shall be
provided for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall:
a. Be furnished at a rate of at least 1.50 car spaces for each mobile
home lot, provided, however, 2.00 car spaces shall be provided on
the lot for each mobile home lot created after the effective date of
this amendatory ordinance (June 2, 1979).
b. Be located within a distance of 200 feet from the mobile home to be
served, unless other vehicular access is provided. The minimum
street width requirement under Sec. 22.8 shall be increased by eight
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.5)
feet if on-street parking is the only type of car parking provided in a
mobile home park.
J. Water Supply.
1. General Requirements. Every park shall have a public water supply system
capable of providing a sufficient supply of potable water, under adequate
pressure, to facilities for mobile homes, service buildings, fire hydrants and
other accessory facilities, as required by this Ordinance for the well being of
park residents and for park maintenance. Such system shall be designated,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the State Standards of Illinois
Department of Public Health and local laws, and shall conform with
regulations of the authorities having jurisdiction.
2. Water Distribution System. The water distribution system serving the
mobile home park and that portion used for fire protection shall be
constructed of piping, fixtures, and other equipment of approved materials
and shall be so designed and maintained to comply with all applicable
provisions of the Town of Normal.
3. Individual Water Connections.
a. Individual water service connections shall be provided at each
mobile home lot in the mobile home park. All water service
connections shall be watertight and located at a safe distance from
sanitary sewer connections. The minimum pipe size of connections
shall be three-quarters (3/4) inch and shall be so constructed as to
provide two (2) connection points, one for the mobile home and one
for a hose or other exterior convenience supply. Outlets shall be so
constructed as to be free of possible contamination from surface
drainage and possible damage during installation of a mobile home,
and shall be four (4) inches above grade.
b. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe, and to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of ground during freezing weather.
4. Sewage Disposal. All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be
disposed of into a public sewerage system. All sewage systems shall be
constructed in conformity with all laws of the State of Illinois, regulation of
any department, division or board of the State of Illinois, and any ordinance
of the Town of Normal, Illinois, relative thereto.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a sewer connection for the
combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the
duty of the owner or operator of said mobile home park to provide an
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.6)
approved type of water and odor tight connection from the mobile home
water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of said owner
or operator to supervise such connection and keep all occupied mobile
homes connected to said sewer while located in a mobile home park. Sewer
connections in unoccupied mobile home lots shall be so closed that they will
emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste shall be
allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile home.
K. Fuel Supply and Storage.
1. Natural Gas System. Natural gas piping systems in all parks shall be
installed and maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices
and the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction.
2. Fuel Supply Systems. All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile
homes, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority
having jurisdiction.
3. L.P. Gas Systems. All L.P. Gas Systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings, and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction.
L. Fire Protection Equipment. Standard fire hydrants shall be placed within 300 feet of
each mobile home or building, provided however, that in the existing mobile home
park areas which do not meet the immediately above-mentioned requirement, two
(2) fire extinguishers Class A, 2-1/2 gallon water pressurized with anti-freeze, or
comparable approved by the Town of Normal Fire Inspector, shall be placed at
locations within 200 feet of each mobile home site.
M. Electrical Distribution System.
1. Underground Utilities. All utility lines including electric, telephone, and
other communication or television signal cables, shall be laid underground
within all mobile home parks. The methods of construction shall be those
commonly used in the utility industry with above-ground access points for
distribution and maintenance purposes. The installation of such lines shall
be in compliance with applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois
Public Utilities Act.
2. Required Illumination of Park Street Systems. All park drives shall be
furnished with lighting units spaced not greater than 150 feet apart and at all
intersections. Each standard shall be equipped with 125 watt mercury vapor
fixtures or equivalent, placed at such mounting heights as will provide
illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.7)
3. Electrical Services.
a. The calculated electrical load for any mobile home will be governed
by Article 550-11 of the National Electrical Code. In no case will
mobile home service equipment* be rated at or served by, less than
100 amperes of electrical power.
*Service equipment is defined as the utility meter mounting means
and the meter. The electrical distribution panel and service switch
located in the mobile home are not part of the service equipment as
herein defined.
b. Mobile home service equipment shall be required to be located not
more than 30 feet from the point of entry of the feeder conductors
into the mobile home it serves provided either of the following
conditions prevail.
(1) In any addition to a mobile home park within the corporate
limits of the Town of Normal after adoption of this
ordinance.
(2) In the event that service conductors and/or equipment serving
a mobile home lot are not of sufficient ampacity to
adequately and safely conduct the required electrical load, the
conductors must be removed and replaced with conductors of
sufficient ampacity, and service equipment, as herein defined,
moved to within 30 feet of the mobile home served.
c. Removal and replacement of mobile homes. A mobile home may be
removed and replaced only with one of the same amperage
requirements.
4. Electrical connections of mobile homes. Connection of the feeder assembly
to the mobile home service entrance conductors shall be made by means of:
a. A weather-proof disconnect, located within two feet of the mobile
home. (Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
b. A connection incorporating an approved underground splicing
method. This connection will consist of a crimped connector
covered by a heat shrinkable synthetic insulator. This connection
must be impervious to moisture and, in the event the conductors are
aluminum, they shall be treated to resist oxidation. Split bolted and
taped connections are not acceptable.
SEC. 22.8-3(Cont.8)
5. Grounding of mobile homes. In the event that a mobile home is not
provided with a four wire grounded system, a ground rod shall be driven at a
point as near as possible to the entrance of the mobile home feeder
conductors. If a grounding electrode conductor is not provided from the
service panel in the mobile home, a suitable sized bare copper conductor
shall be routed from the grounding bus in the mobile home distribution
panelboard and connected to the driven ground rod in an approved manner.
If the mobile home panelboard is provided with an identified grounding
electrode conductor, this conductor may be connected to the driven ground
rod in lieu of the above method. All mobile homes will be grounded by
either of the above methods.
6. Identification of mobile home utility meters. In order to facilitate
identification of utility meters, each mobile home will be appropriately
numbered and a corresponding number will be plainly marked on the utility
meter serving the mobile home.
7. General requirements. All other matters pertaining to electrical requirements
for mobile homes will be governed by Article 550 and other relevant
sections of the National Electrical Code.
N. Mobile Home Stand. Pads: Pads shall be constructed of concrete six inches thick
and the same width and length as the mobile home to occupy the pad. The concrete
shall provide adequate support for the placement and tie-downs of the mobile home,
thereby securing this superstructure against uplifts, sliding, rotation and over turning.
The pads shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile
home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration, or other forces acting on
the structure. The foregoing shall apply to new mobile home parks; the expansion of
existing parks; and whenever units are being replaced and the old pad does not meet
this requirement. Only gravel or sand is to be used as fill for leveling and
preparatory work for concrete installation. (Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
O. Ties, Anchors, and Stabilizing Devices. All mobile homes shall have ties, anchors
and stabilizing devices as established by the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act
effective January 1, 1980. All devices used to tie down homes shall be approved by
the Illinois Department of Public Health. All equipment must be installed in
accordance with the instructions that the manufacturer must provide.
Length of Mobile Single Wide Double Wide
Home Verticle Diagonal Verticle Diagonal
50 feet or less 2 2 None 2
51 to 75 feet 2 3 None 3
Over 75 feet 2 4 None 4
(Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
SEC. 22.8-4
SEC. 22.8-4 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a mobile home
park in a way which does not meet or exceed the operating requirements of this
Section.
B. Conformance with Permit. All mobile home parks shall be operated and maintained
in the manner depicted in that park’s mobile home park permit or in some other and
different way which more closely and completely conform with the then current
mobile home park development standards of this code, but shall not be altered,
operated or maintained in a way which deviates from such then existing
requirements to a greater extent than already present. All improvements and
facilities depicted on such permits (either actual or implied) shall be maintained in
an operable condition.
C. Insect, Rodent and Weed Control.
1. General Requirements. Grounds, buildings and structures within mobile
home parks shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and rodent harborage
and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control
insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with requirements of the McLean
County Health Department.
2. Insect Control. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris
which may provide breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
3. Rodent Control. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent a rodent
harborage. Lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least
one (1) foot above ground.
4. Control Potentially Hazardous Locations. Where the potential for rodent or
vermin infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structures
shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
5. Weed Control. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to
prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall
be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison
oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health.
Open or vacant areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any
description and the entire park shall be maintained in conformance with Sec.
21.1-6 and 21.1-7 of this Code.
D. Fire Protection.
1. Flammable materials. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter,
SEC. 22.8-4(Cont.2)
rubbish and other highly flammable materials. No storage of highly
flammable materials shall be permitted under the mobile home.
2. Fires: Permitted Only in Approved Equipment. Fires shall be made only in
cooking stoves and equipment approved for such purposes.
(Subsection D Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
E. Refuse Disposal.
1. General Requirements. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the
mobile home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof containers,
which shall conform to local ordinance provisions.
2. Collection Frequency. The mobile home park operator shall provide
commercial collection service. All refuse shall be collected and transported
in covered vehicles.
3. Incineration. No garbage or refuse shall be burned on the premises.
F. Lot Identification. All mobile homes shall be provided with and shall thereafter be
maintained so as to have a “lot designation number” or letter at least 4 inches in
height posted on or near the home it identifies, provided however, if lot
identification in conformance with Sec. 22.8-3(I)(6)(b) is provided, such lot
identification shall be maintained.
G. Mobile Home Placement.
1. Home Standards. Any mobile home moved into or returned to the mobile
home park after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance (June 16,
1995) shall be installed and maintained in a way so as to meet the following
standards and requirements:
a. The electrical disconnect requirements of Sec. 22.8-3(M)(3). A
permit is required for this work.
b. The mobile home must be installed as per the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code. A permit is required for this work.
c. The tie, anchor and stabilizing requirements of Sec. 22.8-3(O).
d. The mobile home must be installed on an approved mobile home
stand as required in Sec. 22.8-3(N).
e. An occupancy inspection is required before the unit can be occupied.
SEC. 22.8-4(Cont.3)
The unit must have mobile home lot numbers in accordance with
Sec. 22.8-3(I)(6)(b) and parking as required by Sec. 22.8-3(I)(7)(a)
and interior electrical requirements in accordance with Sec. 22.8-
3(M)(7).
(Subsection (1) Amended 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
2. Lot Standards. No mobile home shall be moved onto a mobile home lot or
expanded on its existing lot so as to reduce the required open lot area or
encroach upon a required setback or minimum separation to an extent greater
than the encroachment existing on the date of this amendatory ordinance
(June 2, 1979).
SEC. 22.8-5 LICENSES.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits
of the Town of Normal unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the Town
of Normal in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All
applications for licenses shall be made to the Town Clerk, who shall issue a license
upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this Ordinance.
B. All licenses shall expire at midnight, July 31 next following the year of issuance or
renewal thereof and shall be renewed from year to year thereafter.
C. Application for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant,
accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by
the deposit as set forth in Chapter 25 of this Code, and shall be accompanied by an
approved Mobile Home Park Permit (except as to those parks enumerated in
Sec.22.8-2(C). (Amended 9/20/93 by Ord. No. 4170) (Amended 2/17/03 by Ord.
No. 4857)(Amended 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
D. Application for renewal of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of the
licenses. All applications shall contain any change in the information submitted
since the original permit and license were issued or the latest renewal granted, and
shall be accompanied by an annual renewal fee as set forth in Chapter 25 of this
Code. (Amended 9/20/93 by Ord. No. 4170)(Amended 2/17/03 by Ord. No.
4857)(Amended 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
E. Prior to the issuance of a Mobile Home Park license renewal, the Town may inspect
the park to determine that it conforms with all operations requirements of this
Chapter and shall not renew any such license if such inspection discloses any
violations or differences.
F. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the Town of Normal finds that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this
Ordinance, the Town of Normal shall give notice in writing in accordance with SEC.
22.8-7(A) to the person to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions
SEC. 22.8-5(Cont.1)
or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice
by the Town of Normal, the license shall be suspended or not renewed. At the end
of such period, the Town of Normal shall reinspect such mobile home park, and if
such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the license shall be suspended
or not renewed and notice shall be given in writing of such suspension to the person
to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, such
person shall cease operation of such mobile home park except as provided in Sec.
22.8-7(B).
G. Any person whose application for a license under this Ordinance has been denied
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Town Council or
Board of Trustees under the procedure provided by Sec. 22.8-7(B) of this Ordinance.
H. The Town of Normal shall supply licenses with any and all rules and regulations
pertaining thereto made by the Town, and any change or changes that may be made
from time to time which shall be kept posted by the park management in a protected,
conspicuous place within the mobile home park.
I. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the Town of Normal
within twenty-four (24) hours after a change of park manager or having sold,
transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in, or control of, any
mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon application
in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00), the
license shall be transferred if the mobile home park is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.8-6 INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
A. The Town of Normal is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as
are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Ordinance.
B. The Town of Normal shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions
relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. The Town of Normal shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record
of all residents of the mobile home park.
D. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the Town of Normal free access
to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
E. The governing body of the School District in which the mobile home park is located,
by and through its officers and proper employees, may inspect and visit a mobile
home park for the purpose of examining the register with reference to children of
school age for the purpose of enforcing attendance of school children.
SEC. 22.8-6(Cont.1)
F. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner
thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with this Ordinance.
G. Representatives of the Department of Revenue and all other law enforcement
officials may enter any mobile home park at any time for the purpose of determining
which, if any, mobile homes therein do not have displayed the Display Certificate of
Title.
SEC. 22.8-7 NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS.
A. Whenever the Town of Normal determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Ordinance, the Town
of Normal shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the
permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
1. be in writing;
2. include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
3. allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
4. be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require, provided that
such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his
last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any
method authorized or required by the laws of this State;
5. contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this ordinance may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Town Council, provided that such person shall file
in the office of the Town Clerk a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the grounds herefore within ten days after the date the
notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of
the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under Sec.
22.8-7(E). Upon receipt of such petition, the Town Clerk shall set a time and place
for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon
application of the petitioner, the Town of Normal may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when in the Town’s
SEC. 22.8-7(Cont.1)
judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such
postponement.
C. After such hearing, the Town Council shall make findings as to compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and shall issue an Order in writing sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided in Sec. 22.8-
7(A)(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice,
the license of the mobile home park affected by the Order shall be revoked.
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the Town of
Normal, and together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Town Clerk, but the
transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the
decision is sought as provided by this Section. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Town Council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this State.
E. Whenever the Town of Normal finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, the Town may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency, including the
suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Town
of Normal shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of Sec.
22.8-7(B),(C) and (D) shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued
thereafter to the extent they can apply to such a post-suspension hearing.
SEC. 22.8-8 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
A. Mobile Home Occupancy. No mobile home shall be occupied by more than one
family as herein defined.
B. Responsibilities of the Park Management.
1. The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate
the park in compliance with this Ordinance and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this ordinance and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this ordinance.
3. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on
its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and installing all
utility connections.
SEC. 22.8-8(Cont.1)
4. The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all
park occupants identified by lot number or street address. Such register shall
be available to any authorized person inspecting the park.
5. The park management shall notify the Health Department immediately of
any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park.
6. The management shall provide an office where each mobile home entering
the mobile home park shall be assigned a mobile home lot, given a copy of
the mobile home rules and registered according to the prescribed form. Said
registration shall include the name and address of every occupant of said
mobile home; the license number of the mobile home; the state issuing such
license; and a statement indicating the exact location at which such mobile
home was last parked, including the state, city, town or village where such
parking occurred. The licensee shall keep a registry of all children of school
age occupying mobile homes in the mobile home park. The abovementioned
register shall be signed by one of the occupants of the mobile
home. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of registration
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under the general
statutes of the State of Illinois or ordinances of the Town of Normal for such
offense. The registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained,
and no registration records shall be destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed
following the date of the registration. The register shall be available at all
times for inspection by law enforcement officers.
7. The park management shall notify the Inspection Department at least 24
hours prior to occupancy of a mobile home; it shall be unlawful for anyone
to occupy a mobile home in a mobile home park without first having
obtained an occupancy permit.
8. A copy of the park drive naming and lot numbering system shall be placed
on file with the Town Police Department, Fire Department and Inspection
Department.
C. Responsibilities of Park Occupants.
1. The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this
ordinance and shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile
home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility
connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management.
3. Pets, if permitted in the park, shall be prohibited from running at large or to
commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot.
SEC. 22.8-8(Cont.2)
4. Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions shall be installed only if
permitted and approved by the park management. When installed, they shall
be maintained in good repair. The space immediately underneath a mobile
home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the park management. If
permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied:
a. The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious
material.
b. Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the
underneath inspection of the mobile home.
c. The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
d. No combustible items are to be stored underneath the mobile home.
(Subsection (d) added 6/5/95 by Ord. No. 4319)
5. The park occupant shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a
clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof,
insect-proof and watertight.
6. First aid fire extinguishers for Class B and C fires shall be kept at the
premises and maintained in a working condition.
SEC. 22.8-9 UNLAWFUL TO PARK MOBILE HOME EXCEPT AS PERMITTED
HEREIN. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, park, store or maintain a mobile home in the
Town outside a mobile home park, which is duly licensed hereunder, except as specifically
permitted herein.
SEC. 22.8-10 (Deleted 10/4/82 by Ord. #3145)
SEC. 22.8-11 GUEST OF A HOUSEHOLDER. It shall be permissible hereunder for a
bona fide guest of a householder to park a mobile home in the rear yard of any dwelling house for a
period of not to exceed fourteen (14) days in any one calendar year; provided however, that such
mobile home may be used only for sleeping purposes during such period.
SEC. 22.8-12 MOBILE HOME USED AS PERMANENT OFFICE. No mobile home
shall be maintained in the Town as a permanent office. Such office use as is compatible with the
demonstration and sale of such articles or services as may be readily transported in a mobile home
by a distributor or salesman may be permitted in a mobile home on a legally located parking lot
within the business or industrial zones of Normal for a period of not exceeding seven (7) days,
provided such mobile home is not used for living or sleeping purposes during such time. Use of a
mobile home as temporary offices on construction sites will be permitted providing no sleeping or
food facilities are established and/or used therein and provided said mobile home is so located as to
not be in violation of any of the other codes or ordinances of the Town. All toilet facilities within
the mobile home shall be connected to an approved sewer connection.
SEC. 22.8-12(Cont.1)
Neither this ordinance nor the license which may be secured by reason thereof is to be
construed in any manner as authorizing the carrying on of a business and shall not in any way be
construed as a modification of the Zoning Code in this respect.
SEC. 22.8-13 MOBILE HOME USED FOR TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY ON
MAJOR CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS. Use of a mobile home as a temporary place of
residence may be permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
A. The Building Permit or subsequent letter requests such an occupancy;
B. The Building Permit application indicates that the proposed construction cost will
exceed $250,000.00;
C. All toilet facilities within the mobile home are connected with approved sewer
connection;
D. The occupancy commences no earlier than the issuance of the Building Permit and
lasts no longer than the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the project under
construction;
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a mobile home under the provisions of
this Section without first having obtained a permit authorizing such occupancy from
the Building Commissioner of the Town of Normal. The purpose of this Permit is to
facilitate the notification of the Police and Fire Department of the Town of Normal
that a mobile home will be occupied on certain construction sites.
SEC. 22.8-14 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the investigation or enforcement of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any of the Codes adopted and modified hereby, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars nor
more than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for the first offense and not less than Fifty ($50.00)
Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the second and each subsequent offense
in any 180 day period; provided however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall
be filed as quasi-criminal actions, subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Practice. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall
continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification or knowledge of
the existence thereof. (Amended 6/3/02 by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 22.8-15 PARTIAL INVALIDITY. If any one or more of the provisions of this
ordinance is declared unconstitutional, or the application thereof is held invalid, the validity of the
remainder of said ordinance and the application of such provisions to other persons and
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Entire Division 8 of Section 22 Amended 5/21/79)
SEC. 22.9
DIVISION 9 - TAXIS
(Division 9 of Chapter 22 repealed in its entirety 6/19/78 by Ord. No. 1738, and effective 6/26/78)
SEC. 22.10-1
DIVISION 10 - MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING SERVICES
SEC. 22.10-1 DEFINITIONS.
Person. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, organization, trust, or
other entity.
Relocator. Any person or entity engaged in the business of removing trespassing vehicles
from private or public property by means of towing or otherwise, and thereafter relocating
and storing such vehicles.
SEC. 22.10-2 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of removing trespassing vehicles from private or public property by means of towing or
otherwise, and thereafter relocating and storing such vehicles without a valid relocator’s license
issued by the Town Clerk.
SEC. 22.10-3 LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
A. Any person seeking a relocator’s license shall provide the following to the Town
Clerk:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the entity;
2. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers and managers of
the relocator;
3. The addresses of the principal place of business and all storage lots;
4. Upon request, the names and dates of birth of all employees engaged in
removing vehicles from public or private property;
5. Proof of insurance which shall insure the relocator for its liability as follows:
a. for injury to person, in an amount not less than $100,000 to any one
person and $300,000 for any one accident;
b. in case of damage to property other than a vehicle being removed, in
an amount not less than $50,000 for any one accident; and
c. in case of damage to any vehicle relocated or stored by the relocator,
in an amount not less than $15,000 per vehicle.
Any such policy shall be issued by an insurance firm qualified to do business
in the State of Illinois. All certificates of insurance filed with the Town
SEC. 22.10-3(Cont.1)
Clerk must show coverage effective continuously until cancelled, and the
Town may require such evidence continued validity as it deems necessary.
B. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) license fee shall be required annually.
C. The Town Clerk shall issue a relocator’s license to any person who is not
disqualified and who provides the information and pays the fee required by this
Section.
SEC. 22.10-4 RESTRICTION ON LICENSE HOLDERS.
A. No person, including any officer of any corporation, who has been convicted of a
felony, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, theft, or other crime of moral
turpitude shall be permitted to obtain a relocator’s license. This restriction shall be
waived by the City Council if the City Council finds that the applicant has been duly
rehabilitated such that issuing a relocator’s license does not pose a significant threat
to the public.
B. No license shall be issued to any person whose relocator’s license has been revoked
within the previous two years.
C. No relocator shall employ any person who has been convicted of a felony, driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs, theft, or other crime of moral turpitude. The
City Manager has authority to waive this restriction if the City Manager finds that
the employee has been duly rehabilitated such that his employment as a relocator
does not pose a significant threat to the public.
SEC. 22.10-5 CONTINUING OBLIGATION.
A. A relocator must, within 15 days, notify the office of the Town Clerk of any changes
in the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers, managers, and
employees of the relocator.
B. A relocator must, within forty-eight (48) hours, notify the office of the Town Clerk
of any changes in locations and telephone numbers of the principal place of
business, places where the company transacts business, and storage lots used.
C. A relocator must, within five days, report the conviction by the relocator or his
employee of felony, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, theft, or other
crime of moral turpitude.
SEC. 22.10-6 AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
A. No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator from any public street or way, public
alley or other public property except pursuant to explicit authorization from a peace
officer, law enforcement officer, owner of said vehicle or duly authorized driver of
SEC. 22.10-6(Cont.1)
said vehicle. Any payment of any kind for authorization to tow given by a relocator
to any peace officer or law enforcement official is prohibited. Nothing in this Sec.
22.10 shall apply to vehicles towed pursuant to Sec. 17.10 of the Municipal Code of
the Town of Normal – Impoundments, and the rights and procedures set forth in Sec.
17.10 shall be the exclusive remedy available for persons whose vehicles are towed
pursuant to Sec. 17.10. (Amended 3/1/2010 by Ord. No. 5330)
B. No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator if it is parked in the space in which it
is authorized to park.
C. Before a relocator may remove an unauthorized vehicle from private property, the
relocator must first obtain a written request from the property owner, the property
owner’s authorized agent or the lessee of the private property to remove the specific
vehicle in question, unless the relocator has been given written authorization to
remove all unauthorized vehicles from said private property. Any payment of any
kind by a relocator to a property owner, lessee or property manager for permission to
tow any vehicle is prohibited.
D. When any owner, authorized agent or lessee of private property gives written
authorization to a relocator to remove all unauthorized vehicles from a private
parking area, signs shall be posted pursuant to Sec. 22.10-7 and the written
authorization shall upon Town request be filed with the Town Clerk. Any payment
of any kind by a relocator to a property owner, lessee or property manager for
permission to tow any vehicle is prohibited.
E. When a property owner utilizes a sticker system to indicate who is allowed to park
in an area, those stickers must be of a quality such that they readily adhere to
window glass, and do not readily fall off. A hang-tag system is permitted in lieu of a
sticker system.
F. Except upon the termination of tenancy, no property owner may terminate parking
permission without first informing the permit holder in person or in writing of the
termination. The burden of proof of showing termination given to the permit holder
shall be on the Relocator and property owner.
SEC. 22.10-7 SIGNS.
A. Signs required. Before a relocator removes any trespassing or unauthorized
vehicles from a private parking area containing more than three spaces, signs shall
be posted no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when any tow is
made.
B. Required sign(s) should be prominently visible from all entrances to the parking area
and in clear view free from interference from any natural or man-made objects and
shall be visible at night. The portions of these signs informing that unauthorized
SEC. 22.10-7(Cont.1)
vehicles will be towed shall be in letters not less than two (2) inches in height, and in
a color vividly contrasting to the background color of the sign. In cases where said
sign(s) are absent or are not clearly visible, for whatever reason, at the time the
vehicle is parked without authorization, towing shall not be permitted. The signs
shall contain the following information:
1. A specific statement indicating who is allowed to park in the area. Said
statements may use classes of persons as well as individuals, but the
statement must provide persons with adequate information to reasonably
apprise persons as to who is allowed to park in the area. The statement
“Authorized Parking Only – Unauthorized Vehicles Towed” is not sufficient
to apprise persons as to who is allowed to park on private property.
“Customer Parking Only – All Others Towed” and “Permit Lot – Vehicles
Displaying Valid Permits Only – All Others Towed” are examples of signs
which apprise persons as to who may park in a given area.
2. A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed.
3. The exact fee, if any, charged by the relocator to recover the vehicle.
4. Name and phone number of Relocator.
SEC. 22.10-8 TOWING WHEN NO SIGNS ARE REQUIRED.
A. Marked parking location. When a vehicle is parked in an otherwise authorized
parking spot on private property and no signs are posted, the relocator may not
remove the vehicle until after either 1) the vehicle owner has been notified in writing
or in person that the vehicle may be towed, or 2) 24 hours have elapsed since a
sticker has been placed on the driver’s side window or windshield indicating that the
vehicle may be towed.
B. Parking in unauthorized areas. When a vehicle is parked on private property in a
clearly marked no parking area, on a non-hard-surface, across a sidewalk, blocking a
driveway or dumpster, or other location where parking is not ordinarily permitted, a
relocator may remove the vehicle.
C. On residential property containing three (3) or fewer parking spaces, a relocator may
remove a vehicle without signs being posted, notification to the vehicle owner, or
stickers being placed on the vehicle.
SEC. 22.10-9 SHOW-UP FEE. No vehicle may be towed by any person from private
property if the owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle is present, or arrives at the
scene prior to the vehicle’s removal from such private property, exhibits the ignition key of said
vehicle, and offers to remove such vehicle voluntarily prior to the time such person attempting to
tow actually removes such vehicle from the private property in question, provided that such other
person so removes such vehicle immediately. However, the owner must pay a show-up fee not to
SEC. 22.10-9(Cont.1)
exceed $25.00. If the owner refuses to pay the show-up fee, the relocator may proceed to tow the
vehicle.
SEC. 22.10-10 NOTIFICATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Whenever an unauthorized vehicle is towed from private property, the relocator shall notify the
Normal Police Department not later than one hour after the vehicle is removed. Such notification
may be by telephone or fax and shall include the name of the relocator; a complete and accurate
description of the vehicle, including license plate number; the location from which and to which the
vehicle was towed; the time the vehicle was towed; and the reason the vehicle was towed.
SEC. 22.10-11 RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FROM CUSTODY OF
RELOCATORS.
A. Prior to release of towed motor vehicles, the relocator shall permit the owner of the
vehicle towed, or his authorized agent, to inspect the interior and exterior of said
vehicle and its contents.
B. The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the towed vehicle shall be identified
by a valid driver’s license and an ignition key which operates the vehicle towed; or
in the instance of rented vehicles, identification may be accomplished by
presentation of a rental contract and the driver’s license of the renting party named in
the rental contract.
C. Should the relocator claim fees and charges for towing, it shall base fees and charges
on rates as stated in this section.
D. The relocator shall accept any of the following methods of payment for such fees
and charges:
1. United States currency,
2. Regular recognized traveler’s checks,
3. Money Order,
4. Cashiers’ or Certified Check,
5. Major credit and debit cards. To the extent that the Town of Normal is
authorized to enact regulations on the use of credit and debit cards, a
relocator holding a properly signed credit or debit card receipt shall become
a holder in due course, and neither the holder of the credit or debit card nor
the company which issued the credit or debit card may thereafter refuse to
remit payment in the amount shown on the credit or debit card receipt minus
the ordinary charge assessed by the credit or debit card company for
processing the charge. No relocator may charge any extra fee for payment
by credit or debit card.
SEC. 22.10-11(Cont.1)
E. The relocator shall immediately release a towed motor vehicle to the owner upon
tender of the lawfully authorized fee. Failure of the relocator to release a vehicle
within 30 minutes of the fee being tendered shall result in a loss of the fee.
F. The relocator shall provide a reason for the vehicle being towed.
G. Hours for Release of Vehicles. A relocator must be open for release of vehicles
from Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except for the following
holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving, and Christmas. A relocator must release vehicles upon demand at all
other times upon payment of an additional late release fee of $20, except no late
release fee may be charged for the release of vehicles within two hours of a vehicle
being relocated.
H. No relocator shall charge more than eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for any motor
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less towed
pursuant to this ordinance, except in the case when a dolly is required to tow the
vehicle, in which case a fee of $110 may be charged.
I. No relocator shall charge more than twelve dollars ($12.00) per day for storage of
motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less
towed under this ordinance. Storage fees may not be charged for vehicles stored less
than twenty-four (24) hours or for the immediate preceding Sunday when the vehicle
is reclaimed on a Monday.
J. A clearly visible sign indicating the right to a post-tow hearing shall be posted at the
primary point of release of all towed vehicles.
K. No relocator shall accept any fees or charges for the release of a motor vehicle
unless such relocator at the time of acceptance of such fee or charge, has provided
the owner or operator with the following notice:
POST-TOW HEARING
ANY VEHICLE OWNER OR OPERATOR WHOSE VEHICLE IS
TOWED PURSUANT TO THE TOWN OF NORMAL MOTOR
VEHICLE TOWING SERVICES ORDINANCE MAY WITHIN
THIRTY (30) DAYS OF THE TOWING APPLY FOR A POST-TOW
HEARING AT THE TOWN OF NORMAL
L. Processing Fee. A relocator may charge a processing fee of no more than $10.00 for
costs involved in obtaining the identity of the owner and providing notice to the
owner of a vehicle which has not been reclaimed within five days.
M. A relocator shall provide an owner with documents showing the time a fee was
tendered and the time the vehicle was released to the owner.
SEC. 22.10-11(Cont.2)
N. The fee limitations set forth in this Sec. 22.10-11 shall not be applicable to vehicles
towed pursuant to police orders when the Town enters into a contract for motor
vehicle towing services. Fees charged for vehicles towed pursuant to police orders
shall be limited by any contract the Town has for motor vehicle towing services.
When no contract for towing services exists, the fee limitations of this Section shall
apply. (Added 3/1/2010 by Ord. No. 5330)
SEC. 22.10-12 POST-TOW HEARING.
A. Any vehicle owner or operator whose motor vehicle is towed pursuant to this
ordinance may, within thirty (30) days of the towing, seek a post-tow hearing by
making application with the Town.
B. Within five (5) business days of the application for the post-tow hearing, the City
Manager or his designee shall set a date and time for an administrative hearing at
which time the vehicle owner or operator must present facts indicating by a
preponderance of the evidence that:
1. Any required signs were not posted or were not readable at the time the
owner left the vehicle; or
2. The vehicle was mistakenly towed, i.e. the owner or operator had the
permission of the property owner to park; or
3. Other circumstances indicating that the owner or operator was without fault
in parking the vehicle in the location from which it was towed; or
4. The vehicle was not abandoned or improperly parked according to local or
state law; or
5. The relocator had no lawful authority to remove the vehicle; or
6. An improper fee was charged; or
7. A vehicle was not released within 30 minutes of the tender of the fee.
C. Notice of said hearing shall be given to the property owner and relocator as well as
to the vehicle owner or operator.
D. The relocator must provide, prior to, or at the post-tow hearing, the following
records:
1. Description of the vehicle towed;
2. Date and time vehicle towed;
3. Location vehicle towed from;
4. Reason vehicle towed.
SEC. 22.10-12(Cont.1)
E. The owner or operator of the vehicle and the relocator may appear at the post-tow
hearing via telephone.
F. If the City Manager or his designee determines that the vehicle owner or operator
has met the burden of proof, then he shall order the relocator to pay the amount of
towing and storage fees to the vehicle owner. An order may state a partial refund if
the City Manager or his designee finds that a relocator exceeded charges authorized
in this Section of this Code.
G. If the City Manager or his designee determines that the vehicle owner or operator
has not met the burden of proof, then he shall order the fee retained by the towing
company.
H. The City Manager or his designee in presiding over a post-tow hearing matter shall
determine all procedural matters, hear all motions, and rule on the admissibility of
evidence. Witnesses may be sworn, but strict rules of evidence shall not apply. No
formal pleading is required.
I. All decisions made by the City Manager or his designee at a post-tow hearing shall
be final.
J. The relocator may be ordered to pay an award no greater than the towing and storage
fee collected by the relocator. The relocator must pay any award within seven days
of the City Manager or his designee’s ruling.
SEC. 22.10-13 LICENSE – REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
A. The City Manager shall be authorized to revoke or suspend for up to thirty (30) days,
a relocator license in conformity with the provision of this section.
B. No relocator license shall be revoked or suspended until after an administrative
hearing before the City Manager. The relocator shall be given no less than five (5)
days written notice of the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of
the hearing and a list of the alleged violations which will be considered at the
hearing. The City Manager shall conduct the hearing, dispose of procedural
requests, motions and similar matters, continue the hearings from time to time when
necessary, and rule on the admissibility of evidence. Witnesses shall be sworn, but
the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The licensee shall, at all times, be
afforded due process, including, but not limited to, the right to counsel, the right to
confront and cross-examine witnesses, and the right to present evidence on his own
behalf.
C. No relocator license shall be revoked or suspended unless following the hearing, the
City Manager finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee:
1. obtained the license by fraud; or
SEC. 22.10-13(Cont.1)
2. has committed a substantial violation or repeated violations of this
ordinance; or
3. has failed to comply with the insurance requirements of this Section.
D. A written copy of the City Manager’s decision will be served on the relocator within
five (5) days of the hearing. Service of the notice of the hearing and decision may
be by certified mail. A relocator may appeal the City Manager’s decision by filing a
written request for City Council review within thirty (30) days of the City Manager’s
decision.
E. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written request for review of the City
Manager’s decision, the City Council will conduct a review. If the City Council
determines that the City Manager’s decision was beyond the scope of his authority
or contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, the decision of the City Manager
will be reversed. The relocator whose license has been ordered revoked or
suspended shall be given not less than five (5) days written notice of the time, date
and place of the City Council review. Any license suspension or revocation shall be
stayed upon the filing of a request for City Council review until the City Council’s
determination.
SEC. 22.10-14 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
A. The relocator shall identify his vehicles, by painting on the vehicle or otherwise
firmly affixing in a color or colors vividly contrasting to the color of the unit, his
name, address and telephone number, using letters and figures not less than two (2)
inches in height, or in the alternative, the vehicle has been painted or otherwise had
firmly affixed to it a seal or trademark which clearly identifies the relocator.
B. All vehicles utilized by a relocator in removing vehicles shall be in good operating
condition with flashing lights as permitted by state statute.
SEC. 22.10-15 SEVERABILITY. It is the intention of the Town Council of the Town of
Normal, Illinois, that the several provisions of this Division 10 on commercial relocation of vehicles
are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Division to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Division not specifically
included in such judgment order.
SEC. 22.10-16 PENALTY. Any person convicted of violating Division 10 of Chapter 22
of the Normal Municipal Code shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Entire Division 22 Amended 7/18/05 by Ord. No. 5021)(Entire Division 22 Amended 6/6/2011 by
Ord. No. 5384)
SEC. 22.11-1
DIVISION 11 – BUSINESS LICENSE
SEC. 22.11-1 DEFINITIONS.
A. Business is meant to include all kinds of vocations, occupations, enterprises,
establishments and other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices,
machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for
private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly on any premise in this city,
including not-for-profit businesses charging for any service products. Business shall
not include:
1. Occasional sales provided such sales occur no more than twelve (12) days
per calendar year.
2. Delivery of newspapers to residential dwelling units.
3. Residential solicitation provided the solicitor is registered pursuant to
Division 4 of this Chapter.
4. De minimis commercial transactions of less than $500 per year.
B. Premise is meant to include all lands, structures, places and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal
property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such
business conducted on such premises.
C. Person is meant to include individual, natural persons, partnership, joint adventurers,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations or any officers, agents,
employees, or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity,
acting either for himself, or for any other person under either personal appointment
or pursuant to law.
SEC. 22.11-2 COMPLIANCE. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly to conduct any business or to use in connection therewith, any vehicle, premise, machine
or device in whole or in part, without first obtaining a license with the Town of Normal. For the
purpose of this ordinance, any person shall be deemed to be in business and thus subject to the
requirements of this Section when any one act of the following is done:
A. Selling any goods or service.
B. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire.
C. Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes.
SEC. 22.11-3 AGENTS RESPONSIBLE. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents
who are doing business in this city, shall be personally responsible for the compliance of
their principals and of the businesses they represent with this ordinance.
SEC. 22.11-4
SEC. 22.11-4 INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL. All information supplied the Town
under this ordinance other than that supplied pursuant to Sec. 22.11-5(A), shall be kept in strict
confidence. Such information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the
contents thereof shall not become known, except to authorized Town personnel.
SEC. 22.11-5 APPLICATION. Every person subject to this ordinance shall submit a
business application form to the Town Clerk. The business application form shall provide the
following information:
A. General information, business name, corporation name, business address, business
phone number, name, address and telephone number of persons to contact in case of
emergency.
B. Security information regarding the presence of any burglar alarm systems, night
watchmen or private security guards, security guard dogs, and a schedule of normal
business hours.
C. Fire safety information regarding the presence of any fire alarm, the presence of any
roof entry point, the presence of any smoke detection system, the presence of any
stand pipe, the presence of any sprinkler system.
D. Business use information. A notation of the type of business. Sales tax number or
tax identification number.
SEC. 22.11-6 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. The Town Clerk shall issue a Business License
to the applicant upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
A. Submission of a completed Application.
B. Payment of all debts owed the Town of Normal unless other payment arrangements
have been made with the City Manager.
C. Payment of all taxes due the Town of Normal.
SEC. 22.11-7 RENEWAL. Annually, on or before January 10 of each year, each person,
subject to this ordinance, shall file a business license renewal form with the Town Clerk. Such form
shall supply any changes in information supplied by the initial registration form. Such License shall
be renewed provided the conditions of Sec. 22.11-6 have been met.
SEC. 22.11-8 FORMS. The City Clerk is authorized to create license application and
renewal forms containing the required information by this Division.
SEC. 22.11-9 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A BUSINESS
LICENSE. The City Manager, or his designee, may after notice and hearing suspend or revoke a
business license for any of the following reasons:
SEC. 22.11-9(Cont.1)
A. The Licensee has violated any state or federal laws or violated any Town ordinance
regulating or relating to the conduct of the business.
B. The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the license
application or renewal.
C. The permitting of any violation of state law or Town ordinance by any person upon
the licensed premises.
D. Failure to use and maintain the licensed premises in compliance with all applicable
laws, Town codes, McLean County health ordinances, and all regulations and lawful
orders of such regulatory bodies.
E. Suspension or revocation of the license of the licensee by a state governing body.
F. Suspension or revocation of the legal status of the licensee, such as, but not limited
to, suspension or revocation by the Secretary of State of the right to transact business
in Illinois.
G. Failure to pay any fee or tax due to the Town of Normal.
The City Manager is authorized to promulgate rules governing the notice and hearing process.
SEC. 22.11-10 REINSTATEMENT FOLLOWING REVOCATION. The City
Manager may reinstate a business license upon:
A. Filing of an application for reinstatement with the Town Clerk.
B. The payment of all fees, taxes, and penalties then due to the Town of Normal.
C. The application for reinstatement shall be on forms developed by the Town Clerk
and shall contain the information required on the original business license
application plus the date and circumstances of the prior license revocation.
D. Remediation of the cause, event, or condition which caused the revocation of the
license.
SEC. 22.11-11 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. In case of a violation of this Division, the Town
may cause to be instituted an appropriate proceeding at law or in the equity to obtain penalties or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, including, but not limited to, the closure of any business
which is not in compliance with this Division.
SEC. 22.11-12 PENALTY. Any person operating a business within the Town of Normal
without first registering with the Town of Normal as provided herein, shall, upon conviction for
violation of this ordinance, be fined a sum not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. Each
day of business operation without registration with the Town, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Entire Division 11 Added 2/6/84 by Ord. No. 3274)(Entire Division 11 Amended 10/16/06 by Ord.
No. 5096)
SEC. 22.12-1
DIVISION 12 – FALSE ALARMS
SEC. 22.12-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division certain words and phrases
shall be defined as herein set forth:
A. Subscriber. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity who or which
purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system.
B. Alarm System. Any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed, or
used to signal the occurrence in the Town of Normal of a burglary, robbery, or other
criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency requiring urgent attention,
and to which police, fire, or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond.
Alarm systems include those through which public safety personnel are notified
directly of such signals through automatic recording devices or are notified
indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report
such signals to the fire or police department. Alarm systems also include those
designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible
outside a protected building structure or facility as to notify persons in the
neighborhood beyond the zoning lot where the signal is located who in turn may
notify the police or fire department of the signal. Alarm systems do not include
those affixed to automobiles; furthermore, alarm systems do not include auxiliary
devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems
which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. Alarms in
separate structures are to be counted as separate systems even though owned by the
same person or entity.
C. False Alarm. An alarm signal eliciting a response by the police or fire department
when a situation requiring a response by the police or fire department does not in
fact exist. False alarm does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions
of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by
the alarm business operator or alarm user. Alarms resulting from the following
conditions are not considered false alarms:
1. Criminal activity or unauthorized entry.
2. Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises.
3. High winds sufficient to activate motion detection system or causing
physical damage to the protected premises.
4. Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage.
5. Lightning bolt causing physical damage to the protected premises.
SEC. 22.12-1(Cont.1)
6. Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the Town by at least a first
line telephone company supervisor.
7. Electrical service interruption verified in writing to the department by local
power company.
8. Communication to the police or fire department before a unit is dispatched to
investigate clearly indicating that the alarm resulting from authorized entry,
authorized system test, or other non-criminal cause.
9. An alarm caused on the reasonable but mistaken belief that a burglary,
robbery, or other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency is
in progress.
10. The generation of a false alarm which is beyond the reasonable control of the
system user.
SEC. 22.12-2 RESPONSE TO ALARMS.
A. Whenever an alarm is activated in the Town thereby requiring an emergency
response to the location by the police or fire department and the police and fire
department does respond, the police or fire department personnel on the scene of the
activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall
determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the
alarm system or whether the alarm signal was a false alarm.
B. If the police or fire department personnel at the scene of the activated alarm system
determines the alarm to be false, said officers shall make a report of the false alarm,
a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address
of said alarm system installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm.
C. The chief of the police or fire department or his designee shall have the right to
inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and
he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time
thereafter.
SEC. 22.12-3 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS AND FEE ASSESSMENT.
A. If any alarm system produces a false alarm in any calendar year, the chief of the
involved department shall provide written notice of the fact, which shall be given by
certified mail or delivery to the subscriber asking the subscriber to take corrective
action in regard to false alarms and informing subscriber of the false alarm fee
schedule provided herein.
B. Subscribers installing a new system or making substantial modifications to an
existing system shall be entitled to a grace period during which alarms generated by
SEC. 22.12-3(Cont.1)
such system shall be deemed non-false alarms. The grace period shall cease thirty
(30) days after installation of or modification to an alarm system.
C. Upon any alarm system producing more than one false alarm in a calendar year, a
fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per false alarm shall be charged to the
subscriber.
All fees assessed must be paid to Town Finance Department or a written appeal
must be submitted to the City Manager within three (3) days of fee assessment.
(Entire SEC. 22.13-3 Amended 3/2/09 by Ord. No. 5241)
SEC. 22.12-4 APPEAL OF FALSE ALARM.
A. Any subscriber who has been notified of a false alarm or assessed a false alarm fee
may appeal to the City Manager by giving written notice and posting a bond equal to
the amount of fee, if applicable, within three (3) days of the invoice assessing such
fee. Upon receipt of the appeal notice and bond, if applicable, a time certain shall be
set for a hearing.
B. The appellant shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing, failure of the
appellant to appear at such hearing shall, if applicable, result in forfeiture of the
appeal bond, and application of such bond toward the false alarm fee assessed by the
Town.
C. The City Manager or his designee shall serve as hearing officer, the burden of proof
shall be upon the appellant to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
alarm signal in question was not a false alarm as defined in Sec. 25.21-1(C).
D. After receipt of all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall, within three (3) days,
render his decision. If the hearing officer determines that the appellant has met the
burden of proof, then he shall order the appeal bond released to the appellant and/or
rescind the false alarm determination. If the hearing officer determines that the
appellant has not met the burden of proof, then he shall order the appeal bond be
forfeited and applied toward the alarm fee as assessed by the Town and/or enter such
alarm as a false alarm.
E. All decisions made pursuant to this Division are final. (Added 3/5/84)
(Entire Division Amended 6/4/84)(Entire Division Re-Codified 7/16/84 by Ord. No. 3326)
SEC.22.13-1
DIVISION 13 – SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESSES
SEC. 22.13-1 – SHORT TITLE. This Division of the Municipal Code shall be known,
cited and referred to as the Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business Ordinance of the Town of
Normal, Illinois and at times referred to as "this Ordinance" in this Division. As used herein
“city” means Town of Normal.
SEC. 22.13-2 – PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to
address the negative impacts associated with sexually-oriented entertainment businesses, as
identified in the legislative findings made and cited in Sec. 22.13-3 of this Ordinance to reduce
or prevent neighborhood blight; to protect and preserve the quality of the City's neighborhoods
and commercial districts; to protect the City's retail trade; to maintain property values; to protect
and preserve the quality of life in the City; to reduce the incidence of unlawful activity and to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The provisions
of this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials for adults.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution,
or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment for adults
to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
SEC. 22.13-3 FINDINGS. The President and Board of Trustees make the following
legislative findings:
A. The Courts of Illinois as well as the United States Supreme Court have recognized
the City's authority to adopt rules and regulations over the operation of sexually
oriented entertainment business establishments; and
B. The City has a substantial governmental interest in protecting the public health,
safety and welfare of its citizens and all persons within the City and of
propounding standards to mitigate the possibility of infection by contagious
sexually transmitted diseases; and
C. There is convincing documented evidence, including statistics and studies
performed in a substantial number of communities in the State of Illinois and in
the United States concerning the serious objectionable characteristics and
secondary effects of sexually oriented entertainment businesses located in other
jurisdictions. The City Council finds that these studies are relevant to the
problems addressed by the City in enacting ordinances to regulate the adverse
secondary side effects of sexually oriented entertainment business establishments;
and
SEC. 22.13-3(Cont.1)
D. The City Council finds that there is substantial evidence that an increase in crime
tends to accompany, concentrate around, and be aggravated by sexually oriented
entertainment businesses, including but not limited to an increase in the crimes
related to prostitution, sale and possession of controlled substances and violence
against persons and property. These studies from other jurisdictions establish
convincing evidence that sexually oriented entertainment business establishments,
if not regulated pursuant to the location and operational requirements set forth in
the ordinances of the City Code, can result in an increase in criminal activities and
other adverse secondary effects with a deleterious impact on adjacent commercial
and residential properties; and
E. The City Council finds that enclosed or dimly lit areas within sexually oriented
entertainment businesses greatly increases the potential for unlawful conduct,
such as prostitution, sales of controlled substances, and lewd and lascivious
conduct, and further finds that all indoor and enclosed public areas should be open
to view by management and visible to all other public areas in the sexually
oriented entertainment business establishment. Adequate lighting, and direct
management supervision of such areas are necessary in order to reduce the
opportunity for and incidents of illegal conduct and facilitate routine inspection
by public safety personnel; and
F. The City Council, in adopting this Ordinance, is aware of and takes legislative
notice of well-established legal principles related to the regulation of sexually
oriented entertainment businesses and does not intend to suppress or infringe
upon any expressive activities protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, but instead intends to enact reasonable regulations that
address the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented entertainment
businesses; and
G. The City Council finds that location and zoning regulations alone are insufficient
to adequately protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City, and thereby finds that it is in the public interest to establish certain
requirements with respect to the ownership and operation of sexually oriented
entertainment businesses; and
H. The City Council finds that there is clear and convincing evidence that close
contact between performers and patrons, and the direct solicitation of and the
direct giving of gratuities in sexually oriented business entertainment
establishments facilitates the opportunity for specified criminal acts, including,
but not limited to: solicitations for sexual acts, transfer of controlled substances,
and lewd and lascivious conduct, and further finds that the enforcement of such
laws prohibiting such specified criminal acts requires a disproportionate level of
public safety resources; and
I. The City Council finds the following, based upon its understanding of the
documents and judicial decisions in the public record:
SEC. 22.13-3(Cont.2)
1. Evidence supports a finding that some dancers and entertainers, and other
persons who publicly perform specified sexual activities or publicly
display specified anatomical parts, as defined herein, in sexually oriented
entertainment businesses (collectively referred to as “performers”) have
been found to engage in specified sexual activities with patrons of such
sexually-oriented entertainment businesses on the site of sexually oriented
entertainment businesses;
2. Evidence demonstrates that performers employed by sexually oriented
entertainment businesses have been found to offer and provide private
shows to patrons who, for a price, are permitted to observe and participate
with the performers in live entertainment exhibiting specified sexual
activities or displaying specified anatomical parts, as defined herein;
3. Evidence supports a finding that performers at sexually oriented
entertainment businesses have been found to engage in acts of prostitution
with patrons of the sexually oriented entertainment businesses;
As a result of the above, and in view of the increase in incidents of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and Hepatitis B, which are both sexually
transmitted diseases (STD), the City has a substantial interest in adopting
regulations that will reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the possibility for the
occurrence of prostitution and casual sex at sexually oriented entertainment
businesses; and
J. The City Council finds that there are unique harmful effects on children and
minors exposed to the effects of sexually oriented entertainment businesses,
including, but not limited to, the deterioration of respect for family values,
exposure to images and acts for which they are too young or immature to fully
understand, exposure to items and displays containing pornography or sexually
oriented toys or novelties, and the possibility that such children or minors could
inadvertently become targets or otherwise victims of solicitations of a sexual
nature for which they are too young or immature to understand or otherwise take
appropriate measures to protect themselves; and
K. The City Council desires to minimize and control the adverse secondary side
effects associated with the operation of sexually oriented entertainment businesses
and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City from
increased criminal activity, preserve the quality of life, minimize adverse impacts
on property values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods and
commercial businesses, and to deter the spread of communicable and sexually
transmitted diseases.
SEC. 22.13-4
SEC. 22.13-4 - DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Ordinance, unless the context
clearly requires different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth shall have the
meanings given them herein.
Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building featuring dancing or other live
entertainment if the dancing or other live entertainment involves the exhibiting of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Ordinance, for
observation by patrons therein.
Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closedcircuit
television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions fifty (50) percent or more of the
number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Ordinance; and
rents, leases, or lets any single room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases, or
lets any single room more than twice in a twenty four (24) hour period.
Adult Lingerie Modeling Studio. An establishment or business that provides for any
form of compensation, monetary or other consideration, the services of live models
modeling lingerie to individuals, couples, or small groups and “specified anatomical
areas” of the models are displayed for the purpose of sexual stimulation of the patrons
and further provided such modeling takes place in a room smaller than six hundred (600)
square feet in gross public floor area.
Adult Media. Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices
used to record computer images, or other media that are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to hard-core material.
Adult Media Store. An establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that media meets
any of the following tests:
1. Fifty (50) percent or more of the gross public floor area is devoted to adult media
as defined in this Ordinance.
2. Fifty (50) percent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of adult media as defined
in this Ordinance.
Adult Modeling Studio. A business which provides, for any form of compensation,
monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of
sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, to
be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons
paying such consideration. Schools certified pursuant to standards set by the State of
Illinois are not included in the definition of "Adult Modeling Studio".
SEC. 22.13-4(Cont.1)
Adult Motion Picture Theater. An establishment emphasizing or predominantly showing
sexually oriented movies distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to "hard-core material", "specified anatomical areas"
and/or "specified sexual activities" (as defined in this Article) for observation by patrons
therein.
Adult Sex Business. Any sexually-oriented entertainment business, including any
business establishment that regularly features live entertainment distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities, as defined herein, or any business establishment whose primary purpose
is the sale or display of any explicit sexual material which, pursuant to state law or other
regulatory authority, can be offered only to persons over the age of eighteen (18) years. It
shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be within any
building that is the site of an “Adult Sex Business”. "Adult Sex Business" may include
an adult cabaret, adult hotel / motel, adult media store, adult modeling studio, adult
motion picture theater, adult video arcade, adult lingerie modeling studio, or a sex shop.
Adult Video Arcade. Any place in an adult media store to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture, or video machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "hard-core material",
"specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities" (as defined in this
Article) in video-viewing booths or arcade booths for observation by patrons therein.
Adult video arcades are prohibited uses except in adult media stores.
Applicant. A person who is required to file an application for a license under this
Ordinance, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or
any other operator, manager, employee or agent of a "Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business", as defined herein.
Business Operator. A person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes,
controls or in any other way, is responsible for or in charge of the premises of a "Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business", as defined herein, or activities occurring on the
premises thereof.
Business Owner. A person or persons who hold a financial or other business interest, in
whole or in part, either singly or jointly in a "Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business",
as defined herein. For purposes of this Ordinance, indicia of ownership may be
established by evidence including, but not limited to; business license information,
fictitious business name registration, utility billing information, or by other competent
evidence. For purposes of this Ordinance, the person whose name appears on the
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business license application as the business owner shall
be deemed to be the " business owner".
SEC. 22.13-4(Cont.2)
City Clerk. The City Clerk for the Town of Normal, Illinois, or his or her designee.
City Council. The City Council for the Town of Normal, Illinois
Days. Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this Ordinance.
Display Publicly. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion
displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may
be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision
viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from property of others, or from
any portion of the premises where items and material other than adult media are on
display to the public.
Establishment. Any business regulated by this Ordinance.
Explicit Sexual Material Any hard-core material as defined by this Ordinance.
Gross Public Floor Area. The total floor area of the building accessible or visible to the
public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service
areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, rest rooms
(whether or not labeled "public"), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage
areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
Hard-Core Material. Media characterized by sexual activity that includes one or more of
the following: erect male genitals; contact of the mouth of one person with the genitals
of another; penetration with a finger or male genital or other object into any genital or
anal orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a sexually oriented toy or
novelty into any orifice in another person; or male ejaculation.
Licensed Premises. The place or location described in a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License where a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment is
authorized to operate.
Licensee. Any person or entity that has been issued a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Massage Therapy Studio. An establishment offering massage therapy and/or bodywork
by a massage therapist, licensed by the State of Illinois, or Town of Normal City Code, or
under the direct supervision of a licensed physician.
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion
picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any
electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of
communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books,
newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, cd-roms, other magnetic
media, and undeveloped pictures.
SEC. 22.13-4(Cont.3)
Media Shop. A general term, identifying a category of business that may include
sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special provisions applicable to
adult media stores. In that context, media shop means a retail outlet offering media for
sale or rent, for consumption off the premises provided that any outlet meeting the
definition of "adult media store" shall be treated as an adult media store.
Nude (Naked). A state of dress or undress that exposes to view (1) less than completely
and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus; or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of
the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel, provided that the areolae is not exposed; or (2) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Reviewing Departments. The Planning and Inspection Department, the Legal
Department, the Fire Department, and the Police Department for the Town of Normal,
Illinois
Role Playing Interaction. An arrangement, service or program where a server, host,
hostess, dancer, singer, or model, for consideration, engages a customer in a meeting or
conversation involving, depicting, simulating or participating in any "specified sexual
activities".
Sadomasochistic Practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked
for the purpose of sexual arousal, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one clothed or naked for the purpose of sexual
arousal.
Sex Shop. An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the
following tests:
1. The establishment offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following
categories: (a) adult media, (b) lingerie in a lingerie modeling studio, or (c)
leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for
sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items constitutes more
than fifty (50) percent its stock in trade or occupies more fifty (50) percent of its
gross public floor area.
2. More than fifty (50) percent of its stock in trade consists of sexually oriented toys
or novelties.
3. More than fifty (50) percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display
of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business. An inclusive term used to describe
collectively: adult cabaret; adult modeling studio, adult motion picture theater;
SEC. 22.13-4(Cont.4)
adult video arcade located within an adult media store; adult lingerie modeling studio;
and/or sex shop.
Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business Employee. Any person, including
entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of,
a sexually oriented entertainment business establishment; provided however, that this
definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult media),
food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business License. A license issued for a sexually
oriented entertainment business establishment pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business Patron. Any person, other than a sexually
oriented entertainment business employee, present in or at any sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment at any time when such sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment is open for business; provided however, that this
definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult media),
food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
Sexually-Oriented Toys or Novelties. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either
designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or
marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
Specified Anatomical Areas. (1) Less than completely and opaquely covered: human
genitals, human pubic region, human buttocks, and human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal or
acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic
touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast specified
anatomical areas.
Straddle Dance. The use by any person, including specifically, but without limitation, a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Employee, of any part of his or her body to
touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Patron or any other person in an adult sex business, or the
touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any person in a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business by a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Patron. Conduct shall be a “Straddle Dance” regardless of whether the “touch”
or “touching” occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical
area as defined herein. Conduct shall be a “Straddle Dance” regardless of whether the
“touch” or “touching” is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to by
the slang terms “lap dance”, “table dance”, and “face dance” shall be included within this
definition of “Straddle Dance”.
SEC. 22.13-4(Cont.5)
Video-Viewing Both (Arcade Booth). Any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is
designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons and is used for presenting motion
pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or
other means or media (including, but not limited to film, video or magnetic tape, laser
disc, c.d.-rom., books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein. A
video-viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or a room or
enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than six hundred (600) square feet.
SEC. 22.13-5 EXCLUDED ACTIVITIES. This Ordinance does not apply to any of
the following activities:
A. Any activity conducted or sponsored by a school district or government agency;
provided that such activity is being conducted as part of and within the scope of
an authorized and regular part of the curriculum or is part of a training or
instructional program being conducted by a school district or government agency.
B. Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by the State of
Illinois or any agency thereof charged with the responsibility of licensing,
prescribing standards for and supervising such activity or profession, in and to the
extent that such activity is conducted within the course and scope of the exercise
of the privileges authorized by such license or the duties of such agency.
SEC. 22.13-6 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Building
Commissioner shall be the Enforcement Officer for this Ordinance and shall have the following
powers and duties:
A. To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance, renewal,
suspension, and revocation of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Licenses
as set forth in this Ordinance;
B. To conduct or provide for such inspections of Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable provisions
of law;
C. To periodically review the provisions of this Ordinance and the conduct and
operation of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments and their
Licenses and to make such reports and recommendations to the City Council as
deemed necessary;
D. To conduct such hearings, studies, and investigations on Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments, and the regulations pertaining thereto, as
deemed necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the revocation or suspension
of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License as required pursuant to
this Ordinance;
SEC. 22.13-6(Cont.1)
E. To establish written rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this
Ordinance, including but not limited to, the content and processing of any
application or petition and the conduct of any hearing; and
F. To take such further actions as deemed necessary to carry out the purpose and
intent of this Ordinance and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance
thereof as are implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly set forth in
this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.13-7 SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS LICENSE
REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, establish, operate or
maintain a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business within the City unless the person first
obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License issued by the City Clerk as required by this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.13-8 OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED. It shall be
unlawful for persons not having a current and valid Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License to establish, operate, or maintain a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business within the
City at any time after the effective date of this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.13-9 OPERATION IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE PROHIBITED. It shall
be unlawful for any Licensee to establish, operate, or maintain a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business within the City except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance
with, the provisions of this Ordinance and the Licensee’s Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License.
SEC. 22.13-10 CONTENT AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Every Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License shall be provided by the City and shall, at a minimum,
prominently state on its face the name of the Licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment. Every Licensee shall cause the
Licensee’s Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License to be framed, covered by glass,
and hung at all times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the Licensed Premises so it can be
easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the Licensed Premises.
SEC. 22.13-11 LICENSE TERM. Except as hereinafter provided, Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended
or revoked, for a term of one (1) year commencing on January 1 of the year following the year of
issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year. Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Licenses issued after January 1 of any year for operations to commence in that year
shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended or revoked, for a term
commencing on the date of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year.
SEC. 22.13-12 LICENSE RENEWAL A Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License may be renewed only by making application as required for an initial License pursuant
to Sec. 22.13-13 of this Ordinance. Application for renewal shall be made at least forty-five (45)
days before the expiration of the then-current license term. The expiration of the License
SEC. 22.13-12(Cont.1)
shall not be affected or extended by a renewal application that is made less than forty-five (45)
days before expiration.
SEC. 22.13-13 FORM AND SUBMITTAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
A. Required Form. An application for a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on a
form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall be signed: (1) by the applicant, if the
applicant is an individual; (2) by at least one of the persons entitled to share in the
profits of the establishment and having unlimited personal liability for the
obligations of the establishment and the right to bind all other such persons, if the
applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of
organization where two (2) or more persons share the profits and liabilities of the
organization; (3) by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation; or
(4) by a trustee, if the applicant is a land trust. The application shall be verified by
oath or affidavit as to all statements made on or in connection with the application
and any attachments thereto. Each application shall specifically identify the
applicant and the Licensed Premises for which a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License is sought. Each initial or renewal application shall be
accompanied by seven (7) identical applications.
B. Administrative Processing Fee. Every applicant for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License or for the renewal of an existing Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License shall pay an Administrative Processing
Fee in the amount of $250.00 by certified check to the Town of Normal, Illinois
at the time of filing such application. Such fee shall in all cases be nonrefundable
and shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the City. Such fee shall be
used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred by the City in processing
such application and is not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under
this Ordinance.
C. Required Information and Documentation. Each application for a Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License shall include the following information
and documentation:
1. Applicant Background Profile.
a. Individuals. If the applicant is an individual, include the
applicant’s legal name, the applicant’s business address and
written proof of the applicant’s age.
b. Partnerships (general or limited). If the applicant is a partnership,
joint venture or other type of organization where two (2) or more
persons share the profits and liabilities of the organization, include
the applicant organization’s complete name and official business
address; the legal name, the ages, and business addresses of each
SEC. 22.13-13(Cont.1)
partner (other than limited partners) or any other person entitled to
share in the profits of the organization, whether or not such person
is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization.
c. Corporations. If the applicant is a corporation, include the
corporation’s complete name and official business address; the
legal name, the ages and business addresses, of all directors,
officers, and managers of the corporation and every person owning
or controlling the voting shares of the corporation; the
corporation’s date and place of incorporation and the object for
which it was formed; proof that such corporation is in good
standing and authorized to conduct business in the State of
Illinois; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process.
d. Land Trusts. If the applicant is a land trust, include the applicant
land trusts’ complete name; the legal name, and the business
address of the trustee of the land trust; the legal name, and the ages
and business addresses, of each beneficiary of the land trust and
the specific interest of each such beneficiary in land trust; and the
interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the Licensed Premises,
as required by Chapter 765 ILCS 405 (Illinois Compiled Statutes).
All such applications shall be verified by the applicant in his/her
capacity as trustee, or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner of
interest in such land trust.
2. If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must be disclosed
pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C) above, then such interest holders shall
disclose the information required in said Section with respect to their
interest holders.
3. The general character and nature of the business of the applicant and the
length of time that the applicant has been in such business.
4. The location, including street address and legal description, and telephone
number, of the premises for which the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License is sought, and the identity of each fee simple owner of
the licensed premises. If the applicant is not the fee simple owner, a copy
of the lease therefore shall be provided.
5. The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License and the specific type or types of
sexually oriented entertainment businesses that the applicant proposes to
operate in the licensed premises.
SEC. 22.13-13(Cont.2)
6. A site plan showing the lot or property on which the Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment is or will be located, and the
location of the building or portion thereof in which the Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business is or will be located, the number of available
parking spaces, the location and type of available and proposed lighting,
landscaping, trash enclosures, and all means of ingress and egress to and
from the property. The site plan need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to scale with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or
minus one (1) foot.
7. A floor plan diagram showing the internal and external configuration of
the licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the
fixed structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior
rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and rest rooms. A
professionally prepared floor plan diagram in the nature of an engineer’s
or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; provided, however that each
such diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
and to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches and sufficient to show
clearly the various interior dimensions of all areas of the licensed premises
and to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The
requirements of this paragraph shall not apply for a renewal applications if
the applicant adopts a floor plan diagram that was previously submitted
for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certified the
licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding
issuance of the license and that the previous floor plan diagram continues
to accurately depict the exterior and interior layouts of the licensed
premises. The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this
paragraph shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or
construed to constitute, any other City approval otherwise required
pursuant to applicable City ordinances and regulations.
8. The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-to-day, onsite
managers of the proposed sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment. If the manager is other than the applicant, the applicant
shall provide, for each manager, all of the information required pursuant to
Sec. 22.13-13(C)(1) of this Ordinance.
D. Incomplete Applications Returned. Any application for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment that does not include all the information
and documents required pursuant to Subsection C of this Sec. 22.13-13 as well as
the Administrative Processing Fee pursuant to Subsection B of this Sec. 22.13-13
shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or processed by the
City. The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days of such submittal, return the
incomplete application to the applicant along with a written explanation of the
reasons why the application is incomplete.
SEC. 22.13-14
SEC. 22.13-14 PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
A. Reviewing Departments. Within five (5) days after receipt of a complete
application for a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License that includes
all the information, documents, the administrative processing fee as required
pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13 of this Ordinance, the City Clerk shall transmit a copy
of such application to the Reviewing Departments.
B. Reviewing Department Reports. Each of the Reviewing Departments shall,
within 45 days after transmittal of the application of thereto, or within such other
period of time as the City and the applicant may otherwise agree: (1) review the
application; (2) conduct such inspections of the proposed Licensed Premises and
background investigations of the applicant and any of the individuals identified in
the application pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C)(1); Sec. 22.13-13(C)(2); and Sec.
22.13-13(C)(8) of this Ordinance, regarding matters within their respective
jurisdictions, as shall be reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth
in the application and to determine whether the proposed Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment and Licensed Premises comply with the
requirements of this Ordnance and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules,
and regulations; and (3) prepare and submit to the Building Commissioner a
written report regarding the results and findings of such reviews, inspections, and
investigations.
C. Building Commissioner Review. The Building Commissioner shall also conduct
such inspections and investigations as the Building Commissioner shall deem
reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and to
determine whether the proposed Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment and Licensed Premises comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
D. Reliance on Diagrams. In the event that the Licensed Premises has not yet been
constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment, the Building Commissioner and the
reviewing departments shall base their respective reports, investigations, and
inspections to the extent necessary, on the site plan and floor plan diagrams
submitted pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C)(6) and Sec. 22.13-13(C)(7) of this
Ordinance. Any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License issued prior to
the construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business shall be subject to the condition that
the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business shall not be open for business until
the Licensed Premises has been inspected and determined to be in substantial
compliance with the diagrams submitted with the application.
E. Applicant Cooperation Required. An applicant for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License shall cooperate fully with the inspections and
investigations conducted by the Building Commissioner and the Reviewing
SEC. 22.13-14(Cont.1)
Departments. The applicant’s refusal (1) to give any information reasonably
relevant to the investigation of the application; (2) to allow the Licensed Premises
to be inspected; (3) to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath of regarding the application; or (4) to otherwise cooperate with the
investigation and inspection required by this Ordinance shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License and shall be grounds for the Building
Commissioner to direct the City Clerk to deny the License.
F. Time for Issuance or Denial. The Building Commissioner shall, within forty five
(45) days after submittal of a properly completed application, or within such other
period of time as the City and the applicant shall otherwise agree, either direct the
City Clerk to issue a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License pursuant
to the provisions of Sec. 22.13-15(A) of this Ordinance or to direct the City Clerk
to deny issuance of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License pursuant
to the provisions of Sec. 22.13-15(B) of this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall
issue or deny the License within said forty-five (45) day period, or such other
period of time agreed to by the City and the applicant, regardless of whether or
not the Building Commissioner has received all of the Reviewing Department
reports. Provided, if after forty-five (45) days a criminal history background
investigation has not been completed, the City Clerk may issue a temporary
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License during the investigation
period. The temporary Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be
valid for ninety (90) days from date of issuance and shall automatically terminate
at the end of the ninety (90) day term. The City Clerk shall revoke the temporary
Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Business License immediately upon an
unsatisfactory completion of a criminal history background investigation.
G. Decision Final. The action taken by the City Clerk to issue or deny a sexually
oriented entertainment business license pursuant, respectively, to Sec. 22.13-
15(A) or Sec. 22.13-15(B) of this Ordinance shall be final, subject to judicial
review.
SEC. 22.13-15 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
A. Issuance. The City Clerk shall issue a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License to an applicant if, but only if, the Building Commissioner finds and
determines all of the following, based on the reports, investigations, and
inspections conducted by the Building Commissioner and the Reviewing
Departments and on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for
the Building Commissioner to rely:
1. All of information and documents required by the Sec. 22.13-13 of this
Ordinance for issuance of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License have been properly provided and the material statements made in
the application are true and correct.
SEC. 22.13-15(Cont.1)
2. For Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments, all persons
identified in the application pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C)(1); Sec. 22.13-
13(C)(2); and Sec. 22.13-13(C)(8) of this Ordinance are at least eighteen
(18) years of age and not under any legal disability.
3. No person identified in the application pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C)(1);
Sec. 22.13-13(C)(2); and Sec. 22.13-13(C)(8) of this Ordinance is overdue
on payment to the City for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against,
or imposed on, any such individual in connection to any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment.
4. The Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, the
Licensed Premises, and the proposed operation of the Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business comply with all then-applicable building, health,
and life safety codes and regulations and have received all necessary
zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of
The Town of Normal Zoning Code, as amended (Zoning Code).
5. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be issued to
any person or premises for which a massage therapy studio license or a
liquor license has been issued by City.
6. When a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License has been
revoked or surrendered following notice of a hearing, as provided herein,
no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one (1) year
thereafter for the conduct of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
on the premises described and in the revoked licenses.
7. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments shall be subject
to the following location requirements:
a. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments may be
located only in the B-1 General Business District, as set forth in
The town of Normal Zoning Code, as amended (Zoning Code),
subject to the location criteria cited herein below in Paragraph (b)
of this Subsection 7.
b. No lot line of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be located closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet to the lot line of any other lot occupied
by a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, and
no lot line of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be located closer than
thirteen hundred and twenty (1320) feet to the lot line of any other
lot used for an amusement center, an amusement park, a day care
center, children’s home, children’s museum, orphanage, agency
SEC. 22.13-15(Cont.2)
operated family home, agency operated group home, child care
facility, foster care home, hobby shop or toy store, institutional
home for the care of children, nursery school or preschool,
elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, park,
playground, gymnasium, recreation center, a miniature golf course,
a place of worship, a religious education facility, a residential
dwelling, a hospital, a skating rink or a zoo.
8. The applicant shall either own or have a valid lease for the licensed
premises for the term of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License.
9. The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the
application of that the applicant has read this Ordinance and all provisions
of the City Zoning Code applicable to Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments, that of the applicant is familiar with their terms
and conditions, and that the licensed premises and the proposed Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment and its proposed operation
are and shall be in compliance therewith.
B. Denial of License. If the Building Commissioner determines that the applicant
does not met any one or more of the conditions set forth in Subsection A. of this
Sec. 22.13-15, then the Building Commissioner shall direct the City Clerk to deny
issuance of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License and shall give
the applicant written notification and explanation of such denial. The City
Clerk’s notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by certified U. S. mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the applicant’s address as
set forth in the application. The Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of denial is delivered in
person or three (3) days after it is placed in the U. S. mail as provided in this
Subsection B.
C. License Deemed To Be Issued. If the City Clerk does not issue or deny the
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment or grant a temporary
license, within forty five (45) days after the properly completed application is
submitted, then the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License applied for
shall be deemed to have been issued.
SEC. 22.13-16 INSPECTIONS BY THE CITY.
A. Authority. The Building Commissioner and other Reviewing Department
representatives with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Businesses as shall be necessary to determine compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable laws.
SEC. 22.13-16(Cont.1)
B. Licensee Cooperation. A licensee shall permit representatives of the City to
inspect the licensed premises and the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance and all other applicable laws at any time during which the licensed
premises is occupied or the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment is open for business.
C. Interference or Refusal Illegal. It shall be unlawful for any Licensee, any
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment Employee or any other
person to prohibit, interfere with the, or refuse to allow, any lawful inspection
conducted by the City pursuant to this ordinance or any other authority.
D. Suspension or Revocation. Any such a prohibition, interference, or refusal shall
be grounds for suspension or revocation of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License pursuant to Sec. 22.13-48 of this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.13-17 OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR ALL SEXUALLY
ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS. General Compliance:
All Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments shall comply with the provisions
of this Ordinance; all other applicable City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations; and all
other applicable federal, state and local laws.
SEC. 22.13-18 HOURS OF OPERATION. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment shall be open for business at any time between the hours of 12:01 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time
on any day
SEC. 22.13-19 ANIMALS. No animals, except only for animals trained and used to
assist a person with a disability shall be permitted at any time at or in any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment.
SEC. 22.13-20 REST ROOMS. All rest rooms in Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional
lavatory facilities. No explicit sexual material or live performances displaying specified sexual
activities shall be provided or allowed at any time in the rest rooms of Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other
motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.
SEC. 22.13-21 RESTRICTED AREAS. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of
any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, including specifically but without
limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employees. No cameras or other surveillance
devices shall be installed or maintained by the business operator in the dressing room facilities
for the purpose of broadcasting or projecting specified anatomical area, images or specified
sexual activities for viewing by the patrons of the establishment or for broadcasting or projecting
SEC. 22.13-21(Cont.1)
images over of the Internet. This subsection shall not apply to persons to bringing goods and
materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises;
provided, however, that any such person shall remain in such nonpublic areas only for the
purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties.
SEC. 22.13-22 SPECIFIED PROHIBITED ACTS AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED
ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
A. No person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment shall
appear, be present, or perform while nude. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment patron shall appear, be present or perform while nude.
B. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employees or any
other person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment shall
perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any other Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employee or any other person.
No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any other
person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment shall
perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any employee or any
other Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any
other person. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment
employees or any other person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment shall perform or conduct any role playing interaction with or for
any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any other
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employee or any other
person.
C. Straddle Dances shall be prohibited at all Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments.
D. No massage therapy shall be provided at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment.
E. No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold, purchased, provided, or
consumed by any person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment.
SEC. 22.13-23 EXTERIOR DISPLAY PROHIBITED. No Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be maintained or operated in any manner that
causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any explicit sexual material, or any entertainment
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from
any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than a lot of which the
licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, searchlights, or spotlights, or
SEC. 22.13-23(Cont.1)
any other similar lighting systems. All exterior lighting shall comply with applicable Town
codes and ordinances and shall provide at least one foot candle of illumination on the property.
SEC. 22.13-24 SIGN LIMITATIONS. All signs for Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one
(1) square foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event exceeding thirtytwo
(32) square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per lot frontage. Temporary
signs shall not be permitted in connection with any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment.
SEC. 22.13-25 NOISE AMPLIFICATION OUTDOORS. No loudspeakers or sound
equipment audible beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time.
SEC. 22.13-26 GAMBLING AND RELATED DEVICES PROHIBITED. No
sexually oriented entertainment business establishment shall contain any video pinball, slot,
bagatelle, pigeonhole, pool, or any other games, machines, or implements.
SEC. 22.13-27 LIGHTING. All areas of the sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at a minimum illumination level of
not less than one (1) foot candle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the business
operator and the business operator’s agents to insure that the minimum illumination level
required by this Section is maintained at all times that a patron is present on the premises.
SEC. 22.13-28 MANAGER’S STATION. Each sexually oriented entertainment
business establishment shall have one or more manager’s stations. The interior of each sexually
oriented entertainment business establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is
either a direct or substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager’s station to every
part of the entire premises (except restrooms) of such establishment to which any sexually
oriented entertainment business establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose. Where
the manager’s station will not have a clear view of the entire premises, the use of wide-angle
mirrors or video systems shall be required to provide continuous monitoring of blind spots or
remote parts of the premises (except restrooms).
SEC. 22.13-29 AGE LIMITATIONS. No employee of a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be under the age of eighteen (18) years old.
SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS FOR ADULT VIDEO ARCADES
SEC. 22.13-30 PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN AN ADULT MEDIA STORES. Adult
video arcades shall be prohibited in all adult sex business establishments except adult media
stores.
SEC. 22.13-31 OCCUPANCY AND PROHIBITED ACTS. Only one individual shall
occupy a video viewing booth at any one time. No individual occupying a video viewing booth
SEC. 22.13-31(Cont.1)
shall engage in any specified sexual activities or damage or deface any portion of a video
viewing booth.
SEC. 22.13-32 OPEN BOOTH REQUIREMENT. In addition to satisfying the
manager’s station requirements of Sec. 22.13-28 of this Ordnance, all adult media stores
containing adult video arcades shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire
interior portion of each video-viewing booth shall be visible from the common continuous main
aisle in the adult video arcade. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open
and unobstructed entrance way for each video-viewing booth and for the entrance way from the
area of the adult media store that provides other adult media to the area of the adult media store
containing the adult video arcade. Each of these entrance ways shall not be capable of being
closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes, or any other
obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the
adult media store containing video-viewing booths or any person situated in a video-viewing
booth. It shall be unlawful to install video viewing booths within any sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment for the purpose of providing secluded viewing of hard core
materials or live performances of specified sexual activities.
SEC. 22.13-33 AISLE REQUIRED. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle
adjacent to the entrance to each video viewing booth provided in any adult media store. Each
person situated in a video-viewing booth shall be visible at all times from said aisle.
SEC. 22.13-34 APERTURES PROHIBITED. Except for the open entranceway to a
video-viewing booth, the walls and partitions of each video-viewing booth shall be constructed
and maintained as solid opaque walls or partitions without any apertures, holes or openings that
would facilitate specified sexual activity between persons on either side of such walls or
partitions.
SEC. 22.13-35 SANITATION REQUIRED. The floors, seats, walls and other interior
portions of all of video-reviewing booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and
bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booth shall
be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of
such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator’s license to
conduct the sexually oriented entertainment business.
SEC. 22.13-36 SIGN REQUIRED. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance way to each video-viewing booth that states that (1) only one (1) person is
allowed in a video-viewing booth at any one time; (2) that it is unlawful to engage in any
specified sexual activities while in a video-viewing booth; and (3) it is unlawful to possess or
consume any alcoholic liquor while in a video-viewing booth.
SEC. 22.13-37 AGE LIMITATIONS.
A. No employee of an adult video arcade shall be under the age of eighteen (18)
years old.
SEC. 22.13-37(Cont.1)
B. No patron of an adult video arcade shall be under the age of eighteen (18) years
old.
SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS
SEC. 22.13-38 PERFORMANCE AREA. The performance area of an Adult Cabaret
shall be limited to one or more stages or platforms (Cabaret Stages) permanently anchored to the
floor. Each Cabaret Stage shall be elevated above the level of, and separate from the Adult
Cabaret patron seating area by a minimum distance of twenty-four (24) inches. Each Cabaret
Stage shall be separated by the minimum distance of thirty-six (36) inches from all areas of the
premises to which the adult cabaret patrons have access. A contiguous barrier at least thirty-six
(36) inches in height and located at least thirty-six (36) inches from all points of each Cabaret
Stage shall separate each Stage from all patron seating areas No adult cabaret patron shall be
allowed at anytime on any Cabaret Stage. Each Cabaret Stage shall have a minimum area of six
hundred square (600) feet with minimum dimensions of twenty (20) feet by thirty (30) feet. The
business operator shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms
which is completely separated from the patrons. If such a separate access is not physically
feasible, the business operator shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for
entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with the railing, fence or other barrier
separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing
any physical contact between patrons and entertainers of an adult cabaret. No entertainers either
before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with a patron on the premises
and no patron shall have physical contact on the premises with any entertainer either before,
during or after performances by such entertainer.
SEC. 22.13-39 LIGHTING. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed
throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible all times A
minimal lighting of not less than one foot candle measured at (thirty) 30 inches above the floor
and on ten (10) foot centers shall be maintained and all times for all areas of the adult cabaret
where adult cabaret patrons are admitted.
SEC. 22.13-40 TIPPING. No adults cabaret patron shall offer, and no adult and cabaret
employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, in any form any tip or gratuity
offered directly or personally to the employee by the adult cabaret patron. Rather, all tips and
gratuities to adult cabaret employees performing on any cabaret stage shall be placed into a
receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the adult cabaret establishment or
shall be placed by the adult cabaret patron on the cabaret stage on which the adult cabaret
employee is performing.
SEC. 22.13-41 NOTICE OF SIGN RULES REQUIRED. A sign not to exceed two (2)
square feet in area with letters at least one (1) inch high shall be conspicuously displayed on or
adjacent to every adult in every stage stating the following:
SEC. 22.13-41(Cont.1)
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE TOWN OF NORMAL,
ILLINOIS.
NO ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR SHALL BE PERMITTED AT ANY TIME.
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY PHYSICAL CONTACT
WITH THE PATRONS ON THE PREMISES.
2. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR
PERSONALLY FROM PATRONS. ANY TIPS MUST BE PLACED
INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT OR
MUST BE PLACED DIRECTLY ON THE CABARET STAGE.
SEC. 22.13-42 AGE LIMITATIONS.
A. No employee of an adult cabaret shall be under the age of eighteen (18) years old.
B. No patron of an adult cabaret shall be under the age of eighteen (18) years old.
SEC. 22.13-43 SECURITY GUARDS REQUIRED. Adult cabarets shall employ
security guards in order to maintain public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:
A. At least one (1) security guard at all times while the businesses is open. If the
occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty-five (35) persons, one
additional security guard shall be on duty, for each additional thirty-five (35)
patrons.
B. Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing
compliance by patrons of the requirements of this Ordinance. Security guards
shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security
guard by the public and be duly licensed as a security guard as required by
applicable provisions of State law. No Security guard required pursuant to this
Section shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admitting person, or
employee occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.
SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS FOR ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
SEC. 22.13-44 SEATING. Each adult motion picture theater shall provide seating in
individual chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on
couches, benches or other multiple person seating structures. The number seats shall equal the
maximum number of persons who may occupy the adult theater.
SEC. 22.13-45
SEC. 22.13-45 AISLE REQUIRED. Each adult motion picture theater shall have a
continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult
theater shall be visible at all times.
SEC. 22.13-46 SIGN REQUIRED. Each adult motion picture theater shall have a sign
posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance way to the auditorium or similar area that
lists the maximum number of persons that may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall
not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
SEC. 22.13-47 AGE LIMITATIONS.
A. No employee of an adult motion picture theater shall be under the age of eighteen
(18) years old.
B. No patron of an adult motion picture video theater shall be under the age of
eighteen (18) years old.
LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
SEC. 22.13-48 GROUNDS. Pursuant to the procedures of set forth in Sec. 22.13-50 of
this Ordinance, the Building Commissioner may direct the City Clerk to suspend for not more
than thirty (30) days, or revoke, any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License if the
Building Commissioner, based upon credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence,
determines that any one or more of the following has occurred:
A. The Licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance
or the sexually oriented entertainment business license issued pursuant here to, or
the provisions of the City Zoning Code applicable to the licensed premises or to
the sexually oriented entertainment businesses establishment.
B. The Licensee (1) knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading
information or withheld information on any application or other document
submitted to the City for issuance or renewal of any sexually oriented
entertainment businesses license or (2) knowingly or negligently caused or
suffered any other person to furnish or withhold any such information on the
Licensee’s behalf.
C. The Licensee has committed a felony or other criminal act on the licensed
premises.
D. The Licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the Licensee’s negligent
failure to supervise the licensed premises or the sexually oriented entertainment
businesses establishment, allows, a sexually oriented entertainment business
employee and a sexually oriented entertainment business patron, or any other
person to (1) violate any of the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance or
SEC. 22.13-48(Cont.1)
the provisions or requirements of the sexually oriented entertainment business
license issued pursuant hereto or (2) commit a felony or any criminal act on the
licensed premises.
E. The Licensee, or any other person, identified pursuant to Sec. 22.13-13(C)(1);
Sec. 22.13-13(C)(2); and Sec. 22.13-13(C)(8) of this Ordnance becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a sexually oriented entertainment business license
at any time during the term of a license at issue.
SEC. 22.13-49 LICENSEE’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES. Every act or
omission of whatsoever nature at the licensed premises constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance by any officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business shall be deemed and held to be an act of such
licensee, and said licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had
been done or omitted by the licensee personally. Accordingly, any act or omission of any such
persons constituting a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed, for purposes
of determining whether the licensee’s Sexually Oriented Entertainment Businesses License shall
be issued, revoked, suspended, or renewed, to be an act or omission of the Licensee.
SEC. 22.13-50 PROCEDURE. A sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment license may be a suspended for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoked,
pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein.
A. Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for suspension or
revocation under Sec. 22.13-47 of this Ordinance may exist, the City Clerk shall
serve a written notice on the licensee in person or by certified U. S. mail, postage
prepaid, a return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee’s address a set forth
in the licensee’s application. A written notice shall contain a minimum, (1) state
that the Building Commissioner has determined that the sexually oriented
entertainment business license may be subject to suspension or revocation
pursuant to Sec. 22.13-47 of this Ordnance; (2) identify the specific grounds for
the Building Commissioner’s determination; and (3) set a date for a hearing
regarding the Building Commissioner’s determination as to the possibility of
suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented entertainment business license.
The date of the hearing shall be no less than five (5) days after service of the
Building Commissioner’s notice, unless an earlier or later date is agreed to by the
licensee and the Building Commissioner.
B. Suspension of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License Due to
Unsanitary Conditions. The Building Commissioner may order the immediate
suspension of a sexually oriented entertainment business license if the Building
Commissioner finds, based upon specific and credible evidence, that a threat to
public health exists by reason of unsanitary conditions which could lead to a
spread of communicable disease. The Building Commissioner shall give the
licensee a written notice setting forth the reasons for the suspension. The
suspension shall continue so long as the threat to public health continues unabated
SEC. 22.13-50(Cont.1)
by the licensee. The licensee may request judicial review of the action of the
Building Commissioner.
C. Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Building Commissioner. At the
hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and witnesses to refute the
grounds cited by the Building Commissioner for suspending or revoking the
license, and the City and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain such
grounds. The administrative record compiled on the sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment pursuant to Sec. 22.13-50 of this Ordinance
shall be made a part of the hearing record. Provided, the Building Commissioner
may designate a hearing officer to schedule, convene and conduct the public
hearing. In such case, the hearing officer shall have the same powers as the
Building Commissioner to conduct the hearing. Where such designation has been
made, a hearing officer shall submit proposed findings and recommendations to
do the Building Commissioner within seven (7) days of the close of the hearing.
Within fourteen (14) days after the close of the hearing, the Building
Commissioner shall, having considered the record made at the hearing, render a
decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by
the Building Commissioner shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review.
D. Notice and Effective Date of Suspension or Revocation. The Building
Commissioner’s written decision shall be posted at Office of the City Clerk and
shall be served by the City Clerk on the licensee in person or by certified U. S.
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee’s address
as set forth in the licensee’s application. To permit the licensee the opportunity to
obtain a judicial review, any suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall
take effect on the tenth (10th) day following the date that the Building
Commissioner’s written decision is delivered as provided in this paragraph.
E. Surrender of License and Security. Upon the suspension or revocation of a
sexually oriented entertainment business license pursuant to this Ordinance, the
City Clerk shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license.
RECORDKEEPING, PENALTIES, NUISANCES & SEVERABILITY
SEC. 22.13-51 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD. The City Clerk shall cause to be kept
in the City Clerk’s office an accurate record of every sexually oriented entertainment business
license application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material
pertaining to such application, and any sexually oriented entertainment business license issued
pursuant thereto.
SEC. 22.13-52
SEC. 22.13-52 RECORDKEEPING BY LICENSEE.
A. The licensee of every sexually oriented entertainment business establishment shall
maintain a register of all of its employees. For each such employee, the register
shall include the following information:
1. Legal name;
2. Date of birth;
3. Gender;
4. Date of commencement of employment; and
5. Date of employment termination, if applicable.
B. The Register shall be maintained for all current employees and all employees
employed at any time during the preceding thirty-six (36) months. The Licensee
shall make the Register of its sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment employees available for inspection by the City immediately upon
demand at all reasonable times.
SEC. 22.13-53 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. Any person who violates, neglect,
refuses to comply with, or assists or participates in any way in the violation of any of the
provisions or requirements of this Ordinance or of any of the provisions or requirements of any
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than $250.00 or more than $3,000.00 for each offense. Each violation of this Ordnance may
be grounds for revocation of any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License issued to
any such establishment by the City.
SEC. 22.13-54 NUISANCE DECLARED. Any sexually oriented entertainment
business establishment established, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions
or requirements of this Ordnance or of any sexually oriented entertainment business license shall
be and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City may, in addition to
or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this Ordinance, commence an action to enjoin,
remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps
and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or
remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating, or
maintaining a sexually oriented entertainment business establishment contrary to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
SEC. 22.13-55 RULES FOR COMPUTATION OF TIME. Unless otherwise
specifically set a forth in this Ordinance, the time within which any act required by this
Ordinance is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day,
unless the last date is Saturday, Sunday or a federal or state holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded. If the day immediately following such a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday, such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
SEC. 22.13-56 SEVERABILITY. In the event that any provision of this Ordinance, or
any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held
SEC. 22.13-56(Cont.1)
to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction
on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the
remaining provisions of this Ordnance, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any
person or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is
hereby declared to be legislative intent of the City that this Ordinance would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provisions not been included herein.
(Entire Division 13 of Chapter 22 Added 6/17/02 by Ord. No. 4801)
SEC. 22.14-1
DIVISION 14 – VIDEO GAMING LICENSE
SEC. 22.14-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Division, the certain words or
phrases shall be defined as set forth:
A. Video Gaming Terminal shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of
Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5.
B. Establishment shall mean any business licensed by the State of Illinois to have or
operate a video gaming device in Normal and shall include any “licensed
establishment,” “licensed fraternal establishment,” “licensed veterans
establishment,” and “licensed truck stop establishment” as those terms are defined in
the State of Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5.
C. Distributor shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5.
D. Terminal Operator shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of Illinois
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5.
SEC. 22.14-2 LICENSE REQUIRED. No establishment shall have on its premises any
video gaming terminal without first obtaining a video gaming license from the Town of Normal and
paying the appropriate fee.
SEC. 22.14-2.5 MORATORIUM ON NEW LICENSES.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division 14, no application for a video
gaming license will be accepted by the Town until February 1, 2017.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division 14, no new video gaming
license may be issued by the Town on any application received prior to the effective
date of this ordinance until February 1, 2017.
C. This Sec. 22.14-2.5 is automatically repealed on April 1, 2017.
(Entire Sec. 22.14-2.5 Added 9/6/2016 by Ord. No. 5656)
SEC. 22.14-3 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. The license applicant
shall provide the following information to the Town of Normal on a form provided by the Town:
A. The legal name of the establishment,
B. The business name of the establishment,
C. The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are to be located,
SEC. 22.14-3(Cont.1)
D. The business office address of the establishment if different from the address of the
establishment,
E. A phone number for the establishment,
F. An e-mail address for the establishment, if any,
G. The name and address of every person owning more than a five percent (5%) share
of the establishment,
H. The name, address, phone number and e-mail address (if any) of any terminal
operator or distributor owning, servicing or maintaining a video gaming terminal,
I. A copy of the establishment’s State of Illinois Video Gaming License,
J. A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the establishment
will have on its premises,
K. A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
Town of Normal or State of Illinois,
L. A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all State and Federal laws and
any local ordinance,
M. A statement that no owner with more than a five percent (5%) interest or manager of
the establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense, or a
crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an establishment cannot provide such
statement, the establishment may apply for a Certificate of Rehabilitation from the
City Manager indicating that the individual who would disqualify the establishment
from obtaining the Video Gaming License has been rehabilitated and is no longer a
threat to violate the law. The City Manager may consider the nature of the offense,
the length of time since the offense, the length of time since release from custody,
and other factors to determine if the individual has rehabilitated himself such that he
is no longer likely to commit another offense.
SEC. 22.14-4 VIDEO GAMING LICENSE FEES. The fee for a Video Gaming License
in the Town of Normal shall be $200 per video gaming terminal per year or portion thereof. Video
Gaming Licenses shall be issued by the Clerk and shall be for a twelve-month period commencing
on April 1 of each year. There shall be no pro-ration of any fee.
SEC. 22.14-5 NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS, DENSITY.
A. No establishment shall have on its premises more video gaming terminals than are
permitted by the Town of Normal Video Gaming License.
B. After February 16, 2017, no establishment may locate to a premises that is within
SEC. 22.14-5(Cont.1)
200 feet of the boundary of any parcel that is located within a zoning district that is
zoned as R-1AA, R-1A, or R-1B. (Added 2/6/2017 by Ord. No. 5679) (Amended
9/5/2017 by Ord. No. 5706)
SEC. 22.14-6 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY. No establishment shall permit the use of a
video gaming terminal in any manner not authorized by State law including, but not limited to,
improper location of terminals, lack of required oversight, payouts in excess of those provided for
by law, side bets, underage use, and other illegal gambling activities.
SEC. 22.14-7 EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY. Any action by an employee of an
establishment in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered a violation
committed by the establishment.
SEC. 22.14-8 LICENSE DENIAL. A Video Gaming License may be denied if any
required information is omitted or false, or if the applicant does not meet the licensing requirements.
The Clerk shall send a letter to an applicant stating the reason for the denial. An applicant may
appeal any denial of a Video Gaming License to the City Manager who shall then hold a hearing to
determine if the denial of the license was for a lawful reason. It shall be the burden of the applicant
to show that he meets the qualifications for a license. The rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing and hearsay will be permitted.
SEC. 22.14-9 LICENSE REVOCATION. Any Video Gaming License may be revoked,
after notice and hearing by the City Manager, or his designee, for any of the following reasons:
A. Failure to pay the Video Gaming License fee,
B. Violation of any law occurring on the establishment’s premises committed by the
establishment or an employee of the establishment,
C. Violation of any law or State regulation regarding video gaming or video gaming
terminals,
D. Violation of any law occurring on the establishment’s premises which the
establishment did not take adequate means to prevent, or did not respond in an
appropriate manner after it became aware of such violation,
E. Failure to pay any tax, fee, or bill due to the Town of Normal, or
F. Failure to provide current information regarding the ownership or location of the
business.
The rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay will be permitted. At the
hearing, the City Manager, or his designee, shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence
whether a lawful reason exists to revoke the license. The City Manager, or his designee, after
determining that a lawful reason exists to revoke the license, shall also determine whether that
lawful reason merits the sanction of a revocation of the license.
SEC. 22.14-10
SEC. 22.14-10 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Any licensee must permit the entry into the
establishment of any police officer or agent of the Town charged with investigating crime or
compliance with this Code at any time when persons are present in the establishment for the
purpose of investigating compliance with this Code or State Statute regarding video gaming. The
Town of Normal is authorized to obtain a warrant from a court should entry to the establishment be
denied.
SEC. 22.14-11 RECORDS. Each establishment shall maintain records for four (4) years
and shall provide those records to the Town within seven (7) days of a request for the purpose of an
audit.
SEC. 22.14-12 PENALTY. Any person, including any establishment, found guilty of
violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such
violation to exist.
(Entire Division 14 Added 3/4/2013 by Ord. No. 5485)
SEC. 22.15-1
DIVISION 15 – TREE TRIMMER AND CUTTER
SEC. 22.15-1 DEFINITION. A tree trimmer and cutter means any person who for a fee
engages in any manner in pruning, trimming, bracing or removal of trees whether diseased or not
diseased.
SEC. 22.15-2 LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person to act or
operate as a tree trimmer and cutter in the Town of Normal without obtaining a license prior thereto.
SEC. 22.15-3 APPLICATION. Any person desiring to become a tree trimmer and cutter
in the Town of Normal shall apply to the Town Clerk in writing for a license. The application shall
state the name and address of the applicant; whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, firm
or corporation; the number, make and style of vehicles to be used by the applicant in carrying on the
business of tree trimmer and cutter; and a copy of a State of Illinois Emerald Ash Borer Compliance
Agreement issued by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
SEC. 22.15-4 Reserved. (Amended 2/1/2016 by Ord. No. 5618)
SEC. 22. 15-5 INSURANCE.
A. No person shall be issued a license required by this Division until the applicant
furnishes the Town with the following insurance policies or certificates of insurance:
1. A public liability insurance policy in the sum of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) for bodily injury to each person, three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000) for bodily injury for each accident and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage for each accident.
Said insurance shall cover operations including the applicant’s own direct
work, work performed by subcontractors and automobile and motor vehicles
used in the business.
2. A certificate showing that the applicant’s agents and employees are protected
by workers’ compensation insurance as required by law.
B. Such policy or certificate shall provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer
except after ten (10) days written notice to the Town Clerk, and if such insurance is
so canceled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same with another policy
conforming to the provisions of this Section, said license shall also be automatically
suspended until such insurance shall have been replaced.
SEC. 22.15-6 BOND. Prior to the issuance of a tree trimmer and cutter license, the
applicant shall post a bond in the principal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) with the Town
Clerk indemnifying the Town and public for any damages or injury or failure to remove debris, or
failure to comply with any other provisions of this Ordinance. The form of bond shall be acceptable
by the Town.
SEC. 22.15-7
SEC. 22.15-7 REMOVAL OF DEBRIS. After completion of any work on public or
private property, licensee shall clean the work site and remove all wood and debris from the
property and public rights-of-way. Licensees are responsible for the legal disposal of all debris;
debris resulting from the work of a licensed tree trimmer or cutter may not be left on private or
public property for pick up and disposal by the Town. Debris infected with the Emerald Ash Borer
must be disposed of according to Illinois Department of Agriculture guidelines.
SEC. 22.15-8 VEHICLES. Each vehicle used by a tree trimmer and cutter in the conduct
of business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and phone number of the proprietor.
No tree, limb, branch, stump or root of any sort shall be transported over any of the streets or alleys
within the Town, except in vehicles constructed as to prevent the loss of contents during
transportation.
SEC. 22.15-9 ESTIMATE REQUIRED. A copy of a written estimate shall be provided
to the property owner for approval prior to the performance of any work. This estimate shall
include the name, address and phone number of the tree trimmer and cutter, a detailed description of
all services or work to be performed and the total estimated cost of the services to be provided. In
the event that a determination is made that the actual charges for the services will exceed the total
written estimate by ten percent (10%) or more, the customer shall be immediately notified of the
new charges. A customer so notified may authorize or cancel the service. The customer shall be
responsible for payment of services provided. In no event shall a customer be required to pay more
than the amount of the original estimate plus ten percent (10%) of the original written estimate if the
customer did not receive notification of a change in the estimate.
SEC. 22.15-10 TERM AND FEE. A tree trimmer and cutter license shall be operative
and valid, unless first terminated, suspended or revoked, for a term of one (1) year commencing on
January 1 of the year of issuance and terminating on December 31 of the same year. The annual
license fee shall be $25 payable to the Town of Normal upon application for a license.
SEC. 22.15-11 RENEWAL. A tree trimmer and cutter license may be renewed by filing a
license renewal form with the Town Clerk annually, on or before December 10 of each year, and
payment of the $25 license fee. Such form shall supply any changes in information supplied by the
initial registration form.
SEC. 22.15-12 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
A. The City Manager is authorized to suspend or revoke a tree trimmer and cutter
license in conformity with the provision of this Section.
B. No tree trimmer and cutter license shall be suspended or revoked until after an
administrative hearing before the City Manager. The licensee shall be given no less
than five (5) days written notice of the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time,
date, and place of the hearing and a list of the alleged violations which will be
considered at the hearing. The City Manager shall conduct the hearing, dispose of
procedural requests, motions and similar matters, continue the hearings from time to
time when necessary, and rule on the admissibility of evidence. Witnesses shall be
SEC. 22.15-12(Cont.1)
sworn, but the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The licensee shall, at all
times, be afforded due process, including, but limited to, the right to counsel, the
right to confront and cross-examine witnesses, and the right to present evidence on
his own behalf.
C. The City Manager may, after notice and hearing, suspend or revoke a tree trimmer
and cutter license for any of the following reasons:
1. The licensee has violated any state or federal laws or violated any Town
ordinance regulating or relating to tree servicing business;
2. The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the license
application or renewal;
3. The permitting of any violation of state law or Town ordinance by the
licensee;
4. Failure to conduct the licensed business in compliance with all applicable
laws, Town codes, McLean County health ordinances, State of Illinois law,
and all regulations and lawful orders of any regulatory bodies;
5. Suspension or revocation of the license of the licensee by a state governing
body;
6. Suspension or revocation of the legal status of the licensee, such as, but not
limited to, suspension or revocation by the Secretary of State of the right to
transact business in Illinois; or
7. Failure to pay any fee or tax due to the Town of Normal.
SEC. 22.15-13 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
Division shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be
considered as a separate, distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Entire Division 15 Added 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5488)
SEC. 23.1-1
CHAPTER 23 - TRAFFIC
DIVISION 1 - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 23.1-1 DEFINITIONS. Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
Alley. A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings,
and not used for general traffic circulation.
All Terrain Vehicle. Any motorized off highway device designed to travel primarily off
highway, 50 inches or less in width (unless otherwise approved by the Public Works
Director), having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 900 pounds or less, traveling on 3 or more
low pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and handle bars or
steering wheel for steering control except equipment such as lawnmowers. (Added 7/5/06
by Ord. No. 5090)
Authorized Governmental Vehicle. Any of the following vehicles clearly marked as owned
or operated by any Illinois governmental agency, including but not limited to, the State of
Illinois, Illinois units of local government, and Illinois school districts, but only when used
by the operator for official governmental business:
1. All terrain vehicles with or without a trailer.
2. Trucksters with or without a trailer.
3. Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(Added 7/5/06 by Ord. No. 5090)
Bicycle Lane. A portion of a street, highway, alley, parkway or roadway which is designated
by ordinance to be used principally by persons riding bicycles and which said portion is
marked as a bicycle lane by the use of a double solid painted "international orange" line.
(Amended 4/7/75)
Bicycles. Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter.
Business District. The territory of any city, village or incorporated town contiguous to and
including a highway, when within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings in
use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage
on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
Controlled Access Highway. Every street or highway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the
same except at such points only as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such street or highway.
SEC. 23.1-1(Cont.1)
Crosswalk. That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk
lines at street intersections.
Domestic Utility Trailer. A single-axle trailer used for domestic or recreational purposes
only and not exceeding any of the following dimensions: six (6) feet in width; twelve (12)
feet in length or eight (8) feet in height. No domestic utility trailer may be used for business
or commercial purposes. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Drag Racing. The act of 2 or more individuals competing or racing on any street or
highway in this State in a situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear
of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the
competing driver from passing or overtaking him, either by acceleration or maneuver, or
against time on any street or highway in this Town.
Drivers. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device. A self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled
device designed to transport only 1 person with an electric propulsion system that limits the
maximum speed of the device to 15 miles per hour or less. (Added 7/5/06 by Ord. No.
5090)
Emergency Vehicle. Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles
carrying a state, county or municipal officer or employee in response to an emergency call,
and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call.
Explosive. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and
combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an
ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by precussion or by a detonator of any part of the
compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous
objects or of destroying life or limb.
Flammable Liquids. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees F. or less, as
determined by tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
Hard Surface. Hard surface means an asphalt or concrete surface of an approved thickness,
or other approved surface, but excluding rock, gravel, grass or dirt. (Added 12/17/01 by
Ord. No. 4759 – Effective 4/1/02)
Improved Highway. A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
Intersection.
A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or,
if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join
SEC. 23.1-1(Cont.2)
one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then every crossing
of each roadway of such divided highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
Laned Roadway. A street, the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
Loading Zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
Major Recreational Equipment. Major recreational equipment means travel trailers (a
vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreational or vacation uses, or one permanently identified as a Travel Trailer by
the manufacturer of the trailer); Pick-up Coaches (a structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation); Motorhomes
(a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation,
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle); Camping trailers (a canvas,
material or metal folding structure, mounted on wheels, designed for travel, recreation and
vacation use); boats, snowmobiles; jet skis; all-terrain vehicles (ATV); dirt bikes; golf carts;
and trailers holding boats, snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), dirt bikes or
golf carts. (Added 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4759 – Effective 4/1/02)(Amended 7/15/02 by
Ord. No. 4804)
Merging Traffic. A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways
to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction thereof, wherein the driver of each
vehicle involved in required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with any other vehicle.
Metal Tires. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or
partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
Motor Driven Cycle. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than 150 cubic
centimeter piston displacement including motorized pedal cycles. (Added 8/4/86)
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designated to
travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
Motor Vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled
by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon rails.
Park. To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is
reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons.
SEC. 23.1-1(Cont.3)
Parking Meter. A mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk in a place
designated by the Town Council as a parking meter zone, hereafter defined, which device
shall record a certain number of minutes by use of a clock mechanism determining the
period of time for which parking privileges may be extended to the person depositing a coin
therein.
Parking Meter Zone. Parking meter zones shall be such as may from time to time be
established by ordinance and the area designated by the Town Council where a vehicle may
be temporarily parked or allowed to remain for the period of time indicated on the meter.
Parkway. All that area within a street right-of-way between a curb and the right-of-way
line, or where no curb exists, between the improved street edge line and the right-of-way
line. (Amended 8/1/83)
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Pneumatic Tire. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
Police or Police Officer. All members of the regularly constituted police department,
special police, auxiliary police and marshals duly constituted and appointed by proper
authorities of the Town.
Property Line. The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property
abutting thereon.
Public Building. A building used by the municipality, the county, any park district, school
district, the State of Illinois or the United States government.
Residence District. The territory of any city, village or incorporated town contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway
for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
Reversible Lane. A lane or a two or more laned roadway upon which traffic may be
directed to more in either direction by means of lane-control signals or other devices in
conjunction with official signs.
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
Road Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a
vehicle or load so drawn.
Safety Zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be
SEC. 23.1-1(Cont.4)
plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
School Bus. Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or
governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization solely for the
transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
Semi-Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent
property line designed for pedestrian use.
Solid Tire. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon
compressed air for the support of the load.
Speed-Change Lane. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the
acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through traffic lanes.
Street or Highway. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right,
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
Suburban District. That portion of any city, village or incorporated town other than the
business and residence districts.
Through Highway. Every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the
same and when stop signs are erected as provided by this Chapter.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances whether
singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. (Amended 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4759, Effective
4/1/02)
Truckster. Every motor vehicle or motorcycle with 3 wheels designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of people or property. (Added 7/5/06 by Ord. No. 5090)
Truck Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and
load so drawn.
Urban District. The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with
structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than
SEC. 23.1-1(Cont.5)
100 feet for a distance of a quarter mile or more.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
For the purpose of this Chapter, motor vehicles as a class shall be divided into two divisions,
viz:
First: Those vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten
persons.
Second: Those vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or the
carrying of more than ten persons.
Yard. A yard is an open space, on the same lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in Sec. 15.4-5 of
this Code. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Yard, Front. A front yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length
of the front lot line between the side lot lines from the front line of the building or structure
to the front lot line. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Yard, Rear. A rear yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length
of the rear lot line between the side lot lines from the rear line of the building or structure to
the rear property line. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Yard, Side. A side yard is that yard, required or otherwise, extending along the side yard
between the front yard and the rear yard from the side line of the building or structure to the
side property line. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Yard, Corner Side. A corner side yard is that area between the setback lines, the side lot
line, and rear lot line, which area faces the street. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
Yard, Interior Side. An interior side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another
lot or to any alley separating such side yard from another lot. (Added 7/15/02 by Ord. No.
4804)
Yield Right-of-Way. When required by an official sign means the act of granting the
privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection
and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, provided that when the roadway is clear
the vehicle may proceed into the intersection.
SEC. 23.1-2 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE. Members of the police department, special
police, auxiliary police and marshals assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic in accordance with the provisions of this division, or in emergencies as public safety or
SEC. 23.1-2(Cont.1)
convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in case of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
SEC.23.1-3 SCENE OF FIRE. The fire department officer in command or any fireman
designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the
scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as the
fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police.
SEC. 23.1-4 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to stand or be in or on the streets at the time of a fire, or while the firemen and
the fire department are moving to or from or are engaged in fighting a fire in said Town, in such a
manner or location, with or without an automobile or other conveyance, so as to willfully or
negligently impede the progress of such firemen or their moving of fire apparatus of any kind, or
interfere with or molest the firemen or any of them in the performance of his or their several duties
or undertaking during a fire or call to a fire; and that every person or persons on the street or
elsewhere in said Town at the time of a fire alarm shall give right-of-way to the firemen and the
transportation or location of the firemen on duty or call while going to or coming from a fire, and
also to the fire fighting apparatus.
The firemen on duty at the time of a fire alarm and/or while fighting a fire hereby are made
officers of said Town with police power to enforce this division and all such persons in said Town
are amenable to their orders and directions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or run any vehicle over or across any line of
firehouse, or to bring any vehicle on any street between a hydrant to which a hose is attached, and a
fire; or to follow the fire truck or other vehicular fire apparatus in route to or from a fire, within a
distance of 300 feet thereof. Upon the sound of the fire gong, all vehicular traffic of the Town shall
at once turn to the right, and stop at the side of the street so as to furnish a clear right-of-way to said
firemen with such fire apparatus.
SEC. 23.1-5 SIGNS AND SIGNALS. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to
disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the corporate
authorities or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting on direction of a police
officer. All signs, signals, traffic markings, controls, crossings, bicycle facilities, islands and similar
devices used to regulate traffic on the public ways established by direction of the governing body
shall conform to the Illinois Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, October, 1979, as amended. (Amended 1/21/80)
SEC. 23.1-6 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND. Whenever traffic is controlled
by traffic control signals exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution” or “Stop”, or exhibiting different
colored lights successively, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall
indicate as follows:
SEC. 23.1-6(Cont.1)
A. Circular Green or the Word “Go”.
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right
or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian
signal.
B. Steady Yellow or the Word “Caution”.
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter or the related green movement is
being terminated, and shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the
intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be
driven cautiously through the intersection.
2. Unless otherwise directed by pedestrian signal, pedestrians facing such
signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway,
and no pedestrian shall cross except upon a green light or go sign.
C. Steady Red or the Word “Stop”.
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a
clearly visible line; if there is no such line, then vehicles shall stop before
entering such crosswalk and shall remain standing until the green indication
is shown, unless otherwise directed by a sign or arrow.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway, shall cross until
receiving a green light or go sign or unless a separate “Walk” indication is
shown.
D. Green Straight Through Arrow (alone).
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may proceed straight through but shall
not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time
such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within the
appropriately marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a
pedestrian signal.
SEC. 23.1-6(Cont.2
E. Green Turn Arrow (along or with circular green, with steady yellow, with steady red
or with green straight through arrow).
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning of the
circular green steady yellow or straight through arrow indication as if it were
shown alone, except that such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the green turn arrow.
Vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
F. In the event that an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section or Sec.
23.1-7 shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement
indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or
marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
G. The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals applicable to vehicles.
H. Green Arrow Alone.
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the intersection only to make
the movement or movements indicated by the arrows but shall not interfere
with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.
I. In the event an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provision of this section shall be
applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application.
Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall
be made at the signal.
SEC. 23.1-7 FLASHING SIGNALS. Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used,
they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
A. Flashing Red (stop sign).
1. When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or
at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection
and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow (caution signal).
SEC. 23.1-7(Cont.1)
1. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with
caution.
SEC. 23.1-8 LANE CONTROL SIGNALS. Whenever lane control signals are used in
conjunction with official signs, they shall have the following meaning:
A. Opaque arrows on green, green arrow on opaque background or green alone.
Drivers of vehicles facing such signals are permitted to use the lanes over which the
signal is displayed providing that no intersection traffic control signal gives a stop
indication affecting the lane or lanes involved.
B. Opaque “X” on red, red “X” on opaque background or red alone. Drivers of
vehicles facing such signals are prohibited from using the lane over which the signal
is displayed.
SEC. 23.1-9 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS. Whenever special pedestrian
control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or “Don’t Walk” are in place, such signals shall
indicate as follows:
A. Walk – pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the
direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the driver of all
vehicles.
B. Don’t Walk – while the “Don’t Walk” signal is illuminated, either steady or
flashing, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal,
but any pedestrian who has partly completed his crossing during the “Walk”
indication shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island, if one is provided.
SEC. 23.1-10 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS. No person shall place, maintain or display
upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or
display upon or in view of any street or other sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal and
no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic
sign bearing thereon any commercial advertising. (Revised 9/3/74)
All such unauthorized devices are hereby declared to be nuisances and may be removed by
any policeman or under his direction and supervision.
SEC. 23.1-11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS. It shall be unlawful for
any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic signal.
SEC. 23.1-12 ADVERTISING SIGNS. It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the
Town any sign, signal, marking or device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the Town
SEC. 23.1-12(Cont.1)
Council or the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings, which purports to be or is
an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, in view of
any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view
any lawful traffic-control device.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway any flashing or
rotating beacon of light.
SEC. 23.1-13 AMBULANCES, OPERATION OF. No person shall operate an
ambulance, which shall include any motor vehicle primarily designed and used for conveyance of
sick or injured persons, in a manner not conforming to a provision of the motor vehicle laws and
regulations of this State or ordinances of this Town as such provision applies to motor vehicles in
general, except in compliance with the following conditions:
A. The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a bona fide
emergency call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to disregard traffic
laws in operating the ambulance during and for the purpose of the specific trip or
journey that is involved.
B. The ambulance shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible signal of an
intensity of 100 decibels at a distance of 50 feet from said siren, and with a lamp
emitting an oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front
of the vehicle and containing a power rating of at least 100 amps.
C. The aforesaid siren and lamp shall be in full operation at all times during such trip or
journey.
D. Whenever the ambulance is operated at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour, the
ambulance shall be operated in complete conformance with every other motor
vehicle law and regulation of this State and ordinances of this Town in which the
ambulance is operated, relating to the operation of motor vehicles, as such provision
applies to motor vehicles in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to
compliance with official traffic-control devices or to vehicular operation upon the
right half of the roadway.
SEC. 23.1-14 ANIMALS. Any person riding an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which have no application to one riding or driving an animal.
(Amended 4/7/75)
SEC. 23.1-15 EXEMPTIONS. The provisions of this division regulating the movements
or parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver when approaching shall slow down as necessary
for safety but may proceed cautiously past a red or stop sign or signal. At other times, drivers of
authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
SEC. 23.1-15(Cont.1)
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privileges except
when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law.
The provisions of this division regulating the movement and parking of vehicles shall not
apply to persons, equipment or vehicles while actually engaged in installing, repairing or otherwise
improving streets or street pavements.
SEC. 23.2-1
DIVISION 2 - THROUGH, ONE-WAY AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY
STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS
SEC. 23.2-1 THROUGH STREETS. The streets and parts of streets of the Town
designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a
vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic-control
signal.
SEC. 23.2-2 ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS. It shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle on any streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance in any direction
other than that so designated.
SEC. 23.2-3 STOP STREETS. The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop
sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance, at one or more entrances
thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within
the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such
intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty in which event the directions of the police
officer shall be complied with.
SEC. 23.2-4 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS. Any street designated by ordinance
as a yield right-of-way street and so posted is hereby declared to be a yield right-of-way street.
The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way sign shall reduce the speed of his
vehicle and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting street,
either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on such intersection as to constitute
a hazard; but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of
other vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
SEC. 23.2-5 POSTING SIGNS. Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through,
stop and yield right-of-way streets; all one-way streets and alleys; and all stop intersections.
SEC. 23.2-6 CHIEF OF POLICE EMPOWERED TO MAKE REGULATIONS. The
Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the Town Engineer, is hereby empowered to make
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the Town of
Normal and make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more
than 180 days.
SEC. 23.2-6(Cont.1)
The Town Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
No provision of this section dealing with temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person.
SEC. 23.3-1
DIVISION 3 - RULES FOR DRIVING
SEC. 23.3-1 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT
INTERSECTION. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
A. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical
to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, or as indicated by traffic markers or
signs.
B. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each
roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing
to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of
the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn
shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection, or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
C. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to the
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway.
SEC. 23.3-2 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE. No person shall start a vehicle which is
stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
SEC. 23.3-3 DRIVER'S SIGNAL. No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down,
stop or attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprise others
who might be affected by his action.
A. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until
such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving a
clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by
such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
B. A signal or intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last
100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
SEC. 23.3-3(Cont.1)
C. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by
a signal lamp or signal device but, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to front and rear of such vehicle, then
said signals must be given by such lamp or device.
D. All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of
the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left turn - Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn - Hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed - Hand and arm extended downward.
SEC. 23.3-4 SIGNALS AND TURNING. No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection
unless the vehicle is in the lane next to the direction in which the turn is to be made or turn a vehicle
to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or
left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person may so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.
A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given continuously during
not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning within a business or residence
district, and such signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence district.
No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided in this division to the driver of any vehicle immediately to
the rear when there is opportunity to give such a signal.
The electric turn signal device required in this division must be used to indicate an intention
to turn, change lanes or start from a parallel parked position but must not be flashed as a courtesy of
"do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.
SEC. 23.3-5 SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES. Every vehicle operated in
this Town shall be equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear of the vehicle which shall display
a red light visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which
shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake, and which may, but need not be
incorporated with other rear lamps.
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device which shall
indicate the intention of the driver to turn to the right or to the left in the form of flashing lights
located at and showing to the front and rear of the vehicle on the side of the vehicle toward which
the turn is to be made. The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a white or amber light, or any
SEC. 23.3-5(Cont.1)
shade of light between white and amber. The lamps showing to the rear shall be mounted on the
same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and when signaling, shall emit a red light.
Every trailer and semi-trailer shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device which
indicates the intention of the driver in the power unit to turn to the right or to the left in the form of
flashing red lights located at the rear of the vehicle on the side toward which the turn is to be made
and mounted on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable.
Turn signal lamps must be visible from a distance of not less than 300 feet in normal
sunlight.
SEC. 23.3-6 DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR GARAGES. The driver
of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley and shall exercise
extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or across such lines.
SEC. 23.3-7 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS, BICYCLE
LANES OR IN SAFETY ZONES. No driver of a vehicle shall drive on or within any sidewalk or
bicycle lane except as a permanent or temporary driveway, alley or intersection. No driver of a
vehicle shall drive on any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone. The foregoing shall not
prohibit the driving of an authorized governmental vehicle on or across any sidewalk, crosswalk,
bicycle lane, or marked safety zone limited as follows: Electric Personal Assistive Mobility
Devices may be operated only on sidewalks immediately adjacent to or across the street from
property owned or used by Illinois State University. (Amended 4/7/75)(Amended 7/5/06 by Ord.
No. 5090)
SEC. 23.3-8 RIGHT-OF-WAY. Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a
vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two vehicles enter an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the rightof-
way to the vehicle on the right.
SEC. 23.3-9 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection
intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard,
but said driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required, may make such
left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
SEC. 23.3-10 U-TURN. When appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a "U-Turn" or otherwise reverse the direction of
travel of a vehicle by turning the vehicle from one lane of traffic across a median or center line of a
street, highway or other public way, so as immediately thereafter to travel in an opposite direction.
(Amended 2/17/75)
SEC. 23.3-11
SEC. 23.3-11 NO LEFT TURN. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
turn left or right at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibition shall
be indicated by appropriate signs.
SEC. 23.3-12 FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES. Upon the approach of a fire
department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall comply with the provisions of this division relating to
the approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to
follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm, closer than one block or to park any vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
It shall further be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over an unprotected hose of
the fire department without the consent of the fire chief or the assistant in command.
SEC. 23.3-13 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY. Upon all roadways of
sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driver upon the right half of the roadway except as follows:
A. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
under the rules governing such movement.
B. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or
repair.
C. Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules
applicable thereon.
D. Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
E. Whenever there is a single tract paved road on one side of the public highway and
two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give
the right-of-way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
SEC. 23.3-14 PASSING VEHICLES. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite
directions shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
SEC. 23.3-15 OVERTAKING VEHICLES. The following rules shall govern the
overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations,
exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right
side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
SEC. 23.3-15(Cont.1)
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an
overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on
audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed
by the overtaking vehicle.
SEC.23.3-16 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT. The driver of a vehicle
may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a roadway with
unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of
the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right on a one-way
street or on any street on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement where the roadway
is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles.
SEC. 23.3-17 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT. No vehicles shall
be driver to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or
any vehicle overtaking. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the righthand side of
the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
No vehicle shall in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time be driven to
the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
A. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the
driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to create a hazard in the
event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
B. When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
C. When official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right, or a
distinctive line also so directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the
Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings.
D. The limitations in sub-paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section, Sec. 23.3-17, shall not
apply upon a one-way street or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction when such
movement can be made with safety.
SEC. 23.3-18
SEC. 23.3-18 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS. Upon
a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the
direction designated.
A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven on the right of such island.
SEC. 23.3-19 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC. Whenever any
roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in
addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single land and shall
not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such
movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the
center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway
is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for a left turn or where such centerline is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is
sign-posted to give notice of such allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of such signs.
D. Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on
sections of roadways and drivers of vehicles shall obey such signs.
SEC. 23.3-20 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle,
when the driver is giving audible sign by siren or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the
right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all person using the highway.
SEC. 23.3-21 RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING. It shall be
unlawful to operate any vehicle in the Town in a careless, reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or
carelessly so as to endanger life or property.
SEC. 23.3-22 SPEED RESTRICTIONS. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle
on any street not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Department of Public Works and
SEC. 23.3-22(Cont.1)
Buildings, of the County, or in any urban district within the city at a speed in excess of 30 miles per
hour, or in any alley at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban district at a speed
of more than 65 miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another vehicle, outside
of an urban district, at more than 55 miles per hour, in an urban district at more than 30 miles per
hour of 15 miles per hour in an alley.
Provided, that if the Mayor and Town Council by ordinance, set other limits as provided by
statute after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the
streets indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such speed limits.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit
does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or on entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the city under the
jurisdiction of the State Department of Public Works and Buildings, or of the county, at a speed
exceeding that lawfully set for such street.
Provided further that the speed of all vehicles of the second division as defined by this
chapter shall be as follows:
A. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross
weight of 8,000 pounds or less (including the weight of the vehicle and maximum
load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is 55 miles per hour
outside of an urban district, 30 miles per hour in an urban district and 15 miles per
hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two or more solid tires, the
maximum is 10 miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
B. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross
weight of more than 8,000 pounds (including the weight of the vehicle and
maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is 50 miles per
hour outside of an urban district and 30 miles per hour in an urban district and 15
miles per hour in an alley; but, if such vehicle is equipped with two or more solid
tires, the maximum is 10 miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
C. If the vehicle is designed and used for carrying more than ten passengers, and is
equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is 60 miles per hour.
SEC. 23.3-23
SEC. 23.3-23 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS. No person
shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone or
while traveling upon any public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from
school during school days when school children are present. Appropriate signs shall be posted to
indicate the restriction.
SEC. 23.3-24 TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED. No vehicle shall be operated or
allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the
traffic thereon.
SEC. 23.3-25 BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES. It shall be unlawful for more than
one person to ride upon any bicycle propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to
ride upon any motorcycle other than upon a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the right or
rear of the operator.
SEC. 23.3-26 UNATTENDED VEHICLES. No vehicle shall be left unattended while
the motor of such vehicle is running; and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or
incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in
any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized
to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
SEC. 23.3-27 UNATTENDED ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or
other draft animal unattended in any street without having such animal securely fastened.
SEC. 23.3-28 CLINGING TO VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful for any person on any
street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, sled or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle
to any moving motor vehicle or wagon.
SEC. 23.3-29 TOYS. It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, roller skates, inline
skates, a skateboard, skis, a coaster, or sled to go upon any roadway other than at a cross walk.
(Amended 3/3/97 by Ord. No. 4443)
SEC. 23.3-30 RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS. It shall be unlawful for any person to
ride upon the fenders, running board, bumpers, top or outside step of any vehicle.
SEC. 23.3-31 TRAIN SIGNALS. The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade
crossing when a signal device gives a warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 10 feet from the nearest track of such railroad and shall not proceed
until he can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when a crossing
gate is lowered or when a flagman, or automatic signal warns of the approach of a train.
SEC. 23.3-31(Cont.1)
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus carrying any
school children, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable liquid as cargo shall stop such
vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 10 feet from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and
look in both directions along such a track from which a train might come before proceeding across
such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided that no such stop need be made at any such crossing
where a police officer or a traffic-control signals traffic to proceed.
SEC. 23.3-32 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS. No
driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required in this division.
SEC. 23.3-33 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION. Each driver in a funeral or other
procession shall drive as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as close as is practical and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe.
SEC. 23.3-34 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. Funeral processions have the right-of-way at
intersections when vehicles comprising such procession have their headlights lighted, subject to the
following exemptions:
A. Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way upon the
approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal.
B. Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way when
directed to do so by a traffic officer.
C. The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with stop
signs and traffic control signals but when the leading vehicle has proceed across an
intersection in accordance with such signal or after stopping as required by the stop
sign, all vehicles in such procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the
sign or signal and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed
with due action.
D. The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not drive his vehicle in
the funeral procession except when authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when
such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.
E. Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form a procession or
convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way
granted by this Division to funeral processions.
F. The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and pass the
vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be accomplished
without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such procession.
SEC. 23.3-34(Cont.1)
G. The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a flashing amber
light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead vehicle in such
procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants
or flags or windshield stickers to identify the individual vehicles in such a
procession.
SEC. 23.3-35 Reserved.
SEC. 23.3-36 BACKING. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic.
SEC. 23.3-37 RESTRICTED ACCESS. No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any
controlled or limited controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established
by public authority.
SEC. 23.3-38 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. It shall be unlawful
to operate a truck upon any street where truck operation is prohibited by ordinance and where such
signs of prohibition are posted, except that a truck may be driven on such street for not more than
the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up loads.
SEC. 23.3-39 WEIGHT LIMITS - GARBAGE OR REFUSE DISPOSAL TRUCKS.
A. Notwithstanding any other weight limitations contained in this Code or in the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code, trucks used exclusively for garbage or refuse disposal
equipped with self-compactors or industrial roll-off hoists and roll-off containers
shall be subject to the following weight restrictions:
Single axles: 22,000 pounds
Tandem axles: 40,000 pounds
Gross weight: 54,000 pounds
B. Drivers of trucks of the type and weight described in paragraph (A) shall limit their
speed to 45 miles per hour unless a lower limit is posted.
C. The formula to be used for determining weight per axle shall be the same formula
contained in 625 ILCS 5/15-111(a). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
D. This Section is intended to be permissive and not prohibitory in nature. In the event
that a truck exceeds the weight limits permitted by this Section, the provisions of the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code shall control.
(Amended 6/17/85)
SEC. 23.3-40 SCHOOL BUSES. The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway, upon
meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching
such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual signal directing that a stop be made;
SEC. 23.3-40(Cont.1)
provided that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which the roadways for traffic
moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground at least four feet wide which is not
surfaced or suitable for vehicle traffic, or on a controlled access highway where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the
opposite roadway.
SEC. 23.3-41 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not
follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed
of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street.
The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle when traveling upon a street outside of a business or residence district shall not follow
within 300 feet of another motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to prevent overtaking and passing
nor shall the same apply upon any lane specifically designated for use by motor vehicles of the
second division.
Motor vehicles being driven upon any street outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow
sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other
vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral
processions.
SEC. 23.3-42 DISREGARDING TRAFFIC ORDERS. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer
invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
SEC. 23.3-43 REFUSAL TO STOP VEHICLE. It shall be unlawful for the driver or
operator of any motor vehicle who, having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer
directing such driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, to willfully fail or refuse to obey such
direction, to increase his speed, to extinguish his lights or otherwise flee or attempt to evade the
police officer. The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, red or blue light
and the officer giving such signal shall be in a police uniform, and, if driving a vehicle, such vehicle
shall be marked showing it to be an official police vehicle.
SEC. 23.3-44 LIGHT ON MOTOR VEHICLES. During the period from sunset to
sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety,
every motorcycle shall carry and exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and
every other motor vehicle two such lighted driving lamps showing white lights or lights of a yellow
or amber tint, visible at least 500 feet in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor
vehicle is proceeding. Parking lamps may be used in addition to but not in lieu of any such driving
lamps. Each motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall also exhibit at least two lighted lamps which
shall be mounted on the left rear and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible for at
least 500 feet in the reverse direction, except that a motorcycle need be equipped with only one such
lamp.
SEC. 23.3-44(Cont.1)
Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light a rear registration plate when required and render it clearly legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps for
illuminating a rear registration plate shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the head lamps or
auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
SEC. 23.3-45 DISOBEYING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. No driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic-control device unless at the time otherwise
directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across private property to
avoid a traffic-control device.
SEC. 23.3-46 OPENING DOOR INTO TRAFFIC LANE. It shall be unlawful to open
any door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably
safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of
time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
SEC. 23.3-47 DRAG RACING. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle
to be a participant in drag racing.
SEC. 23.3-48 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful
for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor
vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
SEC. 23.3-49 SEAT SAFETY BELTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
1961 or later model motor vehicle of the first division that is titled or licensed by the Secretary of
State unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped with two sets of seat safety belts.
SEC. 23.3-50 LIGHTS ON EMERGENCY VEHICLES. No oscillating, rotating or
flashing lights are permitted on any motor vehicle except as follows:
A. Red oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
l. Local law enforcement vehicles and police vehicles of the State of Federal
government;
2. Vehicles of local fire departments and firefighting vehicles of the State or
Federal government;
3. Vehicles which are designed as ambulances and while responding to an
emergency call for the purpose of conveying sick or injured persons.
B. Amber oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
SEC. 23.3-50(Cont.1)
l. Second division vehicles designed for towing or hoisting disabled vehicles
while actually being used for such purposes;
2. Motor vehicles or equipment of the State of Illinois, local authorities and
contractors while engaged in maintenance or construction operations within
the limits of construction projects;
3. Vehicles or equipment used by engineering or surveying crews while
actually engaged in work on a highway.
4. Vehicles of public utilities and municipal departments while engaged in
maintenance or construction operations within the limits of construction
projects;
5. Oversized vehicle or load moving under permit issued by the Department of
Public Works and Buildings of the State of Illinois;
6. The front and rear of motorized equipment owned and operated by the State
of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, which is designed and used
for removal of snow and ice from highways; and
7. Such other vehicles as may be authorized by local authorities.
C. Blue oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
1. The front of any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a volunteer
fireman, paid fireman, part-paid fireman or call fireman while responding to
a call; and
2. Police department vehicles in cities having a population of 500,000 or more
inhabitants.
SEC. 23.3-51 MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CONSTITUTION TRAIL.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the Constitution Trail in the Town of
Normal. (Amended 5/5/97 by Ord. No. 4449)
B. This prohibition shall not apply to persons operating emergency vehicles and to
employees of the Town who are using motor vehicles to perform routine
maintenance on the property.
(Sec. 23.3-51 added 12/15/86 by Ord. No. 3664)
SEC. 23.3-52 USING PRIVATE DRIVE AS A THROUGHWAY. It is unlawful for
any person to drive a motor vehicle through the private drive connecting the City parking lot, west
of the Normal Police Department, 100 East Phoenix Avenue, and East Irving Street, provided
appropriate signs are erected at said private drive stating "No Thru Traffic-Municipal Vehicles
SEC. 23.3-52(Cont.1)
Only". This Section does not apply to persons driving motor vehicles owned by the Town of
Normal or agents of the Town. (Sec. 23.3-52 Added 9/6/88 by Ord. No. 3793)(Amended 3/15/93
by Ord. No. 4123)
SEC. 23.3-53 PARK SPEED LIMIT. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor
vehicle at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in any public park in the Town of Normal,
provided appropriate signs are erected showing such speed limit. (Added 9/5/95 by Ord. No. 4329)
SEC. 23.3-54 EXPIRED REGISTRATION.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle, nor shall any person permit the operation of a
vehicle, upon which is displayed an expired Illinois registration plate, plates or
registration sticker.
B. Any person violating this Section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25.00.
(Entire Sec. 23.3-54 Added 4/5/99 by Ord. No. 4584)
SEC. 23.3-55 WEIGHT LIMITS. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or cause a
motor vehicle to be operated on any of the streets identified in subsection A hereafter if such vehicle
exceeds the weight limits set forth in subsections B and C hereafter.
A. Northtown Road from Linden Street to Towanda Avenue; Hershey Road from
Shepard Road to Raab Road; or Raab Road from Hershey Road to Airport Road.
B. The maximum gross weight per vehicle is limited to 8 tons (16,000 pounds) for all
vehicle classifications from January 15 through April 15.
C. The maximum gross weight for a vehicle for the period April 16 to January 15 is
limited as follows:
2 axels 13 tons (26,000 pounds)
3 axels 18 tons (36,000 pounds)
5 axels 23 tons (46,000 pounds)
D. The foregoing weight limits shall not be enforced unless a sign is present
designating the weight restriction for the segment of street affected by the foregoing
weight limits.
E. Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is
unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the same either
by means of a portable or stationary scales that have been tested and approved at a
frequency prescribed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, or for those scales
operated by the State, when such tests are requested by the Department of State
Police, whichever is more frequent. If such scales are not available at the place
where such vehicle is stopped, the police officer shall require that such vehicle be
driven to the nearest available scale that has been tested and approved pursuant to
SEC. 23.3-55(Cont.1)
this Section by the Illinois Department of Agriculture. Notwithstanding any
provisions of the Weights and Measures Act or the United States Department of
Commerce NIST Handbook 44, multi or single draft weighing is an acceptable
method of weighing by law enforcement for determining a violation of Chapter 3 or
15 of this Code. Law enforcement is exempt from the requirements of commercial
weighing established in NIST Handbook 44.
F. When any vehicle is operated in violation of this Section, the owner or driver of the
vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a violation, and either the owner or the driver of
the vehicle may be prosecuted for the violation. Any person, firm, or corporation
convicted of violating this Section shall be fined not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
and not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for any weight exceeding the
posted limit.
G. The foregoing weight limits shall not apply to the following vehicles:
1. Garbage or refuse disposal trucks as provided in Sec. 23.3-39 of this Code.
2. Authorized emergency vehicles defined as any vehicle authorized by law to
be equipped with oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights under Section 12.2-
15 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (65 ILCS 5/12-215, as amended from time to
time) while the owner or operator of such vehicle is engaged in his or her
official duties.
3. School bus as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-182, as
amended from time to time).
(Entire Section 55 Added 1/20/2009 by Ord. No. 5234)
SEC. 23.4-1
DIVISION 4 - PEDESTRIANS
SEC. 23.4-1 RIGHT-OF-WAY. Where traffic-control signals or pedestrian-control
signals provided for in Division 1 of this chapter are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to a pedestrian crossing
the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an inter-section or a marked
crosswalk between intersections, the pedestrian shall have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles;
and at such marked places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and
any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-ofway
over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle
proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a
pedestrian to cross.
SEC. 23.4-2 PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY.
A. No pedestrian shall cross any street except at crosswalks.
B. No person shall stand or stop in a street or roadway in a manner so as to interfere
with vehicular traffic.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by
official traffic control devices.
(Sec. 23.4-2 Amended 3/17/97 by Ord. No. 4446)
SEC. 23.4-3 SIGNALS. At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a
stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than with
released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
SEC. 23.4-4 STANDING ON SIDEWALK. It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand
upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possibly to the building or curb line, if such
standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.
SEC. 23.4-5 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any street or roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacited person upon a street or roadway.
SEC. 23.4-6 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS. Where sidewalks
are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
SEC. 23.4-6(Cont.1)
Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall,
when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon
meeting a vehicle, shall step off to the left.
No person shall solicit a ride from the driver of any motor vehicle.
SEC. 23.4-7 BLIND PEDESTRIANS - RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any blind person who is
carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white
tipped with red, or who is being guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street
or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic signals, anything
in this Division to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place
where a blind person, so carrying such a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a
street or highway shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding, shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to a blind person who is not carrying such a cane or walking stick or is not guided by
a dog, but the other provisions of this chapter relating to pedestrians shall be applicable to such
person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or so carry such a cane or walking stick or
to be guided by a guidedog when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks shall not be considered
evidence of contributing negligence.
SEC. 23.4-8 WALKING ON HIGHWAYS. Any person walking along and upon
improved highways shall keep on the left of the paved portion, or on the left shoulder thereof, and
upon meeting a vehicle when walking on such paved portion shall step off to the left.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway except at a crosswalk.
It is unlawful for any pedestrian who is under the influence of intoxicating liquors to be
upon any street or roadway of this Town.
SEC. 23.5-1
DIVISION 5 - PARKING RULES
SEC. 23.5-1 PARKING RULES.
A. It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
1. In any intersection;
2. In a crosswalk;
3. Upon any bridge or viaduct or in any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto;
4. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point of
the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
5. Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side;
6. Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk;
7. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of
the roadway for moving traffic to less than 18 feet;
8. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
9. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
10. Within 50 feet of the nearest railroad grade crossing;
11. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within 75 feet
of such entrance when posted;
12. On any sidewalk or parkway. This restriction shall not apply to motor driven
cycles in approved Bicycle Parking Racks. (Amended 8/4/86)
13. At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
14. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic; or
15. On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
SEC. 23.5-1(Cont.1)
B. No vehicle shall be parked in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right hand
or left hand wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by markings on the streets.
(Amended 6/2/72)(Amended 2/6/84)
C. No vehicle shall be parked within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway free for the
movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
within an alley, in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property.
D. No vehicle shall be parked upon any roadway, public park, or any other public
property for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or for washing,
greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
E. Temporary No Parking. The City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to
determine and designate by clearly visible signs places where the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles would create a hazardous condition or would cause unusual
delay to traffic, or in order to accommodate a special event taking place in the public
right-of-way. Said temporary signs shall not be posted for more than thirty (30)
days. (Amended 9/4/2012 by Ord. No. 5454)
When official signs are erected as authorized herein, no vehicle shall be stopped, or
parked in any such designated place.
F. It shall be unlawful to park a truck tractor or road tractor, whether with or without a
trailer, or any other vehicle having more than two (2) axles or any vehicle with a
height in excess of eight (8) feet, or a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds, on
any street, public property or private property in an area in the Town of Normal
zoned and classified R-1AA, Single Family Residence District; R-1A, Single Family
Residence District; R-1B, Single Family Residence District; R-2, Two-Family
Residence District; or R-3A, Medium Density Multiple Family Residence District;
R-3B, High Density Multiple Family Residence District; or R-4, Mobile Home
Residence District, except: (1) for such temporary parking as is required to load or
unload cargo; (2) to make minor repairs necessitated by an emergency; (3) when the
equipment normally stored in or on the truck is in actual use at the location where
the truck is parked; or (4) major recreational equipment parked on private property
in accordance with Sec. 15.7-2 of this Code. (Added 8/15/77)
G. Dealer Parking in Residential District. It shall be unlawful for any person owning,
leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises to permit more than two cars
displaying dealer's license plates to be parked on any single lot in all districts zoned
R-1AA, R-1A or R-1B in the Town of Normal unless such vehicle is in an enclosed
building. (Subsection G Added 8/16/93 by Ord. No. 4163)
SEC. 23.5-1(Cont.2)
H. Parking on a Non-Hard Surface. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in
the Town of Normal, whether on public or private property, on anything other than a
hard surface, except:
1. On nonconforming off-street parking areas as set forth in Sec. 15.4-6 of this
Code;
2. Multi-unit trucks parked on a surface of eight (8) inches of crushed
aggregate in M-1 or M-2 zoning districts as set forth in Sec. 15.7-2(G)(2)(c);
3. Approved non-hard surfaced lots as provided in the Parking Impact Zone
(Sec. 15.7-4);
4. Major recreational equipment parked in conformance with Sec. 15.7-2 of this
Code; or
5. As otherwise provided by law.
I. Trailers. It shall be unlawful in all areas zoned and classified R-1AA, Single Family
Residence District; R-1A, Single Family Residence District; R-1B, Single Family
Residence District; R-2, Two-Family Residence District; R-3A, Medium Density
Multiple Family Residence District; R-3B, High Density Multiple Family Residence
District; or R-4, Mobile Home Residence District to park a trailer outside of an
enclosed building, whether on public property or private property, and whether
attached to a tow vehicle or not, except:
1. Major recreational equipment or domestic utility trailers parked in
accordance with Sec. 15.7-2 of this Code;
2. Trailers temporarily parked for loading, unloading or while the equipment
normally stored in or on the trailer is in actual use at the location of the
parked trailer;
3. On private property where a construction permit for the property has been
issued and the trailer is reasonably necessary for the completion of the
construction; or
4. As otherwise provided by law. (Amended 7/15/02 by Ord. No. 4804)
J. Inoperable or Unlicensed Vehicle. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle outside of
a building, whether on public or private property, which vehicle is unlicensed or
inoperable except on premises for which the principal use is the maintenance, repair,
sale, storage or manufacture of vehicles. An inoperable vehicle is one which is not
capable of being lawfully operated on a public highway or which has not operated
on a highway for a period of eight (8) weeks whether the vehicle is operable or not.
SEC. 23.5-1(Cont.3)
An unlicensed vehicle is any vehicle which does not display a valid license plate or
valid license applied for sticker.
K. It is unlawful to park a vehicle which leaks fluids, other than water, on any public
street, public park or any other public property.
L. It is unlawful to park any vehicle on a public street without such vehicle displaying a
current, valid license or registration sticker.
M. Waiver of Parking Regulations for Persons with Disabilities.
The City Manager, or his designee, may waive any of the parking regulations of this
Sec. 23.5-1 for persons with disabilities upon application by such person, or other
person providing transportation or care services to such disabled person, and upon
finding the following:
1. The waiver would not create a traffic hazard.
2. The waiver would improve the quality of daily life for the disabled person.
3. The waiver is reasonably necessary for the disabled person to enjoy ordinary
life activity.
4. Granting the waiver would not cause substantial detriment to the overall
well-being of the community.
(Entire Sec. 23.5-1 Amended 12/17/01 by Ord. No. 4759 – Effective 4/1/02)
SEC. 23.5-2 STREET CLEANING. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
public street or portion thereof in the Town at any time when such street is being cleaned or snow
removed. Signs indicating such cleaning or snow removal shall be posted before such work is done.
SEC. 23.5-3 TIME LIMIT PARKING.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any block of a public street or within any
portion thereof in excess of the amount of time designated by ordinance for said
block and so posted. This Section, except time limitations of one-half hour or less,
shall not apply to motor vehicles bearing registration plates or decals issued to a
person with disabilities when such person is present. The moving of a vehicle from
one area of said block to another area thereof shall not constitute either abatement of
the unlawful parking time or commencement of a new and lawful parking time. For
purposes of this Section, a “block” is defined as either side of the same street
between street intersections. (Amended 12/17/84)(Amended 9/4/2012 by Ord. No.
5454)
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any public parking lot in excess of the
amount of time designated by the City Manager for said parking lot and so posted.
SEC. 23.5-3(Cont.1)
The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish time limit parking as he deems
appropriate in all parking lots and to cause the same to be posted. This Section,
except time limitations of one-half hour or less, shall not apply to motor vehicles
bearing registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities when such
person is present. The moving of a vehicle from one area of said lot to another area
thereof shall not constitute either abatement of the parking time or commencement
of a new parking time. (Added 9/4/2012 by Ord. No. 5454)
SEC. 23.5-4 VEHICLES PARKED MORE THAN TWENTY-FOUR (24)
CONSECUTIVE HOURS. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a vehicle to permit the
vehicle to remain parked on any public way more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours without
moving the vehicle. The foregoing prohibition shall not be enforced against any person parking on
any public way in the Town unless either appropriate signs have been erected and are clearly visible
on said public way or a clearly visible sticker has been placed on the driver’s side window or the
windshield of the vehicle and the vehicle remains parked twenty-four (24) hours after the placement
of the sticker. The City Manager shall have the authority to order the erection of appropriate signs
as provided herein. (Added 11/7/88)(Amended 2/21/94 by Ord. No. 4209)(Amended 9/20/99 by
Ord. No. 4617)(Amended 1/16/07 by Ord. No. 5110)(Amended 2/2/2015 by Ord. No. 5581)
SEC. 23.5-5 (Deleted 4/18/83 by Ord. No. 3203)
SEC. 23.5-6 VEHICLES FOR SALE. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any
street for the purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any street from which
vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold.
SEC. 23.5-7 LOADING ZONE. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers in anyplace, designated by the Town Council as a loading zone and marked as such, in
any of the following designated places:
A. At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance of any hospital
or hotel at any time.
B. At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance of a public
building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on
Sunday.
C. Directly in front of the entrance to any theatre at any time that the theatre is open.
SEC. 23.5-8 ALL NIGHT PARKING. No person shall park any vehicle between the
hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. prevailing time on any day on any streets in the Town of
Normal. The foregoing prohibition shall not be enforced against any person parking on any street
within the Town unless appropriate signs have been erected and are clearly visible giving notice of
the prohibition of parking between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M., prevailing time, on said street or
portion thereof. The City Manager shall have authority to order the erection of appropriate signs as
provided herein. (Added 10/20/86)
SEC. 23.5-9
SEC. 23.5-9 (Deleted 4/18/83 by Ord. No. 3203)
SEC. 23.5-10 CAB STANDS - BUS STANDS. No vehicle, other than a licensed taxicab,
shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle, other than a bus,
shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
SEC. 23.5-11 PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. It shall
be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of
the property.
SEC. 23.5-12 SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
A. Space Reservation and Parking Prohibition.
1. It shall be illegal for any person to park any motor vehicle in any parking
place, including any private or public off-street parking facility, where such
parking place is specifically reserved by the posting of an official sign for
motor vehicles bearing registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities or a disabled veteran unless such motor vehicle is bearing such
registration plates or decals.
The Director of Public Works shall, at his discretion, designate certain
parking places on public property as being reserved for the use of persons
with disabilities and disabled veterans, and shall cause official signs to be
erected appropriately reserving such spaces.
The erection of an official sign on private property specifically reserving any
parking place for use by a person with disabilities or disabled veteran shall
be deemed authorization for the Town to enforce such parking prohibition.
2. It shall be illegal for any person to park any vehicle bearing registration
plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities or to a disabled veteran in
a space designated as being reserved for persons with disabilities and
disabled veterans unless such person is operating the vehicle or the person
with disabilities or disabled veteran is being transported to or from the
parking place.
3. It shall be illegal for any person to park any motor vehicle in any designated
access aisle adjacent to any parking place, including any private or public
off-street parking facility, where such parking place is specifically reserved
by the position of an official sign for motor vehicles bearing registration
plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities or disabled veteran.
4. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this Section that either the sign
posted pursuant to this Section or the intended accessible parking place does
not comply with the technical requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-301 or
SEC. 23.5-12(Cont.1)
regulations made pursuant thereto, if a reasonable person would be made
aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is
reserved for a person with disabilities.
5. Any person owning or operating a private off-street parking facility may,
after notifying the police department, remove or cause to be removed, any
vehicle parking within a space reserved for use by a person with disabilities
which does not display persons with disabilities registration plates or a
special decal or device as required by this Section. The Police Chief, or his
designee, may remove or cause to be removed, any vehicle parked within a
space reserved for use by a person with disabilities which does not display
person with disabilities registration plates or a special disability decal or
device issued by the Illinois Secretary of State or similar authority from any
other state. A property owner may have a vehicle removed which is parked
in violation of this Section without posting signs as required by Sec. 22.10-7
of this Code.
B. Definitions.
1. Person with Disabilities shall be defined as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1,
as amended, from time to time.
2. Registration Plates or Decals Issued to a Person with Disabilites or to a
Disabled Veteran means:
a. Registration plates or decals issued by the Illinois Secretary of State
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2 or 625 ILCS
5/3-609 State Bar Edition, 1992, as amended, or as hereafter
amended; (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
b. Registration plates, special decals or devices issued by another state
or country designating the vehicle is operated by or for a person with
disabilities or disabled veteran.
3. Official Sign. Any sign erected on public or private property which implies
with regulations promulgated by the State of Illinois for the erection and
maintenance of signs and with the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-301, as
amended from time to time for designating the reservation of parking spaces
for persons with disabilities or disabled veterans. (Added 8/5/85)(Amended
6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
C. Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating Sec. 23.5-12(A)(1) shall be fined
$250.00 for each violation. Any person found guilty of violating Sec. 23.5-12(A)(2)
shall be fined $500.00 for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each one-half (1/2) hour any person permits a motor vehicle to remain
SEC. 23.5-12(Cont.2)
parked in violation of Sec. 23.5-12(A)(1) or Sec. 23.5-12(A)(2). (Amended
3/2/81)(Amended 12/17/84)(Amended 8/5/85)(Amended 10/16/95)
(Entire Sec. 23.5-12 Amended 2/6/06 by Ord. No. 5049)
SEC. 23.5-13 OWNER OF VEHICLE RESPONSIBLE. Whenever any vehicle shall
have been parked in violation of any provision of this Division prohibiting or restricting parking, the
person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation
and subject to a penalty, therefore. Defenses to the prima facie case shall be limited to a showing
that the vehicle was not parked illegally, or that the individual was not the registered owner at the
time of the alleged violation. (Added 11/18/85)
SEC. 23.5-14 PARKING AFTER SNOWSTORMS.
A. When prohibited. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the
Town of Normal, at any time after a snowfall of two (2) inches, or more, as
measured by the Director of Public Works or his designee; and
1. additional snow is falling, or
2. wind velocity is greater than ten (10) miles per hour
until the snow has been removed from the street.
B. Effect of Failing to Remove A Vehicle. A vehicle parked in violation of Subsection
(A) shall be an abandoned vehicle as defined in Sec. 23.5-15.
C. Notice of Parking Prohibited. In order to notify persons whose vehicles violate
Subsection (A), whenever the conditions set forth in Subsection (A) are in effect, the
Director of Public Works, or his designee, may (1) notify local radio stations that the
conditions set forth in Subsection (A) are in existence; and (2) request that an
announcement be broadcast that parking is prohibited on public streets. The failure
of any notice under this Section shall be a defense to a violation of Subsection (A).
D. Priorities. Abandoned vehicles shall be removed from streets in accordance with the
following priorities.
1. vehicles creating a traffic hazard
2. vehicles on major streets
3. vehicles on collector streets
4. vehicles on local or residential streets
Major, collector, and local or residential streets shall be defined in the
Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Normal. (Added 6/1/87 by Ord. 3707)
SEC. 23.5-15 MEANING OF ABANDONED VEHICLE. The words “Abandoned
Vehicle”, as used in this Division, shall be deemed to refer to any vehicle standing or parked on a
public way, which vehicle is either:
SEC. 23.5-15(Cont.1)
A. In such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being driven;
B. Has not been moved or used for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours;
C. Is left unattended on any public way and becomes by reason of a fire, snow or any
unusual happening or occurrence a hazard to public safety and public convenience.
(Added 6/1/87 by Ord. No. 3707)(Amended 9/20/99 by Ord. No. 4617)
SEC. 23.5-16 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO REMOVE VEHICLES; GROUNDS
FOR REMOVAL. Any member of the Department of Police of the Town is hereby authorized to
remove or cause to be removed any vehicle from any public street, alley, parkway, right-of-way, or
public park:
A. When any vehicle is unattended upon any bridge or viaduct or in any subway or
tunnel, or upon any approach thereto;
B. When any vehicle on any public way is disabled as to constitute an obstruction to
traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle has abandoned the same or is
incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for the custody and
removal of such vehicle;
C. When any vehicle is parked in violation of law, or in such a manner as to constitute a
hazard and obstruction to traffic;
D. When any abandoned vehicle is found on any public way.
(Added 6/1/87 by Ord. No. 3707)
SEC. 23.5-17 NOTICE TO OWNER OF TOWED VEHICLE. Whenever the Police
Department has towed any vehicle as authorized under this Division, notice shall be sent to the last
known address of the owner of said vehicle of the fact of such removal and the reason, therefore.
Such notice shall be sent by the Chief of Police or his designate. (Added 6/1/87 by Ord. No. 3707)
SEC. 23.5-18 NOTICE TO SECRETARY OF STATE WHEN OWNER UNKNOWN.
Whenever the Department of Police has towed any vehicle as authorized under this Division and
does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any reason is unable to give
a notice to the owner as provided in Sec. 23.5-17 of this Code, the Chief of Police or his designate
shall send a written report of such removal to the Secretary of State. Such notice shall include a
description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place of removal and the address of the place where
such vehicle has been impounded. (Added 6/1/87 by Ord. No. 3707)
SEC. 23.5-19 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO RELOCATE VEHICLES IN
EMERGENCY. In the event any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any vehicle upon
any public way, members of the Police Department, are hereby authorized to remove or relocate any
such vehicle from one location to any other location. (Added 6/1/87 by Ord. No. 3707)
SEC. 23.6-1
DIVISION 6 - CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
SEC. 23.6-1 CLEAR VISION. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which is so loaded
or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway
essential to the safe operation of the vehicle.
SEC. 23.6-2 GAS AND SMOKE. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits
dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as
to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.
SEC. 23.6-3 UNNECESSARY NOISE. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which
makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise.
SEC. 23.6-4 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any
person to drive or more or for the owner to cause, or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on
any highway any vehicle which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property or
which is in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any Laws of the State of Illinois.
SEC. 23.6-5 SPILLING LOADS. No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load
spills or drops on any street or alley in the municipality.
SEC. 23.6-6 BRAKES. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless
such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition, as required by
the State traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have
ready access to the mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicles.
A. Brake equipment required. Every motor vehicle, other than a motor-driven cycle,
when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including 2 separate means of
applying the brake, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least one wheel on a motorcycle and at least 2 wheels on all other first division and
second division vehicles. If these 2 separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of anyone part of the
operating mechanism shall not leave the vehicle without brakes.
Every motor-driven cycle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with at
least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot.
Every trailer or semi-trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more, when
operated upon a highway, must be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of, to stop and to hold such vehicle, and designed so as to be operable by
the drier of the towing vehicle from its cab. Such brakes must be so designed and
connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes
are automatically applied.
SEC. 23.6-6(Cont.1)
Every motor vehicle, trailer, pole trailer or semi-trailer, sold in this State or operated
upon the highways shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every
such vehicle, except any motor-driven cycle, and except that any trailer, pole trailer
or semi-trailer of less than 3,000 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with
brakes; however any motor vehicle or truck tractor having 3 or more axles need not
have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at
least 2 steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with
brakes. However, a vehicle of the first division that is more than 30 years of age and
which is driven on the highways only in going to and returning from an antique auto
show need be equipped with 2 wheels brakes only.
B. Performance ability of brakes. The service brakes upon any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles operating on a level surface shall be adequate to stop such
vehicle or vehicles when traveling 20 miles per hour within a distance of 30 feet
when upon dry asphalt or concrete pavement surface free from loose material.
Under the above conditions the hand brake shall be adequate to stop such vehicle or
vehicles, except any motorcycle, within a distance of 55 feet and the hand brake
shall be adequate to hold such vehicle or vehicles stationary on any grade upon
which operated.
Under the above conditions the service brakes upon a vehicle of the first division
that is more than 30 years of age and which is driven on the highways only in going
to and returning from an antique auto show shall be adequate to stop the vehicle
within a distance of 40 feet and the hand brake adequate to stop the vehicle within a
distance of 55 feet.
All braking distances specified in this section apply to all vehicles mentioned,
whether such vehicles are unloaded or are loaded to the maximum capacity
permitted under this Chapter.
All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to
operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the
vehicle.
SEC. 23.6-7 HORN. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient
audible signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be sounded
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but such horn or other
signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose other than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren or gong signaling
device.
SEC. 23.6-8 LAMPS ON VEHICLES OWNED BY FIREMEN. Any motor vehicle
owned or fully operated by a fireman may be equipped with not to exceed two lamps which shall
emit a blue light without glare, which lights shall only be used when actually going to a fire.
SEC. 23.6-9
SEC. 23.6-9 LIGHTS. It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not
equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the state law, provided that
vehicles may be parked at night-time without lights on any street or portion thereof designated by
ordinance as a place where vehicles may be so parked at night-time.
SEC. 23.6-10 MUFFLER. No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such
vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a cutout is
prohibited.
SEC. 23.6-11 NON-SKID DEVICES. It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any
motor vehicle equipped with any non-skid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible
portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
SEC. 23.6-12 Reserved. (6/17/85)
SEC. 23.6-13 Reserved. (6/17/85)
SEC. 23.6-14 Reserved. (6/17/85)
SEC. 23.6-15 MOTORCYCLES & TRAILERS: LIGHT REQUIRED. During the
period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use
of lights for safety, every motorcycle operated on any street or other public place in the Town shall
carry and exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and every motor vehicle, two
such lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible at least 500 feet
in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is proceeding and each motor
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall also exhibit at least one lighted lamp which shall be so situated
as to throw a red light visible for at least 500 feet in the reverse direction. That every trailer having
a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or less including the weight of the trailer and maximum load shall
be equipped with two lighted lamps one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be so
situated as to throw a red light visible for at least 500 feet in the reverse direction.
SEC. 23.7-1
DIVISION 7 – LOW SPEED VEHICLES
SEC. 23.7-1 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division, “Low Speed Vehicle” means
any four-wheeled vehicle with a maximum speed of more than 20 miles per hour, but not more
than 25 miles per hour and which conforms to federal regulations under Title 49 C.F.R. Part
571.500.
SEC. 23.7-2 OPERATION OF A LOW SPEED VEHICLE. A person may operate a
low speed vehicle on streets in Normal in accordance with State Law and the following rules and
conditions:
No person shall operate a low speed vehicle on any street having a posted speed limit
exceeding 35 miles per hour, unless crossing such street as provided by State law.
SEC. 23.7-3 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT. No low speed vehicle may be operated on
any street unless at a minimum it has equipment complying with the requirements of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
SEC. 23.7-4 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this Division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than
$500.00.
(Entire Division 7 Added 5/4/09 by Ord. No. 5256)(Entire Division 7 Amended 9/19/2011 by Ord.
No. 5395)
SEC. 23.8-1
DIVISION 8 - BICYCLES
SEC. 23.8-1 SERIAL NUMBER. To entitle the owner of any bicycle to register the same,
and to have a registration tag attached thereto, there must be stamped on the frame and such
principal parts of such bicycle as may be designated by the Chief of Police the manufacturer's serial
number or any identification serial number of any bicycle after the same has been registered as
provided in this Division.
No person shall tamper with, destroy, remove, change or deface the manufacturer's serial
number of identification or serial number of registration of any bicycle.
No person shall sell, dispose of, conceal or have in his or her possession any bicycle, bicycle
part of accessory, the manufacturer's serial number or the identification number or the registration
tag of which has been tampered with, removed, destroyed, changed or defaced contrary to the
provisions of this Division.
Every person to whom there is offered a bicycle for sale, storage or dismantling or for junk
or salvage purposes, upon which the manufacturer's serial number or identification number has been
tampered with, removed, destroyed, changed or defaced shall immediately notify the Police
Department of the Town of Normal of such fact.
SEC. 23.8-2 BRAKES AND LIGHTS. Every bicycle must have a rear wheel brake
sufficient to lock such rear wheel when being operated.
No bicycle shall be driven or operated upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the Town after
one-half hour past sunset of any day or until one-half hour before sunrise of any day unless such
bicycle is equipped with one white headlight visible at night at a distance of at least 200 feet to any
person approaching such bicycle from the front, and one rear red light or reflector visible at night
for a distance of at least 100 feet to any person approaching the bicycle from the rear.
SEC. 23.8-3 PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER APPLICABLE TO BICYCLE
RIDERS. Any person riding a bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the driver of a vehicle, except those prohibiting the driving of a vehicle in bicycle lanes or those
other provisions which could not reasonably be applied to a person riding a bicycle. (Added 4/7/75)
SEC. 23.8-4 REQUIRED USE OF BICYCLE LANES. When a bicycle lane exists, it
shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in any portion of the roadway other than a bicycle
lane. (Added 4/7/75)
SEC. 23.8-5 BICYCLE RIDERS REQUIRED TO CONSIDER BICYCLE LANES
AS ROADWAYS. All provisions rules and requirements of this Chapter applicable to drivers of
vehicles operating on streets, highways, alleys or roadways, including but not limited to those
requiring adherence or obedience to police officers, traffic control signals and signs regulating the
manner of "driving" within a roadway, passing, overtaking or turning, shall be applicable to any
person riding a bicycle within a bicycle lane, as if the bicycle lane constituted a street, highway,
alley or roadway. (Added 4/7/75)(Entire Division 8 Amended 2/3/97 by Ord. No. 4438)
SEC. 23.9-1
DIVISION 9 - SIGNS
SEC. 23.9-1 POSTING OF SIGNS. Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where
the parking, standing or traveling of any vehicle is limited or prohibited indicating such limitations
or prohibitions.
SEC. 23.9-2 AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS. The Chief of Police by and with the
approval of the Town Engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic portion of this Code of the Town of Normal and make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies of special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than 180 days.
The Town Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
No provision of this division dealing with temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person. All permanent regulations with respect to traffic shall be
made by ordinance duly enacted.
SEC. 23.10-1
DIVISION 10 - SPECIFIC EVENTS
SEC. 23.10-1 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct,
manage, institute, carry on, promote, advertise, encourage or participate in any specific event, unless
a written permit is first obtained from the Chief of Police.
SEC. 23.10-2 DEFINITIONS.
A. Specific Event. Any athletic activity or parade conducted in whole or in part, upon
public streets, thoroughfares, highways or rights-of-ways:
1. for which a request is made for police escort, supervision or assistance; or
2. which causes an obstruction or interference with customary uses of said
public ways.
B. Athletic Activity. Any activity conducted in competition against time, or in
competition against other participants, or for which a record of performance is kept,
or any of the following activities provided twenty (20) or more persons participate as
a group: walking, running jogging, biking, or skating.
C. Parade. Any ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or activity involving people,
vehicles or animals marching or proceeding in procession.
D. Obstruction or interference. Any activity which blocks, hinders or disrupts the
customary flow of motorized vehicular traffic on public ways or any activity in
which participants violate state or local traffic regulations.
SEC. 23.10-3 INTERFERENCE WITH SPECIFIC EVENT. No person shall
knowingly join or participate in any specific event in violation of any of the terms, conditions or
regulations of the permit issued therefor, or knowingly join or participate in any specific event
without the consent of the permittee or in any manner interfere with the orderly conduct of such
event.
SEC. 23.10-4 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. An application for a permit shall be filed
with the Chief of Police not less than fifteen (15) days before the date proposed for holding a
specific event. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or by an authorized representative
of the group seeking the permit on forms provided by the Town and shall contain the following:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the
specific event.
B. If the specific event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization.
SEC. 23.10-4(Cont.1)
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the specific
event chairperson.
D. The date when the specific event is to be conducted.
E. The route to be traveled, including the starting point and termination point.
F. The approximate number of persons who and vehicles which will constitute the
specific event and a description of the vehicles.
G. The hours when the specific event will start and terminate.
H. A statement as to whether the specific event will occupy all or only a portion of the
width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
I. The location of streets of any assembly sites for the specific event.
J. The time which participants of the specific event will begin to assemble at the
assembly area or areas.
SEC. 23.10-5 TIME OF DAY. All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times
other than peak traffic periods (7 AM to 9 AM) and (4 PM to 6 PM) Monday through Saturday and
not before noon on Sunday.
SEC. 23.10-6 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT. Prior to the issuance of a permit for an
athletic activity, the Chief of Police shall require from the applicant, an agreement to compensate
the Town for loss or damage to public property, or the deposit of a surety or cash bond in the
amount of $200.00 to guarantee the cleaning up of the site and the removal of any debris left as a
result of the holding of an athletic activity.
SEC. 23.10-7 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF A PERMIT.
A. The Chief of Police shall issue or deny the permit within five (5) days after receiving
an application.
B. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit if the Chief finds all of the following:
1. The application is on the form provided and contains the required
information;
2. The application for a permit does not contain any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact;
3. The applicant has met the requirements of Sec. 23.10-6;
4. The specific event is not contrary to law;
SEC. 23.10-7(Cont.1)
5. The specific event will not unreasonably interfere with the preservation of
the public peace, health, safety or welfare;
6. The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions and
regulations attendant upon the specific event permit;
7. All necessary state highways closure requirements have been filed.
C. The Chief of Police may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the
time and place of the specific event, the maximum number of persons or units
participating therein, the regulation of traffic, the number and type of signs and
barricades to be provided by the applicant together with the plan of disposition and
such other requirements as the Chief of Police may find reasonable and necessary
for the protection of persons and property.
SEC. 23.10-8 HIGHWAY CLOSURE REQUESTS. Permits to local authorities to
temporarily close portions of state highways for such public purposes or needs as specific events are
governed by Section 4-408 of the Illinois Highway Code. Requests to the Illinois Department of
Transportation, 700 E. Norris Drive, Ottawa, Illinois, 6l350, must be filed not less than fifteen (15)
days in advance of the date for which the closure is requests. The request shall be in resolution form
signed by the Mayor and certified by the Town Clerk as an official act of the city government. The
request must include a description of the street limits, the date and time of the closure, and the
information concerning the proposed detour. The request must also stipulate that any liability or
payment of claims occasioned by the closure shall be the responsibility of the local government.
SEC. 23.10-9 PREFERENCE OF APPLICATIONS. If the Chief of Police shall receive
more than one application for a specific event at the same time and place or on the same day, the
application filed first in time shall take precedence. An application shall be considered to be "at the
same time" if the specific event is scheduled to commence within two hours before or after the
holding of another specific event. An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the
requested specific event route comes at any point within six blocks or any equivalent distance from
the route of another specific event. If the Chief of Police receives an application for more than one
specific event in a single day, the Chief may set a time for the duration of each specific event, which
time shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three hours.
SEC. 23.10-10 ISSUANCE OF MULTIPLE PERMITS. The Chief of Police shall issue
permits for more than a single specific event during one date in accordance with the requirements of
Sec. 23.10-7 and Sec. 23.10-9 of this Division, provided however, that the Chief may not issue
multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of such additional permit would require the
continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other municipal personnel so as to
prevent normal police protection of other services to the municipality.
SEC. 23.20-11 RECONSIDERATION. If a permit has been denied because of a conflict
of date or hour for the proposed specific event, the applicant may request reconsideration of such
application and submit therewith an alternative date and hour for the holding of the specific event.
SEC. 23.10-12
SEC. 23.10-12 CONTENTS OF PERMIT. A specific event permit shall contain the
following:
A. The name of the person or organization to whom issued;
B. The address and telephone number of the person or organization named on the
permit;
C. Type of activity for which the permit has been issued;
D. The date, hour and location for the specific event;
E. The expiration date;
F. Any conditions imposed on the holding of such specific event.
SEC. 23.10-13 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. A permit for a specific event may
be summarily suspended or removed by the Chief of Police at any time:
A. When the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that any of the grounds
exist for which the original application for a permit would have been denied;
B. When the Chief of Police has reason to believe that the health, safety and welfare of
persons or property would be endangered because of real or threatened disaster,
public calamity, riot or other emergency.
SEC. 23.10-14 APPEAL.
A. An appeal from the denial or revocation of a permit may be taken to the City
Manager within five (5) days after such denial or revocation. Such appeal shall be in
writing, setting forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based and should be
filed with the City Manager. The Chief of Police shall submit to the City Manager,
the application and any other documents considered in denying or revoking the
permit;
B. Within five (5) days after the appeal is filed, the City Manager shall consider the
appeal and render a decision thereon. Written notice of the time and place the City
Manager will consider the appeal shall be given to the person who filed the appeal at
least three (3) days before such date unless the applicant/permittee shall waive notice
in writing.
C. In any appeal, the City Manager shall consider the application and any other relevant
information presented by the Chief of Police or the applicant/permittee. The City
Manager may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and
regulations set forth in this Division. The decision of the City Manager shall be
final.
SEC. 23.10-15
SEC. 23.10-15 VIOLATION - PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this
Division, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$500.00.
SEC. 23.10-16 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Division, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Division. The Town Council hereby declares that it adopted this Division and each
portion thereof irrespective of the fact that only one portion be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Entire Division 10 Amended 8/1/83 by Ord. No. 3227)
SEC. 23.11-1
DIVISION 11 - PENALTY
SEC. 23.11-1 PENALTY FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
A. Fines. In the event of a violation of Sec. 23.5-3 the fine shall be not less than $10.00
or more than $50.00. The Town Treasurer may accept as settlement $20.00 if paid
within seven days following the time of the offense shown on the ticket. Should such
parking violations not be paid by the offender on or before the seventh day following
the date of the offense as shown on the ticket, then in such event, the Town
Treasurer may accept as settlement $30.00 for each and every violation.
(Amended 7/5/78)(Amended 2/16/87)(Amended 10/16/89)
(Amended 2/3/03)(Amended 2/1/10 by Ord. 5322)
In the event of a violation of any section of Division 5 - Parking Rules other than
Sec. 5-3 or Sec. 5-12, the fine shall be not less than $20.00 or more than $50.00.
The Town Treasurer may accept as settlement $30.00 if paid within seven days
following the time of the offense shown on the ticket. In the event the fine is not
paid by the offender on or before the seventh day following the date of the offense as
shown on the ticket, then the Town Treasurer may accept as settlement $40.00 for
each and every violation. (Amended 7/5/78)(Amended 2/16/87)(Amended
10/16/89) (Amended 2/3/03)(Amended 2/6/06 by Ord. No. 5049)(Amended 2/1/10
by Ord. No. 5322)
B. License Suspension. In the event that a person has 10 or more violations of Town
ordinances regarding the parking or standing of vehicles and which remain unpaid
after a final decision by an administrative hearing officer or a judgment in the Circuit
Court in McLean County has been obtained, the City Manager or his designee may
cause a certified report of the violations to be sent to the Secretary of State for the
purpose of suspending the violator's driver's license. The Town shall send a notice
of impending driver's license suspension to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State. (Amended 6/15/98 by Ord. No. 4532)(Amended 6/2/2014 by Ord. No.
5544)
C. Towing or Immobilization of Vehicle. In the event that any violation remains
unpaid for seven days after a request for payment has been sent to the registered
owner of the vehicle, the City Manager may direct the Corporation Counsel to
initiate an administrative process or file a legal action against the registered owner of
the vehicle and also cause a towing or immobilization notice to be sent to the
registered owner of the vehicle. The notice of towing or immobilization shall state
1) that the car is subject to towing or immobilization if the tickets remain unpaid; 2)
that the car owner can challenge the validity of the violations by appearing at the
administrative hearing or in court; 3) that a failure to appear at the administrative
hearing or in court may result in a towing or immobilization order being entered
against the vehicle.
SEC. 23.11-1(Cont.1)
If an owner of a vehicle failed to appear at the administrative hearing or in court
after receiving a notice of towing or immobilization, the City Manager may issue an
order of towing or immobilization of the vehicle. If an owner of a vehicle appears at
an administrative hearing or in court and is determined to owe the parking fines, and
those fines remain unpaid after the period of time in which review of the
administrative or judicial decision has elapsed, then the City Manager may issue an
order of towing or immobilization of the vehicle. A copy of the order of towing or
immobilization shall be sent to the vehicle owner.
An order of towing or immobilization of a vehicle shall authorize the Town, or its
authorized agents, to immobilize or tow a vehicle wherever it may be found in the
Town of Normal. The vehicle shall not be released from immobilization or storage
until all parking violations fines, parking violation judgments including court costs,
towing and storage fees, and an administrative fee of $100 are paid in full. In the
event that a person seeks to challenge the validity of a tow or immobilization, that
person shall post a cash bond to be held by the Town's Finance Director in an
amount equal to all parking violations fines, parking violation judgments including
court costs, towing fees, storage fees, and an administration fee of $100. The person
challenging the validity of a tow or immobilization may appeal to the Administrative
Hearing Officer regarding all matters. The person challenging the validity of a tow
or immobilization may also reinstate any pending court case or administrative
hearing to challenge the validity of a violation for which a judgment or final
determination has not been entered. The Administrative Hearing Officer, at the
request of the person challenging the tow or immobilization, shall stay any hearing
until the completion of court action regarding any violations for which a judgment
has not been entered. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall hold a hearing to
determine if the towing or immobilization was proper. The Administrative Hearing
Officer may order a return of the bond money, or any portion thereof, to the vehicle
owner, or may order the application of the bond money, or any portion thereof, to
the appropriate fine, judgment, towing, or storage fee.(Entire Sec. 23.11-1 Amended
7/2/01 by Ord. No. 4735)(Amended 6/2/2014 by Ord. No. 5544)
D. Adoption of Administrative Hearing Procedure. Any parking violation may be
processed through the Administrative Adjudication System adopted by the Town of
Normal. The adoption and establishment of the Administrative Adjudication
System does not preclude the Town from using other lawful methods to enforce the
provisions of the Municipal Code or collect fines due the Town, including but not
limited to seeking relief in McLean County Circuit Court or any other court with
jurisdiction over the subject matters or parties.
1. The Finance Director is hereby designated the Traffic Compliance
Administrator and is authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking
violation notices and other notices authorized by this Section and state law
regarding the administrative adjudication of parking violations. The Traffic
Compliance Administrator is further authorized to make reports to the
Secretary of State as allowed by state law.
SEC. 23.11-1(Cont.2)
2. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall provide all notices required by
state law regarding the administrative adjudication of parking violations.
3. Any person may appear by telephone at an administrative adjudication of a
parking violation by pre-arrangement with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.
4. Any person failing to appear for an administrative adjudication may file in
writing a Petition to Set Aside a Final Determination within 21 days of that
determination. The grounds for the Petition to Set Aside the Final
Determination shall be limited to: (a) the person not having been the owner
or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued, (b)
the person having already paid the fine or penalty, or (c) excusable failure to
appear at the hearing.
E. Owner/Violator Appeal of a Violation – Required Written Appeal. Any person
wishing to contest a parking violation issued by the Town of Normal for which the
Town has not set a date for administrative adjudication or court hearing must submit
a request in writing to the Finance Director explaining the reason the citation is not
valid. The Finance Director, or his designee, shall review the request and respond in
writing to the requestor. If the Finance Director determines that the citation was
valid, the Finance Director shall notify the requestor that the requestor may obtain a
hearing utilizing the Town’s administrative adjudication system. The purpose of this
Section is to provide for the quick and efficient resolution of parking citation
disputes with the need for a hearing.
(Subsection D and E Added 6/2/2014 by Ord. No. 5544)
SEC. 23.11-2 GENERAL PENALTIES. In addition to the foregoing, any person found
guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or
opposing the investigation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter, upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than Ten ($10.00) Dollars nor more than Five
Hundred ($500.00) Dollars; provided however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only
shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil Practice Act. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall
continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification or knowledge of
the existence thereof. (Amended 7/5/78)(Amended 7/2/01 by Ord. No. 4735)
SEC. 23.11-3 ARRESTS. Any person arrested for a violation of any provisions of this
Chapter shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law.
SEC. 23.11-4 PRIMA FACIE PROOF. The fact that an automobile which is illegally
operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that
such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation.
SEC. 24.1-1
CHAPTER 24 - HUMAN RELATIONS
SEC. 24.1-1 DECLARATION OF POLICY. It is hereby declared the policy of the
Town of Normal to assure full and equal opportunity to all citizens of the Town in the matters of
employment, public accommodations, financing and housing free from unlawful discrimination
against them because of their race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national
origin or ancestry, disability, or matriculation, and with regard to housing, familial status.
It is further declared to be the policy of the Town of Normal that no person, group of
persons or corporation shall attempt to escalate or de-escalate property prices because of any present
or prospective change in the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial
status, national origin or ancestry, disability, or matriculation of persons in the neighborhood of said
property.
It is further declared to be the policy of the Town of Normal, that in a spirit of harmony, the
Town Council and its Commission on Human Relations shall endeavor to work with and cooperate
with the Board of Realtors, and all other interested persons to the end that the declared purposes of
this Division, to-wit: insuring opportunity for all persons to live in decent housing facilities without
unlawful discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status,
familial status, ancestry, disability, national origin, or matriculation, of such persons, can be
accomplished in an orderly, lawful and proper fashion. Therefore, in order to effectuate this policy,
the following provisions shall prevail.
SEC. 24.1-2 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this Section.
A. Age. Age as used in the Ordinance shall be limited to individuals who are at least
forty (40) years of age or over.
B. Commission. The Town of Normal Human Relations Commission.
C. Complainant. The aggrieved person who files a formal complaint of unlawful
discrimination with the Commission alleging a violation of this Chapter.
D. Complaint. A written and signed statement alleging one or more unlawful
discriminatory acts or practices under this Chapter. A complaint shall be in such
detail as to substantially apprise parties of the time, place, and facts with respect to
the alleged violation. It shall contain the following:
1. A statement of the facts sufficient to constitute a prima facie case of a civil
rights violation, including the date, time, and place thereof;
2. A statement of each specific harm the complainant has suffered as a
consequence of the alleged violation;
SEC. 24.1-2(Cont.1)
3. Complainant’s signature certifying that the statements set forth in the
complaint are true and correct, except as to matters therein stated to be on
information and belief and as to such matters the complainant certifies
complaint that he believes to be true.
E. Conciliation Agreement. A written agreement among the parties setting forth a
resolution of the issues of a complaint.
F. Conciliation Conference. A meeting of the parties to a complaint, including the
complainant and respondent and their representatives, arranged by the Commission
or its designees in a confidential attempt to resolve the complaint through a
facilitated process that may result in a conciliation agreement of the parties.
G. Contractor. A person who contracts with or proposes to contract with the Town to
provide goods and/or service for the current fiscal year or who has contracted with
the Town during the last preceding fiscal year.
H. Disability. Any physical or mental impairment resulting from or manifested by
anatomical, physiological, neurological, or psychological conditions, demonstrable
by medically accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques, and which
constitutes or is regarded as constituting a substantial limitation to one or more of a
person’s major life activities. A disabled person is one who has a physical or mental
disability as defined above, has a record of such disability, or is regarded as having
such a disability. A person is regarded as being disabled under this definition if such
a person, as a result of a disability, requires a support animal, such as a guide dog or
hearing dog, to assist them in a major life function.
I. Employee. Any and all persons who perform services under the direction and
control of and for any employer for compensation, whether in the form of wages,
salary, commission, or otherwise, excluding the parents, spouses or children of the
employer and excluding independent contractors, although they may be subject to
the Ordinance as employers or in any other capacity covered hereunder.
J. Employer. Any person within the Town of Normal including but not limited to
owners, managers, supervisors, and others who serve a supervisory function who
hires or employs any employee, and any person wherever situated who hires or
employs any employees whose services are to be partly or wholly performed within
the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, but excluding any religious or fraternal
corporation, association, society or organization with respect to the hiring or
employment of individuals from their membership.
K. Employment Agency. Any person regularly undertaking, with or without
compensation, to procure employees for any employer, or to procure for employees
opportunities to work for an employer or to recruit, refer or place employees.
SEC. 24.1-2(Cont.2)
L. Familial Status. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 being
domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual(s);
or, the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written
permission of such parent or other person. This shall include any person who is
pregnant or is in the process of attaining legal custody of any individual who has not
attained the age of 18.
M. Housing Accommodation. Includes any building, structure or portion thereof,
within the Town of Normal, which is used or occupied, or is maintained, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or
more human beings.
N. Marital Status. The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or
widowed.
O. Matriculation. The condition of being enrolled in a college or university or other
post secondary educational institution. It is the intent of this provision to give
standing and protection only to persons enrolled in a college or university or other
post secondary educational institution.
P. National Origin. The place in which an individual or one of his or her ancestors was
born.
Q. Owner. The person holding title to property, or acting as agent, trustee or in any
other form, on behalf of the legal title holder.
R. Party or Parties. The Complainant and the Respondent in a complaint filed before
the Commission.
S. Person. An individual, partnerships, associates, organizations, corporations, legal
representatives, joint stock companies, mutual companies, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, labor unions, or union labor organizations, and any other incorporated or
unincorporated organized group. The term includes, but is not limited to, any real
estate owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesman or agent, any
lending institution, the Town of Normal, and any department, unit, officer, or
employee of any of the above. Other governmental entities are excluded from this
definition.
T. Preponderance of Evidence. Considering all of the evidence in the case, the
Commission is persuaded that the proposition on which a party has the burden of
proof is more reasonably true than not. These facts need not be proved “beyond a
reasonable doubt,” as in criminal cases, or by “clear and convincing evidence,” as
some civil matters.
U. Public Accommodation. Any business, enterprise or activity consisting of or
involving furnishing, providing or making available to the public any goods,
SEC.24.1-2(Cont.3)
services, restaurants, eating houses, soda fountains, soft drink parlors, taverns,
hotels, roadhouses, barber shops, department stores, clothing stores, hat stores, shoe
stores, restrooms, theatres, skating rinks, swimming pools, public golf courses,
public golf driving ranges, concerts, crematories, cemeteries, airplanes, boats, and
any other public conveyances on land, water, or air, and other places of public
accommodation and/or amusement. This paragraph shall not apply to any public
school system. Nor does this paragraph apply to the Normal Police Department or
any of its sworn officers or to any other lawfully authorized sworn law enforcement
personnel engaged in the performance of his or her duties in the enforcement or
investigation of the laws of the United States of America, State of Illinois, or the
Town of Normal.
V. Real Estate Broker. Any natural person, partnership, association or corporation or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells, purchases,
exchanges or rents or negotiates, for the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of the real
property of another, or holds him or herself out as engaged in the real property of
another, or collects rental for the use of the real property of another.
W. Respondent. Any person accused in a complaint of having committed an unlawfully
discriminatory practice or act under this Chapter.
X. Sexual Harassment. Any sexual discrimination which involves unwelcome sexual
advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature when:
1. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of employment or access to, or participating in, a public
accommodation, financing or housing; or
2. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the
basis for employment decisions affecting such individual or is the basis for
granting or denying access to, or participating in, a public accommodation,
financing or housing; or
3. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual’s work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working, public accommodation or housing environment.
Y. Sexual Orientation. The actual or perceived state of heterosexuality, homosexuality
or bisexuality. (Added 10/1/01 by Ord. No. 4747)
Z. Staff. The City Manager or his designee(s) authorized to perform work on behalf of
the Commission.
AA. Unlawfully Discriminate and Unlawful Discrimination. Any differences in
treatment based on race, color, religion, sex (including sexual harassment), sexual
SEC. 24.1-2(Cont.4)
orientation, marital status, ancestry, national origin, age, disability, or matriculation,
and with regard to unlawful housing practice, familial status. (Amended 10/1/01 by
Ord. No. 4747)
BB. Unlawful Housing Practice. The commission of an act or acts prohibited by SEC.
24.1-3 hereafter. (Amended 10/1/01 by Ord. No. 4747)
CC. Vendor. A person who sells or has sold goods or services to the Town during the
current or last preceding fiscal year.
SEC. 24.1-3 PROHIBITED ACTS IN HOUSING. It shall be an unfair housing practice
and unlawful for any real estate broker licensed by the State of Illinois, real estate salesman or
agent, owner, lending institution or any other person except owners or tenants of a dwelling unit
when they are seeking another person to reside in the same dwelling unit in which the owner or
tenant resides:
A. To unlawfully discriminate against any person in the price, terms, conditions or
privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any real
estate used for residential purposes in the Town of Normal or in the furnishing of
any facilities or services in connection therewith, who is a prospective buyer, lessee
or renter of such property.
B. To publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published, circulated, issued or
displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any
kind relating to the sale, rental or leasing of any residential real property within the
Town of Normal which will indicate or express any unlawful discrimination in the
sale, rental or leasing of such residential real estate.
C. To refuse to sell, lease or rent, any real estate for residential purposes within the
Town of Normal solely on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
D. To unlawfully discriminate or to participate in unlawful discrimination in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any residential housing unit or
housing accommodation in the Town of Normal.
E. To unlawfully discriminate in the charging of fees or services to persons for
residential housing accommodations.
F. To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease, residential real estate within the
Town of Normal on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective
entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, color,
religion, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin or ancestry, disability,
matriculation, or sexual orientation. (Amended 3/4/02 by Ord. No. 4776)
SEC. 24.1-3(Cont.1)
G. To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to
induce any owner of residential real estate in the Town of Normal to sell or lease his
property because of any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion,
sex, marital status, familial status, ancestry or national origin, disability,
matriculation, or sexual orientation of persons in the neighborhood. (Amended
3/4/02 by Ord. No. 4776)
H. To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any listing of residential real
estate within the Town of Normal to any person solely because of race, color,
religion, sex, marital status, familial status, ancestry or national origin, disability,
matriculation, or sexual orientation. (Amended 3/4/02 by Ord. No. 4776)
I. To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities in rules,
policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such persons equal opportunity in housing. It shall be an affirmative defense
to this section for the respondent to show that such accommodations would
constitute an undue hardship upon the respondent or a safety risk to the person with
a disability or others.
J. It shall also be considered an unfair housing practice for anyone to harass in any
fashion an existing householder with the intent to force such householder to sell,
lease or rent to any other party on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
K. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, this Chapter and all of the
applicable provisions hereof shall apply to all residential and multiple-family zoning
classifications and/or uses or portions thereof within the Town of Normal, except for
owners or tenants of a dwelling unit when they are seeking another person to reside
in the same dwelling unit in which the owner or tenant resides. This limited
exemption shall apply only in those situations where the owner or renter of the
dwelling unit shares a kitchen or bathroom with a prospective tenant not related to
the owner or renter of the dwelling unit.
L. The prohibition of discrimination on the basis of familial status does not apply to
retirement communities. For the purposes of this Section a “retirement community”
is defined as a condominium or community association which, in its initial
declaration and on-going practice, limits its housing accommodations:
1. intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or
2. intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older,
and;
a. at least eighty percent (80%) of the occupied units are occupied by at
least one person who is 55 years of age or older;
b. the housing facility or community publishes and adheres to policies
SEC. 24.1-3(Cont.2)
and procedures that demonstrate an intent required under this
subdivision (L); and
c. the housing facility or community complies with rules adopted by the
Illinois Department of Human Rights for verification of occupancy.
M. Nothing in this Sec. 24.1-3 shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society from engaging in unlawful discrimination while carrying out or furthering
the religious activities of such organization. Nothing in this Sec. 24.1-3 shall
prevent any not-for-profit organization from engaging in unlawful discrimination
while engaging in their rights of “expressive association” as set forth in Boy Scouts
of America v. Dale,170 S. Ct. 2446. (Added 10/1/01 by Ord. No. 4747)
SEC. 24.1-4 PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES IN EMPLOYMENT,
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS AND FINANCING. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit to any of the following acts of “discrimination”;
A. To permit or take any action which unlawfully discriminates in a person’s selection,
status, or eligibility for employment, promotion or transfer, or for apprenticeship,
membership, or conditions and privileges or benefits directly or indirectly related to
one’s employment, except for a bona fide occupational qualification;
B. To cause or permit to be published, posted or circulated, any notice, advertisement,
job order, requisition or request for applicants for employment or apprenticeship for
the referral thereof which makes or has the effect of making unlawful discrimination
a condition of applying for employment or of referral thereof or indicates the
existence of such a condition except for a bona fide occupational qualification;
C. For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to inquire for a written
application whether a job applicant has ever been arrested or to use such knowledge
of an arrest as a reason for denial or termination of employment. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit any employer, employment agency or labor organization
from requesting or using information or records concerning conviction of any
individual.
D. To unlawfully discriminate against any person in the full enjoyment of goods,
services, facilities, advantages or privileges of any public accommodation;
E. To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for person with disabilities in rules,
policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity in public accommodations. It shall be an
affirmative defense to this Section for the respondent to show that such
accommodations would constitute an undue hardship upon the respondent or a
safety risk to the person with a disability or others.
F. To unlawfully discriminate or to participate directly or indirectly in unlawful
SEC. 24.1-4(Cont.1)
discrimination in connection with the terms of loans, guaranteeing loans, accepting
mortgages or otherwise making available funds for loans, provided that lending
money is one of the principal aspects of the person’s business or is incidental to the
person’s principal business.
G. Nothing in this Sec. 24.1-4 shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society from engaging in unlawful discrimination while carrying out or furthering
the religious activities of such organization. Nothing in this Sec. 24.1-4 shall
prevent any not-for-profit organization from engaging in unlawful discrimination
while engaging in their rights of “expressive association” as set forth in Boy Scouts
of America v. Dale, 170 S. Ct. 2446. (Added 10/1/01 by Ord. No. 4747)
H. Nothing in this Sec. 24.1-4 shall prohibit an employer from using marital status as a
factor in determining eligibility for participation in employee benefit programs.
(Added 10/1/01 by Ord. No. 4747)
SEC. 24.1-5 CITIZEN PROTECTION. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, incite,
compel, coerce or participate directly or indirectly in the doing of any act or practice declared in this
Section to be prohibited or to unlawfully discriminate or to take retaliatory action against any other
person because such person has opposed any practice forbidden by this Section or because such
person has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding, or hearing under this Section.
SEC. 24.1-6 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMPLIANCE. All
vendors, contractors or financial institutions who conduct business with the Town of Normal and
have unlawfully discriminated may, upon the recommendation of the Commission and approval of
the Town Council, be prohibited from doing business with the Town for a period of at least one (1)
year. Further, the Commission may recommend the termination of an effective contract based on
unlawful discrimination during the term of a contractual relationship between the Town of Normal
and a contractor. Such recommendation shall be forwarded to the Town Council for final
consideration.
SEC. 24.1-7 DUTIES OF COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS. It shall be the
duty of the Commission on Human Relations as established by the Town Council of the Town of
Normal to:
A. Receive complaints charging unlawful discrimination.
B. Seek conciliation of such complaint.
C. Hold public hearings, make findings of fact, issue orders and publish its findings of
fact and orders in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and with the
Ordinance establishing the Commission and the Statutory Laws of the State of
Illinois.
SEC. 24.1-7(Cont.1)
D. Hold public hearings in order to gather information on human relations, civil rights
or relevant social issues within the community.
E. Advise or make recommendations to the Board of Trustees on issues of human
relations, civil rights or relevant social issues within the community.
F. Render from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written report of its
activities and recommendations with respect to fair housing practices to the Mayor
and the Town Council.
G. Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and
provisions of this Division.
SEC. 24.1-8 COMPLAINTS.
A. Any individual who believes that he/she has been aggrieved in any manner by a
violation of any provision of this Chapter may file a written complaint setting forth
his or her grievance with the Commission on Human Relations of the Town of
Normal. No verbal complaints shall be acted upon by the Commission.
B. All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date or
discovery of the last alleged occurrence of an unlawfully discriminatory act or
practice, thereof, but in no event shall a complaint be filed more than one (1)
calendar year after the occurrence of the violation.
C. Complaints determined by staff to not meet jurisdictional requirements or allege a
prima facie case will be dismissed; however, staff must notify the Commission in
writing of the dismissal and explain the reasons therefore. Any Commissioner may
notify the chairperson of his/her request to consider staff’s determination at its next
regular meeting if, within five (5) days of the date of the dismissal, the chairperson is
so notified. The Commission, upon the timely request of any Commissioner, shall
review the staff decision to dismiss a complaint. A request is timely if made within
five (5) days of receipt of staff’s decision.
D. The Commission shall not process any complaint if a similar complaint is filed
before the Illinois Department of Human Rights, the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, or other similar Federal or State governmental body with
the power to receive, investigate and adjudicate complaints of unlawful
discrimination. The Commission shall dismiss any complaints filed with it where it
is discovered that a similar complaint has been filed with any of the above or
similarly empowered agencies.
E. The Respondent shall be sent a copy of the complaint by Staff within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the receipt of a complaint. However, the failure of Staff to send the
complaint to the respondent shall not be the basis for a dismissal and shall not
deprive the Commission with jurisdiction over the matter.
SEC. 24.1-8(Cont.1)
F. A response shall be filed by the Respondent to the Commission’s staff within
twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the notice of the complaint. The
response shall contain the full name, address and telephone number of the
Respondent, the Respondent’s legal counsel and full contact information if
applicable. The response shall also contain the Respondent’s specific position with
respect to the allegations contained in the complaint. Failure to file a response
within the permitted time shall allow for the entry of a default judgment against the
Respondent.
G. A person who is identified as a Respondent in the course of the complaint but who
was not named as a Respondent in the initial filing of the complaint may be joined as
a Respondent upon written notice to such person by staff. This Respondent will be
notified per paragraphs E above and will be held to the response requirements in
paragraph F above. In no event shall an amended complaint be filed in a timeframe
that is not consistent with paragraph B above.
H. Complaints may be dismissed upon motion to the Chairperson or Hearing Examiner
any time prior to a public hearing for any of the following reasons: 1) At the written
request of the Complainant at any time prior to the commencement of a Public
Hearing on the complaint; 2) If the Complainant does not respond to inquiries of the
Commission or Staff after a thirty (30) day notice; 3) If the Complainant fails to
appear at a public hearing; 4) If the Respondent can show that the Complainant has
no legal jurisdictional basis for the complaint; 5) Upon proof of a successfully
concluded conciliation agreement; 6) Failure to state a claim for relief; 7) Other
affirmative matters or defenses sufficient to bar such claim. Any complaint
dismissed by the Commission shall not be re-filed.
I. A complaint filed before the Commission will not be made public unless required to
do so under the Freedom of Information Act or until a public hearing has been
scheduled. Depositions, interrogatories, and other discovery materials, not in the
possession of the Town are not matters of public record. All matters discussed in a
conciliation conference shall be considered confidential and may not be available to
the public. All discovery information is considered confidential and may not be
disclosed by the parties except as needed for a public hearing. Any party may seek
an order from the Commission Chairperson or hearing officer placing limitations on
use or dissemination of any discovery material. Information, material and testimony
given during a public hearing is considered in the public record.
SEC. 24.1-9 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
A. The Commission is hereby fully authorized to seek to resolve conflicts between
persons involved in complaints which are within the jurisdiction of the Commission
by specifically authorizing the Commission Chairperson, or its designee, to set a
date for a conciliation hearing. At such hearing, the Commission’s representative
shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and
persuasion. Such conciliation hearings shall be closed to the public. A fifteen (15)
SEC. 24.1-9(Cont.1)
to sixty (60) day notice stating the time and place of the conciliation conference shall
be sent to all parties; however, the failure to hold such conciliation conference
within sixty (60) days shall not waive the requirement of a conciliation conference
and shall not deprive the Commission of jurisdiction in the case. If the Complainant
fails to attend the conciliation conference, the complaint may be dismissed unless
such absence is for good cause. One person may accompany each party at a
conciliation conference. In addition, witnesses may be called into the conciliation.
If the Respondent fails to attend the conciliation conference the complaint shall
proceed to a public hearing unless excused by staff for any reasons staff deems
beyond the control of the respondent. The Complainant and Respondent must attend
the conciliation conference prepared to participate in good faith or the Commission
may find against them on that basis.
B. If conciliation is not successful as determined by the Commission’s representative,
there shall be a full hearing of the complaint.
C. A public hearing shall be held to determine by a preponderance of the evidence if
the violation alleged in the complaint occurred. The public hearing shall be held
before the Commission or a qualified hearing officer appointed by the Commission,
who shall make findings of fact, determine if the alleged violation occurred, make
recommendations to resolve or alleviate the conflict or similar conflicts which may
occur in the future, determine and assess actual damages reimbursable to the
Complainant, or other “make whole” remedies including attorney’s fees and costs,
and/or recommend a fine payable to the Town of Normal to be imposed upon the
person found to have violated this Chapter. The total of said municipal fine shall not
exceed $2,500.00 for each offense. (Amended 7/2/90 by Ord. No. 3916)
D. Parties to a complaint may be represented by attorneys or other advocates.
E. The parties shall have limited discovery. Parties to a proceeding, including
employees, managers, officers, and supervisors may be compelled to appear for
deposition upon notice. No party may hold more than three depositions without the
approval of the Hearing Officer or Commission Chairperson. The person seeking
the deposition shall incur all costs of the deposition. Each party may serve one set of
interrogatories consisting of no more than 30 questions upon the other party to be
answered within twenty-eight (28) days. Discovery may occur at any time after the
filing of a complaint. Additional discovery may be allowed at the sole discretion of
the Hearing Officer or Chairperson of the Commission. Objections to discovery
may be made to the Hearing Officer or the Chairperson of the Commission who
shall rule on such objections. The Hearing Officer or Chairperson of the
Commission may fine a party for failure to comply with discovery in an amount not
to exceed $1,000 or may enter such further orders as is deemed appropriate such as
excluding evidence or prohibiting a party from raising a claim or defense or such
other sanction as is appropriate for failure to comply with discovery. Each such fine
so assessed shall be paid within fifteen (15) days after it is assessed. In the event
such fine is not paid, it shall be considered a debt to the Town of Normal and shall
SEC. 24.1-9(Cont.2)
be collectible in the same manner provided by law for the collection of all other
debts.
F. The parties shall file a written pre-trial memo stating their arguments to be made
during the Public Hearing no less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the Public
Hearing. The pre-trial memo shall contain the following:
1. A brief statement of the nature of the case or defense.
2. A list of all witnesses the party intends to call at trial.
3. A list of all exhibits the party may seek to introduce at public hearing.
4. The estimated length of time the party expects his evidence will take to
present his case.
5. The name, address, and telephone number for the party’s attorney or
representative.
6. Any further information required by the Hearing Officer or Chairperson.
Failure to file a timely pre-trial memo or failure to file any pre-trial memo may
subject either party at fault to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, except that the
Commission may excuse either party at fault based upon circumstances beyond the
control of the party at fault. Said fine shall be separate and not related to the
Commission’s determination of the merits of the complaint through the Public
Hearing.
G. If the Commission conducts said public hearing, its findings, determination,
remedies, damages to be paid to the complainant, attorney’s fees and costs, and the
fine, if any, shall be stated in writing which upon being signed by the Chairperson
shall constitute a final order of the Commission. If a hearing officer conducts said
public hearing, the Commission shall at its next meeting, after receipt of the hearing
officer’s report, adopt or reject in whole or in part, and in writing, the findings,
determinations, recommendations, damages, attorney’s fees and costs and/or the
proposed fine of the hearing officer. The Commission may, as part of a final order,
require a respondent to conduct limited remedial actions to assist in eliminating
future unlawful discrimination, including: a) the keeping of records for up to one
year for the purpose of review by the Commission; b) requiring the respondent to
eliminate certain practices. That written decision, which upon being signed by the
Chairperson shall constitute a final order of the Commission. A copy of the final
order of the Commission shall be served by the Chairperson, either personally or by
certified mail on each person directly affected thereby. (Amended 7/2/90 by Ord.
3916)
H. In conducting any hearing provided for herein, the Chairperson or designee, at the
request of the Complainant, the hearing officer, any Respondent or other party in
such hearing, may compel the attendance of any person believed to have knowledge
of any facts relevant to such hearing or compel the presentation of any tangible
evidence relevant to such hearing by the issuance of a subpoena to the person
believed to have such knowledge or to have custody or control of any relevant
SEC. 24.1-9(Cont.3)
books, papers, records or other tangible evidence, directing said person to appear
personally to testify and/or produce such tangible items to be copied and/or for
examination at a convenient location in the Normal City Hall prior to any such
hearing or before such person or persons conducting said hearing. All such
subpoenas shall be personally served by the Normal Police Department, or other
person authorized by the Commission, upon the person to whom they are issued.
I. Any witness so summoned may petition the Chairperson, or designee in the
Chairperson’s absence, to vacate or modify a subpoena. The Chairperson shall set a
hearing on each such petition, shall give prompt notice of each petition and of the
hearing date, time and place thereon to the party who requested the issuance of the
subpoena. The Chairperson, with assistance from legal counsel, shall conduct each
such hearing. The Chairperson may grant the petition in whole or in part upon
finding that the testimony, or the evidence sought, does not relate to any matters in
question, or that a subpoena for the production of evidence is unreasonable and
oppressive.
J. Upon the failure of any person to comply with subpoenas issued as herein provided,
the Chairperson may petition any court of competent jurisdiction to compel the
attendance of the person subpoenaed and the production of subpoenaed evidence or
at the election of the Commission, such person may be assessed a fine by the
Commission not in excess of $1,000.00 for each offense provided the person to
whom the subpoena is issued is notified on said subpoena that such fine may be
assessed. Each such person shall be immediately notified of the amount of each
such fine and each such fine shall be paid within fifteen (15) days after it is assessed.
In the event that such fines are not so paid, they shall be considered to be debts to
the Town of Normal and shall be collectible in the same manner provided by law for
the collection of all other debts.
K. If a public hearing should occur, the written record of the Public Hearing shall
consist of the notice of hearing, the complaint, the briefs, the transcript of the Public
Hearing at the cost to the requesting party, the exhibits entered into evidence,
motions, stipulations, and the findings and orders of the Hearing Officer and/or of
the Commission. Statements made during a conciliation conference will not be
permitted in a public hearing.
L. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law in the State shall not be
applicable to nor bind any party, the representative of any party, nor any
administrative person or body in any proceeding hereunder but such parties, persons
and bodies shall consider any and all reliable, probative, and substantial evidence,
statistical or otherwise, produced by anyone at any proceeding hereunder which may
tend to prove or disprove any act or acts of discrimination alleged in the complaint
under consideration. All testimony in any proceeding hereunder shall be given
under Oath.
SEC. 24.1-9(Cont.4)
M. The Commission shall be empowered at the conclusion of such proceedings as
described above, as a part of its order, to file with the Department of Registration
and Education of the State of Illinois, a complaint against any real estate broker
found guilty of violating any provision of this Division, seeking suspension of the
license issued to such broker by the State of Illinois.
N. The Commission may request the City Manager to commence prosecution of any
person who violates the provisions of this Division or who fails to comply with an
order of this Commission.
O. Any person found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be guilty of violating
this Division or who fails to comply with an order of the Commission shall be fined
an amount not to exceed $2,500.00 for each offense. Each day of any continuing
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
P. Representation Fees and Costs. As used in this section, the hearing officer or
Commission may recommend or order either of the following:
1. That the Respondent pay to the Complainant all or a portion of the costs of
maintaining the action, including reasonable representation fees and expert
witness fees incurred in maintaining this action before the Commission;
2. That the Complainant pay to the Respondent all or a portion of reasonable
representation fees for the respondent if the hearing officer or Commission
concludes the complaint was frivolous, unreasonable or groundless; or that
the complainant continued to litigate after it became clearly so.
SEC. 24.1-10 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause
of this Division is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect any remaining portion, section or part thereof.
(Entire Sec. 24 Amended 4/5/99 by Ord. No. 4586)(Entire Sec. 24 Amended 11/20/06 by Ord. No.
5099)
SEC. 25.1-1
CHAPTER 25 - MISCELLANEOUS
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL
SEC. 25.1-1 DATUM PLANE. That the elevations and permanent grades of streets,
alleys, sidewalks and sewers, and all other elevations hereafter fixed for public works in said Town
of Normal, shall be and are referred to a datum plane which is a level surface 75.16 feet below the
top of a copper bolt in the top of a concrete post set flush with the ground in the southeast corner of
Lot 10, Block 39, First Addition to Normal. The said datum plant is fixed at elevation 709.22 feet
above sea level and may be re-established from any permanent benchmark of the United States
Geological Survey, at any time that said reference point hereabove established is lost.
SEC. 25.1-2 CORPORATE SEAL. That the corporate seal of the said Town of Normal
shall be circular in form and be so constructed as to read "Corporate Town of Normal, Illinois."
The said seal shall be and remain in the custody of the Town Clerk and his successors in
office, to be used by him in all cases provided for by code of said Town or the laws of the State of
Illinois, and in all such cases where, by the laws and customs of any state or nation, the use of the
corporate seal of the Town becomes necessary.
SEC. 25.1-3 FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the Town of Normal shall commence on
the first day of April in each and every year.
SEC. 25.1-4 PAYMENT OF INTEREST AND FEES ON OUTSTANDING
OBLIGATIONS AND FINES; REFUNDS.
A. The Finance Director is hereby authorized to accept payment to the Town of Normal
of all money payable to the Town of Normal in the form of cash, personal check,
certified check, money order, Finance Department approved credit card or debit
card, or electronic fund transfer.
The Finance Director may refuse any form of payment if the Finance Director has
reason to believe that the payment will not be honored or that the funds of the Town
of Normal may be placed in jeopardy by the acceptance of the payment.
B. Interest Charges. Except as otherwise specifically provided in the Municipal Code
where money is due on a specific date to the Town, for fees, licenses, or any other
purpose, and where that money is not paid on time, the said debt shall accrue interest
at the annual rate of 2% over prime as defined below. (Added 3/2/81)(Amended
8/17/82)(Amended 8/15/83)
C. Determination of Prime Rate. Prime rate shall be as reported by the Wall Street
Journal on the date the debt is due or on the next day the Wall Street Journal is
published if the debt falls due on a day when the Wall Street Journal is not
published. (Added 8/17/81)
SEC. 25.1-4(Cont.1)
D. Refunds. The Town Clerk or any other official or employee of the Town of Normal,
shall, prior to making any refund due any person under any license, permit, or for
any other cause, determine whether such person owes the Town of Normal any
money, and if it is determined that the person owes the Town of Normal any money
for any reason, the Town Clerk or any other official or employee of the Town shall
withhold payment of any refund until all monies owed the Town have been paid in
full. (Added 5/2/82)
E. Non-Sufficient Funds Checks. The Town Treasurer may assess and collect a $25.00
penalty or fee for the collection of checks not honored by the institution upon which
they are written. (Amended 2/16/04 by Ord. No. 4929)(Amended 6/16/08 by Ord.
No. 5200)
F. Costs for Collection Agencies. The Town Treasurer may assess an additional $5.00
per penalty or fee whenever a fine, fee or debt owed to the Town remains unpaid
after an initial attempt to collect by the Town Treasurer, and the debt owed to the
Town is referred to a collection agency for collection.
G. Late Fees. In all matters concerning fines, fees, or monies due to the Town, when
the Town of Normal brings legal action for the enforcement of ordinances or
collection of revenue, and for which a settlement is reached between the Town and
the offending party, the office of Corporation Counsel may assess a fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) if settlement is reached prior to initial court appearance and
fifty dollars ($50.00) if settlement is obtained after a court appearance. This fee
shall be in addition to any settlement reached with the party and in addition to any
other fees, costs, or penalties provided by this ordinance or State law.
(Entire Sec. 25.1-4 Amended 5/20/1996 by Ord. No. 4388)(Sec. 25.1-4 Amended 5/4/98 by
Ord. No. 4511)(Sec. 25.1-4 Amended 12/4/00 by Ord. No. 4692)
SEC. 25.1-5.
A. Medical Expenses of Arrestees. In order to implement “an act relating to the
responsibility for certain incurred expenses relating to arrestees, “Public Act 83-370,
approved September 14, 1983, as heretofore or hereafter amended, the Town of
Normal will accept financial liability for necessary medical expenses incurred by
arrestees of the Normal Police Department. This financial responsibility shall take
the form of a direct payment from the Town of Normal to the provider of medical
services to such arrestee. Before liability will be assumed, the following conditions
must be met:
1. The recipient of necessary medical services must have been arrested by and
be in the actual physical custody of the Normal Police Department.
2. The recipient of necessary medical services must have been in need of
immediate medical care.
SEC. 25.1-5(Cont.1)
3. The recipient of necessary medical services does not qualify for free medical
services pursuant to the federal Hill-Burton Act or any other similar federal
legislation.
4. The provider of the necessary medical services must be unable to collect
directly from the recipient, his insurance company, or any other public
agency. For purposes of this Section, a provider of necessary medical
services shall be deemed unable to collect directly from the recipient when
applying its usual procedures, it has been unable to collect for services
rendered and the next step in its collection procedure is to refer the account
to an attorney or collection agency.
B. Subrogation. Upon making payment as provided for herein, the Town of Normal
shall succeed to the rights of the provider of medical services to the arrestee and
shall be empowered to bring any appropriate action at law or in equity to recover
payment for the amounts expended on behalf of the arrestee.
C. Intent. It is the purpose of this Section to outline and define the obligations of the
Town of Normal, under Public Act 83-370. It is not the intention of the Board of
Trustees for the Town of Normal to assume any liability hereby greater than that
which is imposed under Public Act 83-370. (Added 1/3/84)
SEC. 25.1-6 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
A. Trade-in of Personal Property. Any item of personal property owned by the Town
may be traded in as part of the purchase price of other property purchased by the
Town through competitive bids; provided, however, the Notice to Bidders shall
specify the items of personal property to be so traded. The award of a contract to the
successful bidder shall be sufficient authorization to trade in personal property
specified in the Notice to Bidders.
B. Other Disposal Procedures.
1. If an item of personal property has a fair cash market value of more than
25% of its original purchase price, it shall not be junked or donated and shall
not be sold except by competitive bid or at Public Auction after the
advertisement of a Notice of Sale published at least one time in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Town of Normal; provided, however, the
Corporate Authority may, by a majority vote, waive the advertising
requirement and by a two-thirds vote authorize the sale of such property to a
specified buyer at a specified price without competitive bidding.
2. If an item of personal property has a fair cash market value of 25% or less of
its original purchase price or if its fair cash market value is less than
$1,000.00, the City Manager may authorize the use or disposal of such
personal property without formal action of the Corporate Authority. In using
SEC. 25.1-6(Cont.1)
or disposing of such property, the Manager shall be guided exclusively and
endeavor to serve the best interests of the Town of Normal, Illinois.
3. In all other cases, personal property owned by the Town of Normal, Illinois,
shall be sold, traded, donated, scrapped, junked, or otherwise disposed of
only after prior approval by Motion or other official sanction of the President
and Board of Trustees. (Added 7/21/75)
C. Disposal of Interest in Real Property
1. When, in the opinion of the corporate authorities, real estate or any interest
therein is no longer necessary, appropriate, required for the use of, profitable
to, or for the best interest of the Town of Normal, then the corporate
authorities may, by an ordinance passed by a two-thirds vote of the corporate
authorities of the Town then holding office at any regular meeting or at any
special meeting, authorize the disposition of such real estate or interest
therein upon such terms and conditions as may be in the best interests of the
Town provided, however, notice of intent to so dispose of such real estate or
interest has been published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Town of Normal at least one (1) time prior to such sale or conveyance. The
notice shall contain pertinent information concerning the size, use, and
zoning of the real estate and the terms of sale. (Sec. C Added 9/8/92 by Ord.
No. 4079)
2. The foregoing paragraph (Sec. 25.1-6(C)(1)) shall not apply to any property
located in a Redevelopment Project Area established pursuant to the Tax
Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act (65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq). In
such designated Redevelopment Project Area real property and interests in
real property shall be transferred and disposed pursuant to authority and
procedures provided in the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act.
(Amended 3/17/03 by Ord. No. 4863)
D. Lost, Abandoned, Stolen or Illegally Possessed Property. This section applies to all
personal property of which possession is transferred to the Town of Normal, or
possession is in the Town of Normal, under circumstances supporting a reasonable
belief that such property is lost, abandoned, stolen or otherwise illegally possessed,
except property seized during a search by authorized law enforcement officials, and
except lost, abandoned, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicles.
1. The Town shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to identify and notify
the owner or other persons entitled to possession of such personal property
and shall return the property to the person lawfully entitled to possess said
property, after such person provides reasonable and satisfactory proof of his
ownership, or right to possession and reimburses the Town for all reasonable
expenses of such custody.
SEC. 25.1-6(Cont.2)
2. If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession
of the property is not ascertained in sixty (60) days, from the date the Town
obtains possession of such property, the City Manager may dispose of the
property as follows:
a. Transfer custody to a municipal department of the Town of Normal
for use by the department.
b. Effectuate the sale of the property for cash to the highest bidder at
public auction, notice of which shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Normal, at least ten
(10) days prior to such auction.
c. Return the property to the finder, subject to the claims of the rightful
owner.
d. The property may be donated to not-for-profit agencies for the
agency’s own use or for the agency to give away to other persons.
(Subsection (d) Added 7/16/12 by Ord. No. 5449)
3. Proceeds from the sale of the property at public auction shall be deposited in
the treasury of the Town of Normal and may be used for any public purpose.
4. The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may claim
and recover possession of the property at any time before its sale at public
auction or donation to a not-for-profit agency, as provided herein, upon
providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership, or right to
possession and reimbursing the Town for all reasonable expenses of custody
thereof. (Amended 7/16/12 by Ord. No. 5449)
(Entire Subsection D Added 10/20/97 by Ord. No. 4477)
SEC. 25.1-7 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
A. City or Village. Any reference made to “city” or “village” shall mean the Town of
Normal, McLean County, Illinois, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
Any reference to “city” officer or employee, “Village” officer or employee or town
officer or employee shall mean one and the same and shall be deemed to be the
officer or employee of the Town of Normal.
B. Mayor. The President of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal.
C. Council. The Trustees elected to the Board of Trustees for the Town of Normal.
D. Ordinance. Any reference to the word “ordinance” shall be read to mean Division,
Chapter or Code, as the context may require, unless specifically meant to refer to a
legislative act of the Town not embodied in the Code.
SEC. 25.1-7(Cont.1)
E. Official and Employee. Anything contained in this Code notwithstanding, any
person receiving compensation from the Town of Normal for services rendered,
except those persons designated in the Town Charter to be elected by the electors of
the Town of Normal, are hereby deemed to be employees for and during the period
of time said services are rendered for compensation, despite the fact that said
persons might be performing services classified under or designated as duties of any
certain officer or official as set forth in this Code.
(Entire Division 1 Re-Codified 7/16/84 by Ord. No. 3326)
SEC. 25.2-1
DIVISION 2 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS
SEC. 25.2-1 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A purpose of this Division is to
create the Town of Normal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to be known as Normal
E.S.D.A. There is thus hereby created the Normal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency whose
purpose is to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate any injury or damage resulting from disaster
caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from any natural or man-made disaster
in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975".
Normal E.S.D.A. shall consist of the Director/Coordinator and such additional members as
may be appointed by the Municipal Manager.
SEC. 25.2-2 DEFINITIONS.
Civil emergency. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force or violence if accompanied by the immediate power to effectuate
such threat by three or more persons acting together without authority of law.
Curfew. A prohibition against any person or persons walking running, loitering, standing or
motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate
limits of the Town of Normal, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency or disaster emergency.
Disaster. An occurrence of threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or less of life or
property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire, flood,
earthquake, wind, storm, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger of damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or
hostile military or paramilitary action. "Disaster" includes but is not limited to all occurrences and
threats thereof which are contemplated by the concept of "Emergency services, and disaster
operations."
Emergency Services. The preparation for and the carrying out of such functions other than
functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire,
flood, earthquake or other manmade or natural causes. These functions include, without limitation,
fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, air raid
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection,
temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the
foregoing functions.
SEC. 25.2-3 DIRECTOR/COORDINATOR. The Director/Coordinator of Normal
E.S.D.A. shall be appointed by the Municipal Manager. The Director/Coordinator shall have direct
SEC. 25.2-3(Cont.1)
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the Normal E.S.D.A.
subject to the direction and control of the Municipal Manager as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability of the Director/Coordinator to
serve in this function, the Municipal Manager or any person designated by him shall be and act as
Director/Coordinator until a new appointment is made. The Director/Coordinator shall prepare a
comprehensive plan and program for disaster preparedness, emergency response, utilization of
resources and recovery of Normal from any disaster emergency. This comprehensive plan shall be
tested, revised and coordinated with the State and Federal government as required.
The Director/Coordinator of Normal E.S.D.A. shall be and he is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare, execute and file in the appropriate State office any and all applications
necessary for the purpose of obtaining certain federal financial assistance under the Disaster Relief
Act (Public Law 288, 93rd Congress) or which may otherwise be available from the President’s
Disaster Relief Fund. (Amended 8/21/78)
That the Director/Coordinator is hereby further authorized and directed to provide to the
State and to the Federal Disaster Assistance Administration Department of Housing and Urban
Development (H.U.D.) for all matters pertaining to such Federal Disaster Assistance the assurances
and guarantees enumerated and provided in H.U.D. document No. HUD-490-6-77, a copy of which
has been and remains on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Town Clerk of
the Town of Normal. (Amended 8/21/78)
SEC. 25.2-4 FUNCTIONS. Normal E.S.D.A. shall perform such functions within the
Town as shall be prescribed by the State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency plan and
program prepared by the Governor of the State of Illinois, and such orders, rules, and regulations as
may be promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid Agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipalities or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the State E.S.D.A. Act
of 1975.
SEC. 25.2-5 SERVICES AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM. All or any member of the
Town staff may be designated as members of the Mobile Support Team created by the Director of
the State E.S.D.A. as provided by law.
The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the Director/Coordinator of
Normal’s E.S.D.A. organization.
Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a Town employee or officer while serving
on call to do duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have
the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member
who is not a paid officer or employee of the Town, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
SEC. 25.2-6 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. The
Director/Coordinator of E.S.D.A. may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreements with other counties or
SEC. 25.2-6(Cont.1)
political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been
approved by the President and Board of Trustees and by the State Director of E.S.D.A.
SEC. 25.2-7 COMMUNICATIONS. The Normal Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications and shall
coordinate all available communications resources in times of Disaster Emergencies. The Agency
shall consider the desirability of supplementing those communication resources with available State
resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive State of State-Federal communications
System or Network.
SEC. 25.2-8 EMERGENCY ACTION. If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or
emergency exists or in the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States, it shall be the
duty of the Town E.S.D.A. to cooperate fully with the County E.S.D.A., the State E.S.D.A. and with
the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
SEC. 25.2-9 COMPENSATION. Members of the Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency who are paid employees or officers of the Town, if called for training by the State Director
of E.S.D.A., shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to
the position held; members who are not such Town employees or officers shall receive for such
training time such compensation as may be established by the Town Council.
SEC. 25.2-10 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE. The State Treasurer may receive and
allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State to the Town for expenses incident
to training members of the E.S.D.A. prescribed by the State Director of E.S.D.A., compensation for
services and expenses of members of the mobile support team while serving outside Normal, and
any other reimbursement made by the State incident to E.S.D.A. activities, as provided by law.
SEC. 25.2-11 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES. The Director/Coordinator of
E.S.D.A. is authorized to make purchases or enter into contracts necessary to place the Town in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other
bomb or missile and to protect public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of any disaster. Said purchases or entry into contracts can be done
upon the approval of the President and Board of Trustees acting as the Corporate Authority of the
Town of Normal.
In the event of enemy-caused, man-made or other natural disaster, the Town
Director/Coordinator of E.S.D.A. is authorized on behalf of the Town to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes in view of the exigency
without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to
Town contract or obligations. As authorized by “The State E.S.D.A. Act of 1975”, provided that if
the President and Board of Trustees of the Town is meeting at the time of such disaster, he shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
SEC. 25.2-12 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY AND CIVIL EMERGENCY.
A. Whenever a local disaster or civil emergency as defined in Sec. 25.2-2 of this code
SEC. 25.2-12(Cont.1)
exists, the Mayor shall declare its existence by means of a written declaration setting
forth the facts which constitute the emergency and shall perform the duties and
obligations of Mayor prescribed in this Division. In the absence of the Mayor, the
President pro tem if one has been appointed, or if the Mayor and President pro tem
are both unable to perform the duties of Mayor prescribed in this Division through
either absence from the Town or physical or mental disability for such a length of
time or of such severity as would reasonably require someone other than the Mayor
or President pro tem to perform the duties of Mayor prescribed in this Division, then
the member of the Board of Trustees, present and physically and mentally able to
perform the duties of Mayor prescribed in this Division, with the longest length of
time of continuous service as a member of the Board of Trustees immediately
preceding the existence of such civil emergency, shall declare its existence by means
of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency and
shall otherwise perform the duties and obligations of the Mayor prescribed in this
Division until the Mayor, President pro tem or more senior member of the Board of
Trustees returns to the community or becomes physically or mentally able to
discharge the duties of Mayor prescribed in this Division at which time such person
shall assume those duties and responsibilities.
B. Curfew. After proclamation of a local disaster or civil emergency by the Mayor, he
may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Town or to
the Town as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the
day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
C. Other Prohibitions. After the proclamation of local disaster or civil emergency, the
Mayor of the Town of Normal may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare,
make any or all of the following orders:
1. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or
other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
2. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away
of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
3. Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the protection of
life and property.
4. Prohibiting the selling at retail of alcoholic liquor.
D. Effective Period. The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period
of forty-eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the local disaster or civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor
shall have the power to re-proclaim the existence of a local disaster or civil
emergency at the end of each 48-hour period during the time the said emergency
exists. The Mayor may make no more than two consecutive proclamations after the
SEC. 25.2-12(Cont.2)
initial proclamation without the consent of the Town Council in regular or special
session so convened.
E. Public Notice. Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of
Police shall notify local news media, and shall cause three copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the Town of Normal: the City Hall, the Normal Public
Library and the Post Office.
F. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster or civil emergency is to activate the
response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local or interjurisdictional
disaster emergency plans and authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance thereunder.
SEC. 25.2-13 OATH. Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Town
E.S.D.A. organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the Director/Coordinator:
"I, _______________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both
public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of a political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
State by force or violence; that during such time as I am affiliated with the Normal
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence."
SEC. 25.2-14 OFFICE. The Municipal Manager is authorized to designate space in a city
building or elsewhere as may be approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Town for
the McLean County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as its office.
SEC. 25.2-15 APPROPRIATION-LEVY OF TAXES. The President and Board of
Trustees of the Town may make appropriation for E.S.D.A. purposes in the manner provided by
law, and may levy an additional tax for E.S.D.A. purposes only, a tax not to exceed $.05 per
$100.00 of assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by "The
State E.S.D.A. Act of 1975". However that amount collectible under such levy shall in no event
exceed .25 per capita.
(Entire Division 2 of Chapter 25 Amended 7/19/76 by Ord. No. 1518)
SEC. 25.2-16 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALLEVIATING
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
SEC. 25.2-16(Cont.1)
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Division shall have
the meaning given to them in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
Emergency Situation. Any situation causing or threatening immediate physical
injury or damage to person or property, the alleviation of which requires the
procurement of goods or services by the Town of Normal from sources other than
the Town of Normal.
Person. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association, or the State
of Illinois or any subdivision thereof, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or
personal representative thereof.
B. Alleviation of Emergency Situation - Financial Responsibility. Whenever any
employee of the Town of Normal, in response to a call, encounters an emergency
situation, said employee is authorized by means of procedure determined by the City
Manager, to procure appropriate goods or services to alleviate said emergency. The
Town of Normal shall be entitled to recover from any person causing or contributing
to the causing of said emergency, all or any equitable portion of the cost of said
goods and/or services procured by the Town.
(Added 1/16/84)(Sec. 25.2-16 Re-Codified 7/16/84 by Ord. No. 3326)
SEC. 25.3-1
DIVISION 3 - LAND ANNEXATION
SEC. 25.3-1 PROHIBITION. No land shall be annexed to the Town of Normal except
upon the following terms and conditions.
SEC. 25.3-2 REQUIREMENT. That such persons as are authorized by laws to petition
this municipality for annexation shall, within thirty (30) days subsequent to the allowance of any
petition for annexation, file a petition for annexation to the Bloomington and Normal Sanitary
District and the Bloomington-Normal Airport Authority.
SEC. 25.3-3 INVALIDATING ANNEXATION. Failure upon such person's part to file
said petitions and obtain annexation to the other two agencies referred to herein shall be grounds for
the Town Council to revoke the annexation of any such property by ordinance and without notice to
the property owner.
SEC. 25.3-4 DISCONNECTION. A petition for disconnection shall be subject to the
same conditions as a petition for annexation.
SEC. 25.3-5 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS. A Petition for
Annexation or for disconnection filed with this municipality shall in all other respects comply with
the code of said Town of Normal and with the Statutes of the State of Illinois in such cases made
and provided.
SEC. 25.3-6 COPIES OF PLAT. A petition for annexation or disconnection shall be
accompanied by two mylar drawings drawing and thirty (30) copies of the area to be annexed or
disconnected, drawn clearly and legibly by a registered Illinois Land Surveyor or Registered
Professional Engineer. (Added 6/15/81)(Amended 6/6/83)
(Entire Division Re-Codified 7/16/84 by Ord. No. 3326)(Amended 2/20/95 by Ord. No. 4288)
SEC. 25.3-7 ANNEXATION APPLICATION FEES. All petitions for annexation shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and be accompanied by a fee receipt reflecting payment to
the Town Treasurer of the appropriate fee as set forth in Division 16 of this chapter. (Amended
2/16/08 by Ord. No. 5236)
SEC. 25.4-1
DIVISION 4 - STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
SECTION 25.4-1. The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and
Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this Section) are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the
Town to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
SECTION 25.4-2. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the Town, is
hereby prohibited.
SECTION 25.4-3. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the Town under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
SECTION 25.4-4. The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the Town, is hereby prohibited.
SECTION 25.4-5. For purposes of this Section, the terms “officer” and
“employee” shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
SECTION 25.4-6. The penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
SECTION 25.4-7. This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify
any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of Town officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive
than this Section, however, the provisions of this Section shall prevail in accordance with
the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
SECTION 25.4-8. Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this Section shall be incorporated into this Section by reference and shall
be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to
prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Town.
SECTION 25.4-9. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or
rehearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the Town if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois
Supreme Court.
SEC. 25.4-10
SECTION 25.4-10. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not
address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this Section
shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this Section relating to the part
of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the Town.
(Entire Division 4 Amended 5/3/04 by Ord. No. 4944)
SEC. 25.5-1
DIVISION 5 – ADOPTION OF PROCEDURES FOR REMOTE PARTICIPATION
Sec. 25.5-1 DEFINITION OF MEETING. The term “meeting” as applied to any Town
of Normal public body as defined in the Illinois Open Meetings Act shall be defined to mean
“Any gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone calls, electronic
means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat and instant messaging), or
other means of contemporary interactive communication, of a majority of a quorum of the
members of a public body held for the purpose of discussing public business” or such other
definition as shall be contained within the Illinois Open Meetings Act as amended from time to
time.
Sec. 25.5-2 REMOTE PARTICIPATION POLICY. Any member of a Town of
Normal public body may attend and participate in any meeting of such public body as defined in
the Open Meetings Act from a remote location via telephone, video or internet connection
provided that such attendance and participation is in compliance with the Remote Participation
Policy set forth in this Division and any applicable laws.
A. Policy Statement. It is the policy of the Town of Normal that a member of any
group associated with this unit of government which is subject to the provisions
of the Open Meetings Act (Covered Group) may attend and participate in any
open or closed meeting of that Covered Group from a remote location via
telephone, video or internet connection, provided that such attendance and
participation is in compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites. A member of the Covered Group of the Town of Normal shall be
provided the opportunity to attend an open and closed meeting or only one of such
meetings from a remote location if the member meets the following conditions
and a majority of the members present of the Covered Body votes to approve the
remote attendance.
(1) the member must notify the recording secretary or clerk of the Covered
Body at least 24 hours before the meeting unless advance notice is
impractical.
(2) the member must assert one of three reasons described herein why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including either (1) that the
member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; (2) the
member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of
Town of Normal; or (3) the member cannot attend because of a family or
other emergency; and
(3) a quorum of the Covered Body must be physically present.
C. Voting Procedures. After roll call, a vote for the Covered Body shall be taken,
considering the prerequisites set forth in Section B(2) above, on whether to allow
Sec. 25.5-2(Cont.1)
an off-site board member to participate remotely. All of the members physically
present are permitted to vote on whether remote participation will be allowed. A
vote may be taken to permit remote participation for a stated series of meetings if
the same reason applies to each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow
each remote participation.
D. Quorum and Vote Required. A quorum must be established by members
physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether to allow a
member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a majority of the
members present shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the meeting to
continue, there shall always need to be a quorum physically present.
E. Minutes. The member participating remotely shall be considered an off-site
participant and counted as present by means of video or audio conference for that
meeting if the member is allowed to participate. The meeting minutes of the
Town of Normal shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is
physically present, present by video, or present by audio means.
F. Rights of Remote Member. The member permitted to participate remotely will be
able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate in the
same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting
guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The remote
member shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any remote member shall be called during any vote
taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Secretary and placed in the
minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member participating remotely may
leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided the member
attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
G. Closed Meetings. A quorum of the Town of Normal’s members must be
physically present at any closed meeting. Members participating remotely shall
otherwise be entitled to participate in closed meetings by video or audio
conference as provided above.
H. Costs. A member participating remotely via telephone shall be reimbursed for the
cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any other costs associated
with remote participation, including video conferencing and other audio and video
equipment, must be approved by the Town of Normal.
(Entire Division 5 Added 1/16/07 by Ord. No. 5111)
SEC. 25.6-1
DIVISION 6 – GROSS RECEIPTS UTILITY TAX
SEC. 25.6-1. A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
A. Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity, or
radio magnetic waves or fiber optics, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of the Town of
Normal. (Amended 1/3/95 by Ord. No. 4280)
B. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas
for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, and not
for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
C. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling
electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Town of
Normal, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom.
SEC. 25.6-2. No tax is imposed by this ordinance with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this State or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance for such transactions as are or
may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax
Act” authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. No tax is imposed by this
Ordinance with respect to any gas or electricity to accounts of the Town of Normal. (Amended
1/19/2016 by Ord. No. 5616)
SEC. 25.6-3. Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets,
alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers’ business or for their
respective franchise rights.
SEC. 25.6-4. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Gross receipts. The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas or electricity for use or
consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account
SEC.25.6-4(Cont.1)
of the cost of the service, product, or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
B. Transmitting messages. In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person to
person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services
or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection with the
transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any
consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of
services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that
any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a
consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages.
In the case of persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages through the
use of mobile equipment, such as cellular phones and paging systems, the gross
receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate within the corporate limits of
a municipality only if the address to which the bills for the service are sent is within
those corporate limits. If, however, that address is not located within a municipality
that imposes a tax under this Section, then (i) if the party responsible for the bill is
not an individual, the gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate
within the corporate limits of the municipality where that party's principal place of
business in Illinois is located, and (ii) if the party responsible for the bill is an
individual, the gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate within
the corporate limits of the municipality where that party's principal residence in
Illinois located. (Amended 1/3/95 by Ord. No. 4280)
C. Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation, or political
subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
SEC. 25.6-5. This ordinance shall take effect after publication, and the tax provided for
herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined actually paid to the taxpayer for
services billed on or after the first day of July, 1965.
SEC. 25.6-6. On or before the last day of October, 1965, each taxpayer shall make a return
to the City Clerk for the months of July, August, and September, 1965, stating:
1. His name;
2. His principal place of business;
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is
imposed;
4. Amount of Tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities
may require.
SEC. 25.6-6(Cont.1)
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to
the Town Treasurer for a corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return,
pay to the City, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the
taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between
such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
SEC. 25.6-7. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this ordinance, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this ordinance from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than
three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
SEC. 25.6-8. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. The
Town Treasurer shall have the authority to audit and otherwise review the financial records of the
taxpayer in order to determine compliance with this division. (Amended 7/21/97 by Ord. No. 4459)
SEC. 25.6-9. Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who willfully violates any other provision of this ordinance is guilty of misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax
due. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Amended 7/21/97 by Ord. No. 4459)
SEC. 25.6-10. Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any word, sentence, or
paragraph of this ordinance to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration shall in no way affect
the remaining portion of said ordinance.
SEC. 25.6-11. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and due publication as provided by law; however, the effective date of the tax herein
imposed shall be as above set forth, namely, July 1, 1965.
(Entire Division Added 8/6/84 by Ord. No. 3337)
SEC. 25.6-12 ENTERPRISE ZONE REFUND. Until January 1, 1999, certified business
enterprises described herein shall be entitled to a refund of fifty percent (50%) of a portion of the
additional charge imposed by the persons engaged in occupations described in Section 25.6-1 of this
Code on the certified business enterprise pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/9-221 State Bar Edition, 1992, as
amended. The portion of the additional charge subject to the fifty percent (50%) refund shall be that
portion equal to the five percent (5%) municipal gross receipts utility tax imposed by this Division.
Any business meeting the following qualifications shall be considered a certified business enterprise
eligible for the fifty percent (50%) refund provided herein: (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
SEC. 25.6-12(Cont.1)
A. makes investments which cause the creation of a minimum of two hundred (200)
full-time equivalent jobs or makes investments which causes the retention of a
minimum of two thousand (2,000) full-time jobs; and
B. is located within the Town of Normal enterprise zone as established by Ordinance
No. 3364 and any amendment thereto; and
C. is certified by the Town Council and the Illinois Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs as complying with the qualifications specified in clauses A and
B.
Certified business enterprises shall make application for refund in the manner prescribed by the City
Manager. (Added 3/6/89)
SEC. 25.6-13. Coordination with Telecommunications Tax imposed pursuant to
Division 14 of this Chapter. The five per cent (5%) Gross Receipts Utility Tax imposed on
persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity or radio magnet
waves or fiber optics from such business originating within the corporate limits of the Town of
Normal be and the same is hereby declared of no force and effect during such time as the
Telecommunications Tax imposed in Division 14 of this Chapter is in full force and effect. If the
Telecommunications Tax imposed in Division 14 of this Chapter pursuant to Section 8-11-17 of
the Illinois Municipal Code is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then the five per
cent (5%) Gross Receipts Utility Tax on the business of transmitting messages imposed pursuant
to this Division 6 of Chapter 25 shall be deemed to be in full force and effect as of the date the
Telecommunications Tax enacted pursuant to Section 8-11-17 of the Municipal Code is repealed
or becomes ineffective. Provided, however, that in the event the Gross Receipts Utility Tax on
the business of transmitting messages and the Telecommunications Tax authorized pursuant to
Section 8-11-17 of the Municipal Code are converted to another tax pursuant to law, then it is the
intent of the Normal Town Council that such conversion to such new tax shall be made on the
basis of the Telecommunications Tax authorized by Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. (Sec. 25.6-13 Added 2/18/02 by Ord. No. 4775)
SEC. 25.7-1
DIVISION 7 - TAX UPON THE USE AND PRIVILEGE OF RENTING
A HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOM
SEC. 25.7-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, whenever any of the
following words, terms, or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them
in this Section:
A. Hotel Room or Motel Room. A room within a structure offered for rental on a daily
basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental with or
without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single hotel or motel room. The
number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall be computed on the basis of
those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
B. Owner. Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a
hotel or motel room or receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel or
motel room.
C. Person. Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution,
agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political
subdivision, contractor, supplied, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any
officers, agents, employees or other representative, acting either for himself or for
any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstance.
SEC. 25.7-2 TAX.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of 6% (six percent) of the rent charged for
the privilege and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the Town of Normal for
each twenty-four (24) hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room
charge is made; provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied and imposed
upon any person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
(Amended 2/5/96 by Ord. No. 4370 - Eff. 4/1/96)(Amended 3/18/96 by Ord. No.
4377 - Eff. 6/1/96)(Amended 4/1/96 by Ord. No. 4383 - Eff. 5/1/96)(Amended
11/18/02 by Ord. No. 4833 – Eff. 1/1/03)
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be borne by the
person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room, said person
hereinafter referred to as "Renter."
C. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to secure said tax from the
renter of the motel or hotel room and to pay over to the Town Treasurer or any
SEC. 25.7-2(Cont.1)
authorized representative of his office said tax under procedures prescribed by the
Town Treasurer, or as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
D. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this ordinance shall secure said tax
from the renter at the time he collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel room.
Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or memorandum of the rent given to the
renter at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this
ordinance shall be stated separately on said documents.
SEC. 25.7-3 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Town Treasurer, or his authorized
representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of
records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this ordinance, and to assure the
enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder, or interfere with the Town Treasurer or his authorized deputy or representative in the
discharge of his duties in the performance of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of every owner to
keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Town Treasurer, or his authorized
representative, shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
(1) the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty-four (24) hour period, including
multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room where such shall occur, and (2) the actual hotel or
motel tax receipts collected for the date in question.
SEC. 25.7-4 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE.
A. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel room within the Town of Normal shall
file tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel and motel
room during each one (1) calendar month period commencing on and including
September 1, and for each successive calendar month period thereafter prescribed by
the Town Treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the last day of the
calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period and the returns shall
indicate for what period the return is to be filed; i.e., return for September tax
receipts due on or before the last day of October.
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this Ordinance shall commence on
September 1, 1984, and the tax return payment for such period shall be due on or
before the last day of October, 1984. Thereafter, reporting period and taxes shall be
paid in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. At the time of filing said
tax returns, the owner shall pay to the Town Treasurer all taxes due for the period to
which the tax return applies.
C. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, interest and penalties shall apply as
set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter. (Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.7-5 COLLECTION. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the City Manager, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the City in any Court of competent
jurisdiction.
SEC. 25.7-6
SEC. 25.7-6 PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES. All proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this ordinance, including penalties, shall be transferred to the Town
General Fund to be retained until lawfully appropriated and expended by ordinance by the Board of
Trustees for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 25.7-7 PENALTIES. Any person found willfully guilty of failing to pay, collect,
report, and transmit said hotel or motel tax to the Town Treasurer in accordance with the terms of
this Ordinance shall, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof be
punished by a fine of not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more than Three Hundred
Dollars ($300.00) for the first offense, and not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil
Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1 et seq.). (Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.7-8 SEPARABILITY. If any provision of this ordinance, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this ordinance and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Entire Division 7 Added 8/6/84 by Ord. No. 3340)
SEC. 25.7.5-5
DIVISION 7.5 – SHORT TERM RENTAL TAX LAW
SEC. 25.7.5-5 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division 7.5:
A. Director. The Finance Director of the Town of Normal.
B. Dwelling Unit. A building designed or used principally for residential occupancy,
including, without limitation, single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
multiple-family dwellings.
C. Finance Department. The Finance Department of the Town of Normal.
D. Gross Rental Charge. The total consideration paid for the rental of a Short-Term
Residential Unit.
E. Guest. Any person who pays a Gross Rental Charge.
F. Intermediary. An organization that rents a Short-Term Residential Rental Unit and
collects the Gross Rental Charge for that rental from a Guest via the Internet or other
digital means.
G. Operator. Any person who owns or operates a Short-Term Residential Rental Unit.
H. Short-Term Rental Tax. The tax imposed under Sec. 25.7.5-10.
I. Short-Term Residential Rental Unit. All or part of a Dwelling Unit within the Town
that is rented to individuals or families who occupy overnight accommodations for a
period of less than 30 days.
SEC. 25.7.5-10 TAX IMPOSED.
A. A tax is imposed on the privilege of renting a Short-Term Residential Rental Unit
within the Town of Normal. The tax is imposed at a rate of 6% of the Gross Rental
Charge.
B. The tax imposed under this Section is in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges.
C. The Guest bears the liability for the payment of the tax. Each Intermediary or
Operator is required to collect the tax from the guest and remit it as set forth under
this Division 7.5.
D. The tax under this Section is imposed on and after April 1, 2019.
SEC. 25.7.5-10(Cont.1)
SEC. 25.7.5-15 COLLECTION BY INTERMEDIARY.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, each Intermediary that collects a Gross Rental
Charge for a Short-Term Rental from a Guest shall collect and account for the Short-
Term Rental Tax at the time that the Gross Rental Charge is paid.
B. Any Intermediary who collects the Short-Term Rental Tax shall do as a trustee for
and on account of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 25.7.5-20 COLLECTION BY OPERATOR.
A. For any Short-Term Rental, if the Short-Term Rental Tax is not collected by an
Intermediary under Sec. 25.7.5-15, then the Operator has the duty to collect and
account for the Short-Term Rental Tax at the time of the Short-Term Rental.
B. Any Operator who collects the Short-Term Rental Tax shall do as a Trustee for and
on account of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 25.7.5-25 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX.
A. All Short-Term Rental Tax collected by an Intermediary or Operator in any month
must be paid over to the Finance Department by the 25th day of the following month.
B. All payments under this Section must be remitted in the form and manner as
required by the Director.
SEC. 25.7.5-30 RECORDKEEPING; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
A. Each Intermediary and Operator has a duty to maintain complete and accurate
books, records, and accounts showing the Gross Rental Charges and Short-Term
Rental Tax collected from Guests.
B. The books, records, and accounts under this Section must be available in the Town
for examination and for audit by the Town. Any examination by the Town may be
made only after reasonable notice and may be made only during customary business
hours.
SEC. 25.7.5-35 PROCEEDS. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under
this ordinance, including penalties, shall be transferred to the Town General Fund to be retained
until lawfully appropriated and expended by ordinance by the Board of Trustees for the Town of
Normal.
SEC. 25.7.5-40 PENALTIES.
A. If, for any reason, any tax imposed by this Division 7.5 is not paid or remitted when
due, then interest and penalties apply as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter.
SEC. 25.7.5-40(Cont.1)
B. The Corporation Counsel may bring any appropriate legal action to enforce the
provisions of the Division 25.7.5.
(Entire Division 25.7.5 Added 11/19/18 by Ord. No. 5756)
SEC. 25.8-1
DIVISION 8 - HOME RULE GAS USE TAX
SEC. 25.8-1 TITLE. This Division shall be known and may be cited as the "Normal Gas
Use Tax Ordinance." The tax shall be known as the "Normal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in
addition to all other taxes imposed by the Town of Normal, the State of Illinois or any other
municipal corporation or political Subdivision of the State of Illinois.
SEC. 25.8-2 DEFINITIONS. When any of the following words or terms are used in this
section, it shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this section:
A. Normal Occupation Tax. The tax imposed by Sec. 25.6-1 et.seq of this Code on
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
B. Town. Town of Normal, Illinois.
C. Department or Department of Revenue. The Department of Finance of the Town.
D. Director or Director of Finance. The Director of Finance of the Town.
E. Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
F. Public utility. A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
G. Public Utilities Act. The Public Utilities Act, as amended, Illinois Compiled
Statutes, Chapter 220, Section 5/1-101, et seq.
H. Retail purchaser. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
I. Sale at retail. Any sale by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for
resale. For this purpose, the term retailer means any person engaged in the business
of distribution, supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
SEC. 25.8-3 TAX IMPOSED.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this Section, a tax is imposed on the privilege of
using or consuming in the Town gas that is purchased in a sale at retail. The tax
shall be at the rate of 3.8¢ per therm. (Amended 4/7/08 by Ord. No. 5187, Effective
9/1/08)
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail
purchaser, and nothing in this Division shall be construed to impose a tax on the
occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.
SEC. 25.8-3(Cont.1)
C. The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the
retail purchase's premises, (1) to the public utility designated to collect the tax
pursuant to Section 25.8-5 of this Code on or before the payment due date of the
public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or (2) directly to the Department on or
before the 15th day of the second month following the month in which the gas is
delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the
tax pursuant to Sec. 25.8-5 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public
utility so designated.
D. The tax shall not apply to the use or consumption of gas by, (1) a person purchasing
the gas for use in operating or propelling a vehicle, or vehicle fuel, as that term is
defined by this Code or (2) a public utility engaged in the business of distributing
gas. (Amended 4/6/98 by Ord. No. 4501)
E. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Town by a retail purchaser
properly subject to a tax imposed by any state or by the Town or any other
municipality with respect to the sale at retail of such gas, whether such tax is
imposed (1) upon the retail purchaser or (2) upon the seller and separately charge to
the retail purchaser by the seller, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this
Division. For purposes of this Subsection only, any charge imposed on a retail
purchaser pursuant to Section 9-221 or Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act with
respect to a sale at retail shall be treated as a tax properly imposed on the retail
purchaser by the State of Illinois or by this Town or other municipality.
F. A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax
imposed by this Division with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who
later uses or consumes part or all or the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the
Department on or before the 15th day of the second month following the month in
which the gas is used or consumed.
G. Nothing in this Division shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person,
business or activity which, under the Constitutions of the United States or State of
Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the Town.
H. The tax shall apply to a gas for which the delivery to the customer is billed by a
public utility after May 31, 1998.
SEC. 25.8-4 COMPLEMENTARY RELATION TO NORMAL OCCUPATION
TAX. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division, the tax shall not apply to the use or
consumption of gas if the gross receipts from the sale of the gas would not be taxable under the
Normal Occupation Tax despite all elements of the sale occurring in the Town.
SEC. 25.8-5 COLLECTION OF TAX.
A. The Director is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed
by this Division with any public utility providing gas service in the Town. The
SEC. 25.8-5(Cont.1)
contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: (1)
the public utility will collect the tax with respect to gas delivered by it to its
customers as an independent contractor; (2) the public utility will remit collected
taxes to the Department no more often than once each month; (3) the public utility
will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to 3% of the
amounts collected and timely remitted to the Department; (4) the public utility will
treat partial payments received from a customer as payments made pro rata for each
item or charge billed to the customer, including the tax imposed by this Section; (5)
the obligation of the public utility to collect and remit the tax shall not apply to gas
billed by the public utility to a retail purchaser prior to a date two months subsequent
to the execution of such contract; (6) the public utility shall not be liable to the Town
for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and (7) such additional
terms as the parties may agree upon.
B. A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this Division from its
customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas delivered to the customer
unless (1) the customer's use or consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant to Sec.
25.8-3(E) of this Code because the customer's purchase of the gas is subject to a
charge authorized by Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, or (2) the
public utility has received a written certificate issued by the Town authorizing the
public utility not to collect tax on deliveries to the customers.
SEC. 25.8-6 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
A. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise,
or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption under this chapter. All such
books and records shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during
business hours of the day, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
Department.
B. Every person that delivers customer-owned gas within the corporate limits of the
Town shall furnish to the Department, upon the department's request, the names,
addresses and therms delivered with respect to such deliveries.
SEC. 25.8-7 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Director is authorized to adopt,
promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
SEC. 25.8-8 PENALTY PROVISION. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Division or failing to
remit the tax owed shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor
more than $10,000.00 or five times the amount of tax imposed, whichever is greater. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue
any such violation or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. (Subsection
Added 4/6/98 by Ord. No. 4501)(Entire Division 8 Added 3/16/98 by Ord. No. 4500)
SEC. 25.9-1
DIVISION 9 - HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER AND
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SEC. 25.9-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail in this municipality. Before January 1, 2016, the tax
under this Subsection A is imposed at the rate of 1.5% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business. On and after January 1, 2016, the
tax imposed under this Subsection (A) is 2.5% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business. The tax under this Subsection (A) does not
apply to (i) the sale of an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with
an agency of this State’s government or (ii) food for human consumption which is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft
drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin,
urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. This tax is imposed
in accordance with Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1).
B. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service. Before January 1, 2016, the tax imposed under
this Subsection (B) at the rate of 1.5% of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. On and
after January 1, 2016, the tax imposed under this Subsection (B) is 2.5% of the
selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an
incident to a sale of service. The tax under this Subsection (B) Does not apply to the
sale of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes
and needles used by diabetics. This tax is imposed in accordance with Section 8-
11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-5). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord.
No. 4143) (Amended 9/8/2015 by Ord. No. 5596)
SEC. 25.9-2. The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance.
SEC. 25.9-3 DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN PROCEEDS. The Town shall distribute
10% of the net proceeds from the 2.5% rate under Sec. 25.9-1 to the County of McLean for
purposes of mental health and public safety in accordance with an intergovernmental agreement to
SEC. 25.9-3(Cont.1)
be entered into between the Town of Normal, the City of Bloomington, and the County of McLean.
For the purposes of this Section, “net proceeds” means the amount of the tax collected under Sec.
25.9-1 and remitted to the Town by the Department of Revenue. (Added 9/8/2015 by Ord. No.
5596)
SEC. 25.9-4. (Deleted 2/21/94 by Ord. No. 4211)
(Entire Division 9 Amended 9/18/95 by Ord. No. 4333, effective January 1, 1996)(Entire Division 9
Amended 3/5/01 by Ord. No. 4715, effective July 1, 2001)(Entire Division 9 Amended 2/1/10 by
Ord. No. 5325, effective July 1, 2010)
SEC. 25.10-1
DIVISION 10 - TOWN OF NORMAL USE TAX
SEC. 25.10-1 NATURE OF TAX. This Division shall be known and may be cited as the
Town of Normal Use Tax. The tax herein imposed is in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
Town of Normal, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision
thereof.
SEC. 25.10-2 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Division, when any of the
following words or terms are used herein, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to
them in this Section.
A. Department. The Finance Department of the Town of Normal.
B. Director. The Director of Finance of the Town of Normal.
C. Gross Receipts from the sales of tangible personal property at retail means the total
selling price or the amount of such sales, as hereinafter defined. In the case of
charge and time sales, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
payments are received by the seller. Receipts or other consideration derived by a
seller from the sale, transfer or assignment of accounts receivable to a wholly owned
subsidiary will not be deemed payments prior to the time the purchaser makes
payment of such accounts.
D. Like kind and character shall be liberally construed (including but not limited to any
form of motor vehicle for any other form of motor vehicle, or any kind of farm or
agricultural implement for any other kind of farm or agricultural implement), while
not including a kind of item which, if sold at retail by that retailer, would be exempt
from tax hereunder as an isolated or occasional sale.
E. Person. Any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a
receiver, executor, trustee' conservator or other representative appointed by order of
any court.
F. Purchaser. Any person who, through a sale at retail, acquires the ownership of or
title to tangible personal property for a valuable consideration, or in whose name the
tangible personal property is registered.
G. Purchase at retail. The acquisition of the ownership of or title to tangible personal
property through a sale at retail.
H. Receipts from sales of tangible personal property at retail with respect to any period
of time means the aggregate selling price, as herein defined, received by seller
during such period of time. In the case of charge and time sales, receipts include
consideration only as and when payments are received by the seller.
SEC. 25.10-2(Cont.1)
I. Retailer means every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this Section.
A person who is engaged in the business of leasing or renting motor vehicles to
others and who, in connection with such business sells any used motor vehicle to a
purchaser for his use and not for the purpose of resale, is a retailer to the extent of
the value of the vehicle sold. For the purpose of this Section, "motor vehicle" has
the meaning prescribed in Section 1.157 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as now or
hereafter amended (nothing provided herein shall affect liability incurred under this
Division because of the sale at retail of such motor vehicle to a lessor.)
J. Retailer maintaining a place of business in the Town, or any like term, shall mean
and include any retailer:
1. having or maintaining within the Town, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business, or any
agent or other representative operating within the Town under the authority
of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily,
or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the Town,
or
2. engaging in soliciting orders within the Town from users by means of
catalogues or other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted
within or without the Town.
K. Sale at retail. Any transfer of the ownership of or title to tangible personal property
to a purchaser, for the purposes of use or consumption. Sale at Retail includes any
transfer made for resale unless made in compliance with Sec. 25.10-7 of this
Division.
Transactions whereby the possession of the property is transferred but the seller
retains the title as security for payment of the selling price shall be deemed to be
sales.
Sale at retail shall be construed to include any transfer of the ownership of or title to
tangible personal property to a purchaser, for use or consumption by any other
person to whom such purchaser may transfer the tangible personal property without
a valuable consideration.
A person whose activities are organized and conducted primarily as a not-for-profit
service enterprise, and who engages in selling tangible personal property at retail
(whether to the public or merely to members and their guests) is engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail with respect to such
transactions, excepting only a person organized and operated exclusively for
charitable, religious or educational purposes either (1) to the extent of sales by such
SEC. 25.10-2(Cont.2)
person to its members, students, patients or inmates of tangible personal property to
be used primarily for the purposes of such person, or (2) to the extent of sales by
such person of tangible personal property which is not sold or offered for sale by
persons organized for profit.
The isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property at retail by a person
who does not hold himself out as being engaged (or who does not habitually engage)
in selling such tangible personal property at retail does not constitute engaging in a
business of selling such tangible personal property at retail within the meaning of
this Division; provided that any person who is engaged in a business which is not
subject to the tax imposed by this Division because of involving the sale of or a
contract to sell real estate or a construction contract to improve real estate, but who,
in the course of conducting such business, transfers tangible personal property to
users or consumers in the finished form in which it was purchased, and which does
not become real estate, under any provision of a construction contract or real estate
sale or real estate sales agreement entered into with some other person arising out of
or because of such nontaxable business, is engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail to the extent of the value of the tangible personal property
so transferred. If, in such a transaction, a separate charge is made for the tangible
personal property so transferred, the value of such property, for the purpose of this
Division, shall be the amount so separately charged, but not less than the fair market
value of such property.
A person who holds himself or herself out as being engaged (or who habitually
engages) in selling tangible personal property at retail is a person engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail hereunder with respect to such
sales (and not primarily in a service occupation) notwithstanding the fact that such
person designs and produces such tangible personal property on special order for the
purchaser and in such a way as to render the property of value only to such
purchaser.
L. Selling price. The consideration for a sale valued in money whether received in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property, other than as hereinafter
provided, and services, but not including the value of or credit given for traded-in
tangible personal property where the item that is traded-in is of like kind and
character as that which is being sold, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost or any other expense whatsoever, but shall not include charges that are
added to the price by the seller on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the
purchaser, the tax imposed upon the purchaser under this Division or on account of a
tax liability imposed upon the seller or the purchaser under any other ordinance of
the Town or of any other unit of local government or under any law of the State of
Illinois upon or in connection with such sale, purchase or use.
M. Tangible Personal Property means any item of tangible personal property which is
titled or registered with an agency of the State of Illinois. Tangible Personal
SEC. 25.10-2(Cont.3)
Property means items which are titled or registered with the State are motor vehicles,
aircraft, motorboats, sailboats exceeding 12 feet in length, snowmobiles, and
implements of husbandry and special mobile equipment for which the owner decides
to apply for an optional title. For the purposes of this Division:
1. The term "motor vehicle" includes passenger cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles
and any kind of vehicle which is required to be titled under the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-146), (including house trailers for which a
display certificate of title is required). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)
2. The term "implement of husbandry" means every vehicle designed and
adopted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising
operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in
connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry
provided that no farm wagon, wagon trailer or like vehicle having a capacity
of more than 400 bushels or a gross weight of more than 36,000 pounds,
shall be included hereunder (625 ILCS 5/1-130). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord.
No. 4143)
3. The term "special mobile equipment" means every vehicle not designed or
used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only
incidentally operated or moved over a highway, including but not limited to:
Ditch digging apparatus, well boring apparatus and road construction and
maintenance machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers,
bucket loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditches, leveling graders,
finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving
carryalls and scrapers, power shovels and drag lines, and self-propelled
cranes and earth moving equipment. The term does not include house
trailers, dump trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels, or
other vehicles designed for the transportation of persons or property to which
machinery has been attached (625 ILCS 5/1-191). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord.
No. 4143)
N. Tax collector. A "retailer" maintaining a place of business in the Town or a retailer
authorized by the Department to collect the tax herein imposed pursuant to Sec.
25.10-3 hereof.
O. Town. The Town of Normal, Illinois.
P. Use. The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible personal
property incident to the ownership of that property, except that it does not include
the sale of such property in any form as tangible personal property in the regular
course of business to the extent that such property is not first subjected to a use for
which it was purchased, and does not include the use of such property by its owner
for demonstration purposes.
SEC. 25.10-2(Cont.4)
Use does not mean the interim use of tangible personal property by a retailer before
he sells such tangible personal property and does not mean the physical
incorporation of tangible personal property, to the extent not first subjected to a use
for which it was purchased, as an ingredient or constituent, into other tangible
personal property
1. which is sold in the regular course of business, or
2. which the person incorporating such ingredient or constituent therein has
undertaken at the time of such purchase to cause to be transported
a. in interstate commerce to destinations outside the State of Illinois, or
b. to designate outside the Town and within the State of Illinois.
Provided that the property purchased is deemed to be purchased for the purpose of
resale, despite first being used, to the extent to which it is resold as an ingredient of
an internationally produced product or by-product of manufacturing.
(Sec. 25.10-2 Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.10-3 IMPOSITION OF TAX - COLLECTION BY SELLERS. Imposition of
tax: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, in the Town, any item of tangible personal
property which is purchased at retail from a retailer and which is titled or registered in the Town of
Normal with an agency of the State of Illinois, at a rate of three-quarters of one percent (3/4 of 1%)
of the selling price of such tangible personal property. (Amended 3/2/09 by Ord. No. 5240)
The tax imposed hereunder and the obligation to pay the same is upon the purchaser. In the
event that a vehicle or other item of tangible personal property is titled or registered in different
names, both the title holder and the person in whose name the vehicle or other item is registered are
jointly and severally liable for the tax. The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected from the
purchaser by the tax collector, as defined in Sec. 25.10-2 hereof, and remitted to the Department as
provided herein. The tax collector shall be liable to the Town for the amount of tax he is required to
collect. Retailers shall collect the tax from purchasers by adding the tax to the selling price of
tangible personal property, when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department.
Whenever possible, the tax imposed by this Division shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the selling price of the tangible personal property. The Department
may adopt and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the adding of such tax by retailers to
selling prices by prescribing bracket systems for the purpose of enabling such retailers to add and
collect, as far as practicable, the amount of such tax. The tax hereby imposed and not paid to a
retailer pursuant to this Section shall be paid to the Department directly by any person purchasing or
using such property within the Town, pursuant to Sec. 25.10-8 hereof. If any Seller collects an
amount (however designated) which purports to constitute taxes measured by receipts which are not
subject to such tax, or if any seller, in collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to
constitute taxes measured by receipts which are subject to tax under this Chapter, collects more
from the purchaser than the actual tax liability on the transaction, the purchaser shall have a legal
right to claim a refund of such amount from such seller. However, if such amount is not refunded to
SEC. 25.10-3(Cont.1)
the purchaser for any reason, the seller is liable to pay such amount to the Department. This
paragraph does not apply to an amount collected by the seller on receipts which are subject to tax
under this Chapter as long as such collection is made in compliance with the tax collection brackets
prescribed by the Department in its rules and regulations.
When the Town has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with any other
municipality or county to collect such other governmental unit’s use tax, the tax collector shall upon
notice from the Department collect such tax for sales at retail within the Town.
Affidavit of Exemption: Each purchaser at retail claiming an exemption from the tax
imposed by this Division shall complete at the time of purchase an Affidavit of Exemption on forms
provided by the Department. It shall be a violation of this division to supply false or misleading
information on such affidavit. The tax collector shall provide such affidavit to the purchaser and
submit any completed affidavit to the Department along with the appropriate tax return information.
(Sec. 25.10-3 Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 2013)
SEC. 25.10-4 EXEMPTIONS. Purchases or uses of tangible personal property under the
following circumstances shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this Division.
A. The proceeds from the sales of motor vehicles of the first division, or any motor
vehicle of the second division which is on the van configuration designed for the
transportation of not less than seven (7) nor more than sixteen (16) passengers, as
defined in Section 1-146 of the “Illinois Vehicle Code” (625 ILCS 5/1-146 et seq.)
which are used for automobile renting as defined in the “Automobile Renting
Occupation and Use Tax Act” (35 ILCS 155/1). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No.
4143)
B. The proceeds from the sale of personal property by a teacher-sponsored organization
affiliated with an elementary or secondary school located in Illinois.
C. The proceeds of that portion of the selling price of a passenger car the sale of which
is subject to the Replacement Vehicle Tax.
D. The proceeds of the sale of personal property to an Illinois County Fair Association
for use in conducting, operating or promoting the county fair.
E. The proceeds from the sale of personal property by a corporation, society,
association, foundation, institution or organization which is organized and operated
as a not-for-profit service enterprise for the benefit of persons 65 years of age or
older if such personal property was not purchased by the enterprise for the purpose
of resale by the enterprise.
F. The proceeds from the sale of personal property to any not-for-profit music or
dramatic arts organization which establishes, by such proof as the Department may
require by rule, that it has received an exemption under Section 501(C) (3) of the
SEC.25.10-4(Cont.1)
Internal Revenue Code and which is organized and operated for the presentation of
live public performances of musical or theatrical works on a regular basis.
G. Sales to any governmental body, or to any corporation, society, association,
foundation, or institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious
or educational purposes or any not-for-profit corporation, society, association,
foundation, institution or organization which has no compensated officers or
employees and which is organized and operated primarily for the recreation of
persons 55 years of age or older.
H. The proceeds from sales of tangible personal property to interstate carriers for hire
for use as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce or lessors under leases of one
year or longer executed or in effect at the time of purchase to interstate carriers for
hire for use as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce.
I. The proceeds from sales to owners, lessors or shippers of tangible personal property
which is utilized by interstate carriers for hire for use as rolling stock moving in
interstate commerce; The rolling stock exemption applies to rolling stock used by
an interstate carrier for hire, even just between points in Illinois, if such rolling stock
transports, for hire, persons whose journeys or property whose shipments originate
or terminate outside Illinois.
J. The proceeds from the sale of tangible personal property to a common carrier by rail
which receives the physical possession of such property in Illinois, and which
transports such property, or shares with another common carrier in the transportation
of such property, out of Illinois on a standard uniform bill of lading showing the
seller of the property as the shipper or consignor of such property to a destination
outside Illinois, for use outside Illinois.
K. However, such tax is not imposed upon the privilege of engaging in any business in
interstate commerce or otherwise, which business may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the Town, nor is
such tax imposed upon the sale of a motor vehicle in this Town to a nonresident
even though said motor vehicle is delivered to said nonresident in this Town, if said
motor vehicle is not to be titled to a resident of this Town provided however a use
tax shall be imposed and collected where the Town has entered into an
intergovernmental agreement with another municipality or county to collect such
municipality’s or county’s use tax for sales at retail within the Town.
L. The proceeds from the sales of motor vehicles of the first division which are leased
for a period in excess of twelve (12) months to a lessee who resides outside the
corporate limits of the Town of Normal or the City of Bloomington. (Subsection L
added 2/4/91 by Ord. No. 3955)
Any informal rulings, opinions or letters issued by the Department in response to any
inquiry or request for any opinion from any person regarding the coverage and applicability of these
SEC. 25.10-4(Cont.2)
exemptions to specific devices shall be published, maintained as a public record, and made available
for public inspection and copying. If the informal ruling, opinion or letter contains trade secrets or
other confidential information, where possible the Department shall delete such information prior to
publication.
If any seller collects an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such
seller for use tax liability measured by receipts which are not subject to use tax, or if any seller, in
collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such seller for use tax
liability measured by receipts which are subject to tax under this Division collects more from the
purchaser than the seller’s use tax liability on the transaction is, the purchaser shall have a legal right
to claim a refund of such amount from such seller. However, if such amount is not refunded to the
purchaser for any reason, the seller is liable to pay such amount to the Department. This paragraph
does not apply to an amount collected by the seller as reimbursement for the seller’s purchaser tax
liability on receipts which are subject to tax under this Division as long as such collection is made in
compliance with the tax collection brackets prescribed by the Department in its Rules and
Regulations.
SEC. 25.10-5 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. Every retailer maintaining a place
of business in the Town shall obtain a certificate of registration as a tax collector from the
Department no later than thirty (30) days after commencing such business or thirty (30) days after
the effective date of this Ordinance, whichever occurs later.
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the Department upon forms
furnished by it. Each such application shall be signed and verified by the applicant or a properly
accredited agent, which in the case of a corporation shall include the president, any vice president,
the secretary or treasurer or some other properly accredited agent and shall state:
A. the name of the applicant:
B. his residence address and the address of his principal place of business;
C. the address of the principal place of business from which he engages in the business
of selling tangible personal property at retail in the Town and the addresses of all
other places of business, if any (enumerating such addresses, if any, in a separate list
attached to and made a part of the application), from which he engages in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the Town;
D. the applicant’s most recent annual gross receipts from the retail sale of tangible
personal property whether or not incidental to the sale of service as reported to the
Illinois Department of Revenue;
E. the applicant’s estimated receipts from sales of tangible personal property at retail in
the Town for the current calendar year; and
F. such other information as the Department may reasonably require.
SEC. 25.10-5(Cont.1)
After notice by the Director, an applicant for or holder of a certificate of registration
hereunder shall, within thirty (30) days, furnish a bond from a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois, or a bond signed by two (2) personal sureties who have filed with
the Department sworn statements disclosing net assets equal to at least three (3) times the amount of
the bond to be required of such applicant, or a bond secured by an assignment of a bank account
or certificate of deposit, stocks or bonds, conditioned upon the applicant paying the Town all
monies becoming due under this Division. The Department shall fix the amount of such security in
each case, taking into consideration the amount of money expected to become due from the
applicant under this Division. The amount of security required by the Department shall be such as,
in its opinion, will protect the Town against failure to pay the amount which may become due from
the applicant under this Division, but the amount of the security required by the Department shall
not exceed three (3) times the amount of the applicant’s average monthly tax collection and
remission liability, or $50,000.00, whichever amount is lower. No certificate of registration under
this Division shall be issued by the Department until the applicant provides the Department with
satisfactory security as herein provided for.
Upon receipt of the application for a certificate of registration in proper form, and upon
approval by the Department of the security furnished by the applicant, the Department shall issue to
such applicant a certificate of registration.
If the person so registered states that he operates other places of business as a retailer in the
Town, the Department shall furnish him with a sub-certificate of registration for each such place of
business. All sub-certificates of registration shall bear the same registration number as appearing
upon the certificate of registration to which such sub-certificates relate.
Where the same person engages in two (2) or more businesses as a retailer in the Town,
which businesses are substantially different in character or engaged in under different trade names
or engaged in under other substantially dissimilar circumstances (so that it is more practicable, from
an accounting, auditing, or bookkeeping standpoint, for such business to be separately registered),
the Department may require or permit such person (subject to the same requirements concerning the
furnishing of security as those that are provided for hereinbefore in this Section as to each
application for a certificate of registration) to apply for and obtain a separate certificate of
registration for each such business or for any of such businesses, under a single certificate of
registration supplemented by related sub-certificates of registration.
With respect to security other than bonds (upon which the Department may sue in the event
of a forfeiture), if the tax collector fails to pay, when due, any amount whose payment such security
guarantees, the Department shall, after such liability is admitted by the tax collector or established
by the Department through the issuance of a final assessment that has become final under the law,
convert the security which that tax collector has furnished into money for the Town after first giving
the tax collector at least ten (10) days’ written notice, by registered or certified mail, to pay the
liability or forfeit such security to the Department. If the security consists of stocks or bonds or
other securities which are listed on a public exchange, the Department shall sell such securities
through such public exchange. If the security consists of a bank certificate of deposit, the
Department shall convert the security into money by demanding and collecting the amount of such
bank certificate of deposit from the bank which issued such certificate. If the security consists of a
SEC. 25.10-5(Cont.2)
type of stocks or other securities which are not listed on a public exchange, the Department shall sell
such security to the highest and best bidder after giving ten (10) days’ notice of the date, time and
place of the intended sale by publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the Town. If
the Department realized more than the amount of such liability from the security, plus the expenses
incurred by the Department in converting the security into money, the Department shall pay such
excess to the tax collector who furnished such security and the balance shall be paid into the
Corporation Fund of the Town.
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the Town and making sales of tangible
personal property for use in the Town shall, when collecting the tax as provided in Sec. 25.10-3 of
this Article from the purchaser, give the purchaser (if demanded by the purchaser) a receipt
therefore in the manner and form prescribed by the Department. Such receipt shall be sufficient to
relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which such receipt may refer. Each such
retailer shall list with the Department the names and addresses of all his agents operating in the
Town and the location of any and all of his distribution or sales houses, offices of other places of
business in the Town.
SEC. 25.10-6 TAX RETURNS; PAYMENTS; COLLECTION FEES; DEPOSIT OF
COLLECTION. Except as provided in this Section, every retailer required or authorized to collect
the tax imposed by this Division shall, on or before the last day of each calendar month, file a return
for the preceding calendar month with the Department, stating:
A. The name and tax identification number of the retailer;
B. His residence address and the address of his principal place of business and the
address of the principal place of business (if that is a different address) from which
he engages in the business of selling tangible personal property in the Town;
C. Total amount of receipts received by him during the preceding calendar month from
sales of tangible personal property in the Town by him during such preceding
calendar month;
D. Total amount received by him during the preceding calendar month on charge and
time sales of tangible personal property in the Town by him prior to the month for
which the return is filed;
E. Deductions allowed by law;
F. Gross receipts which were received by him during the preceding calendar month and
upon the basis of which the tax upon purchasers from him is imposed;
G. The amount of tax due;
H. The amount of penalty due, if any; and
I. Such other reasonable information as the Department may require.
SEC. 25.10-6(Cont.1)
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Division concerning the time within which a
retailer may file his return, in the case of any retailer who ceases to engage in a kind of business
which makes him responsible for filing returns under this Division, such retailer shall file a final
return under this Division with the Department not more than one month after discontinuing such
business.
Where the same person has more than one business registered with the Department under
separate registrations under this Division, such person may not file each return that is due as a single
return covering all such registered businesses, but shall file separate returns for each such registered
business.
Refunds to purchasers made by the retailer during the preceding return period shall be
allowed as a deduction under Subsection E of this Section, in case the retailer had theretofore
included the receipts from such sale in a return filed by him and has remitted the tax imposed by this
Division with respect to such receipts.
Where the retailer is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of such corporation shall be
signed by the President, Vice President, Secretary or Treasurer or by the properly accredited agent
of such corporation or by the chief executive officer or highest ranking manager.
Except as provided in this Section, the retailer filing the return under this Section shall, at
the time of filing such return, pay to the Department the amount of tax imposed by this Division less
a discount of 1.75% which is allowed to reimburse the seller for the expenses incurred in collecting
the tax, keeping records, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
Department on request. However, no discount shall be allowed for any return which is filed late or
for which full payment is not received when due. (Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
All such deposits shall be credited against the tax collector’s liabilities under this Division.
If the tax collector’s average monthly liability to the Department under this Division was
$25,000.00 or more during the preceding four (4) complete calendar quarters, he shall file a return
with the Department each month by the end of the month next following the month during which
such liability is incurred and shall make payments to the Department on or before the 7th, 15th, 22nd
and last day of the month during which such liability is incurred in an amount equal to ¼ of the tax
collector’s actual liability for the month or an amount set by the Department not to exceed ¼ of the
average monthly liability of the tax collector to the Department for the preceding four (4) complete
calendar quarters (excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest liability in such
4 quarter period). The amount of such quarter monthly payments shall be credited against the final
tax liability on the tax collector’s return for that month. Once applicable, the requirement of the
making of quarter monthly payments to the Department shall continue until such tax collector’s
average monthly liability to the Department during the preceding four (4) complete calendar
quarters (excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest liability) is less than
$9,000.00, or until such tax collector’s average monthly liability to the Department as computed for
each calendar quarter of the 4 preceding complete calendar quarter period is less than $10,000.00.
If any such quarter monthly payment is not paid at the time or in the amount required by this
Section, then the 1.75% tax collector’s discount shall be reduced by 1.75% of the difference
SEC. 25.10-6(Cont.2)
between the minimum amount due as a payment and the amount of such quarter monthly payment
actually and timely paid, except insofar as the tax collector has previously made payments for that
month to the Department in excess of the minimum payments previously due as provided in this
Section. The Department shall make reasonable rules and regulations to govern the quarter monthly
payment amount and quarter monthly payment dates for tax collectors who file on other than a
calendar monthly basis.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, for the first twelve (12) month
period this tax is in effect the Department may estimate what the amount of liability from any tax
collector would have been for prior periods if the tax hereunder had been in effect for such periods
and direct the frequency of remittance of the tax and filing of returns in accordance with the
provisions of this Section on the basis of such estimates.
If any such payment or deposit provided for in this Section exceed the tax collector's present
and probable future liabilities under this Division, the Department shall issue to the taxpayer no later
than sixty (60) days after the date of payment a credit memorandum, which may be submitted by the
tax collector to the Department in payment of liability subsequently to be remitted by the tax
collector to the Department or be assigned by the tax collector to a similar tax collector under this
Division, in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations to be prescribed by the Department.
Any deposit previously made by a tax collector who is required to make quarter monthly
payments under this Article shall be applied against the tax collector's liability to the Department
under this Division for the month preceding the first month in which the tax collector is required to
make such quarter monthly payments. If the deposit exceeds that liability, the Department may
issue the tax collector a credit memorandum for the excess.
The money received by the Department under the provisions of this Division shall be
deposited in the General Funds of the Town as directed by the Town Council.
The Department may require the tax collector to prepare and file with the Department on a
form prescribed by the Department within fifteen (15) days after filing the State income tax return
for his fiscal year an annual information return for such fiscal year. Such annual return to the
Department shall include a statement of receipts as shown by the retailer's last State income tax
return. If the total receipts of the business as reported in the State income tax return do not agree
with the receipts reported to the Department for the same period, the retailer shall attach to his
annual return a schedule showing a reconciliation of the two (2) amounts and the reasons for the
difference. The retailer's annual return to the Department shall also disclose any additional
reasonable information which the Department deems would be helpful in determining the accuracy
of the quarter-monthly or monthly returns filed by such seller as provided for in this Section. The
provisions of this Section concerning the filing of an annual information return do not apply to a
retailer who is not required to file an income tax return with the United States Government.
If the annual information return by this Section is not filed with and as required, the tax
collector shall be liable for a penalty equal to 1/6 of 1% of the amount due from such tax collector
under this Division during the period to be covered by the annual return for each month or fraction
SEC. 25.10-6(Cont.3)
of a month until such return is filed as required, the penalty to be assessed and collected in the same
manner as any other penalty provided for this Division.
The president, vice president, secretary or treasurer, chief executive officer, proprietor,
owner or highest-ranking manager shall sign any return required to be filed under this Section to
certify the accuracy of the information contained therein. Any person who willfully signs any such
return containing false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of a violation of this Division and
punished accordingly. The return forms prescribed by the Department shall include a warning that
the person signing such return may be liable for a penalty as provided by this Division.
Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail as a
concessionaire or other type of seller at art shows, flea markets and similar exhibitions or events
may be required to make a daily report of the amount of such sales to the Department and to make a
daily payment of the full amount of tax due. The Department shall impose this requirement when it
finds that there is a significant risk of loss of revenue to the Town at such an exhibition or event.
Such a finding shall be based on evidence that a substantial number of concessionaires or other
sellers who are not residents of the Town will be engaging in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail at the exhibition or event, or other evidence of a significant risk of loss of
revenue to the Town. The Department shall notify concessionaires and other sellers affected by the
imposition of this requirement. In the absence of notification by the Department, the
concessionaires and other sellers shall file their returns as otherwise required in this Section.
With respect to motor vehicles and aircraft, every retailer selling this kind of tangible
personal property shall file, with the Department, upon a form to be prescribed and supplied by the
Department, a separate return for each such item of tangible personal property which the retailer
sells, except that where, in the same transaction, a retailer of motor vehicles transfers more than one
motor vehicle to another motor vehicle retailer for the purpose of resale, such seller for resale may
report the transfer of all the motor vehicles involved in that transaction to the Department on the
same uniform invoice transaction reporting return form.
Each transaction reporting return in the case of motor vehicles shall be the same document
as the Uniform Invoice referred to in Section 5-402 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and must show the
name and address of the seller, the name and address of the purchaser, the amount of the selling
price, including the amount allowed by the retailer for traded-in property, if any; the amount
allowed by the retailer for the traded-in tangible personal property, if to the extent to which Section
25.10-2 of this Division allows an exemption for the value of traded-in property; the balance
payable after deducting such trade-in allowance from the total selling price; the amount of tax due
from the retailer with respect to such transaction; the amount of tax collected from the purchaser by
the retailer on such transaction (or satisfactory evidence that such tax is not due in that particular
instance, if that is claimed to be the fact); the place and date of the sale; a sufficient identification of
the property sold; such other information as is required in Section 5-402 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, and such other information as the Department may reasonably require.
Such transaction reporting return in the case of aircraft must show the name and address of
the retailer; the name and address of the purchaser; the amount of the selling price including the
amount allowed by the retailer for traded-in property, if any; the amount allowed by the retailer for
SEC. 25.10-6(Cont.4)
the traded-in tangible personal property, if any, to the extent to which Sec. 25.10-2 of this Ordinance
allowed an exemption for the traded-in property; the balance payable after deducting such trade-in
allowance from the total selling price; the amount of tax due from the retailer with respect to such
transaction (or satisfactory evidence that such tax is not due in that particular instance, if that is
claimed to be the fact); the place and date of the sale, a sufficient identification of the property sold,
and such other information as the Department may reasonably require.
Such transaction reporting return shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after the date of
delivery of the item that is being sold but may be filed by the retailer at any time sooner than that if
he chooses to do so. With each such transaction reporting return, the retailer shall remit the proper
amount of tax due (or shall submit satisfactory evidence that the sale is not taxable if that is the
case), to the Department or its agents, whereupon the Department shall issue, in the purchaser’s
name, a tax receipt (or a certificate of exemption if the Department is satisfied that the particular
sales is tax exempt).
If the purchaser or user who would otherwise pay tax to the retailer wants the transaction
reporting return filed and the payment of tax or proof of exemption made to the Department before
the retailer is willing to take these actions and such purchaser or user may certify to the fact of such
delay by the retailer, and may, upon the Department being satisfied of the truth of such certification,
transmit the information required by the transaction reporting return and the remittance for tax or
proof of exemption directly to the Department and obtain his tax receipt or exemption
determination, in which event the transaction reporting return and tax remittance, if a tax payment
was required, shall be credited by the Department to the proper retailer’s account with the
Department, but without the 1.75% discount provided for in this Section being allowed. When the
purchaser or user pays the tax directly to the Department, he shall pay the tax in the same amount
and in the same form in which it would be remitted if the tax had been remitted to the Department
by the retailer.
Any retailer filing a return under this Section shall also include (for the purpose of paying
tax thereon) the total tax, if any, imposed upon him hereunder for the purpose or use of tangible
personal property purchased by him at retail from a retailer, but as to which the tax imposed by this
Chapter was not collected from the retailer filing such return, and such retailer shall remit the
amount of such tax to the Department when filing such return.
SEC. 25.10-7 RESALE NUMBER. If the purchaser is not registered with the Department
as a tax collector, but claims to be a re-seller of the tangible personal property in such a way that
the purchaser’s purchase or use if not taxable under this Division or under some other tax,
collection of which the Department may administer, such purchaser (except in the case of an outof-
Town purchaser who will always resell and deliver the property to his customers outside the
Town) shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which
will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for tax under this Division or under
some other tax law which the Department may administer and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the
applicant and shall certify such number to him. The Department may cancel any such number
SEC. 25.10-7(Cont.1)
which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to make a purchase or use tax-free
when the purchase in fact is not a purchase for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
purchaser’s having discontinued the making of resales of the property. Except as provided
hereinabove in this Section, no purchase or use shall be made tax-free on the ground of the retailer’s
sale being a sale for resale unless the purchaser has an active registration number or resale number
from the Department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the
retailer that any purchase or use by such purchaser is non-taxable because of the retailer’s sale being
a sale for resale.
SEC. 25.10-8 PAYMENT BY PURCHASER-LESSOR. When tangible personal
property is purchased from a retailer by a purchaser who did not pay the tax imposed by this
Division to the retailer, and who does not file returns with the Department as a retailer under Sec.
25.10-6 of this Division, such purchaser (by the last day of the month following the calendar month
in which such purchaser makes any payment upon the selling price of such property) shall, except
as provided in this Section, file a return with the Department and pay the tax upon that portion of the
selling price so paid by the purchaser during the preceding calendar month. When tangible personal
property is purchased by a lessor, under a lease for one year or longer, executed or in effect at the
time of purchase to an interstate carrier for hire, who did not pay the tax imposed by this Division to
the retailer, such lessor (by the last day of the month following the calendar month in which such
property reverts to the use of such lessor) shall file a return with the Department and pay the tax
upon the fair market value of such property on the date of such reversion. Such return shall be filed
on a form prescribed by the Department and shall contain such information as the Department may
reasonably require. Such return and payment from the purchaser shall be submitted to the
Department sooner than the last day of the month after the month in which the purchase is made to
the extent that they may be necessary in order to secure the title to a motor vehicle or the certificate
of registration for an aircraft. (Amended 8/17/92 by Ord. No. 4077)
When a purchaser pays a tax imposed by this Division directly to the Department, the
Department (upon request therefore from such purchaser) shall issue an appropriate receipt to such
purchaser showing that he had paid such tax to the Department. Such receipt shall be sufficient to
relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which such receipt may refer. A purchaser
or user who is liable to pay tax directly to the Department only occasionally and not on a frequently
recurring basis, and who is not required to file returns with the Department as a retailer under Sec.
25.10-6 of this Division, need not register with the Department. However, if such a purchaser or
user has a frequently recurring direct tax liability to pay to the Department, such purchaser or user
shall be required to register with the Department on forms prescribed by the Department and to
obtain and display a certificate of registration from the Department. In that event, all of the
provisions of Sec. 25.10-6 of this Division concerning the filing of regular monthly, quarterly or
annual tax returns and all of the provisions of this Division concerning the requirements for
registrants to post bond or other security with the Department, as the provisions now exist or may
hereafter be amended, shall apply to such purchasers or users.
SEC. 25.10-9 FILING; PENALTIES; SUIT FOR COLLECTIONS. In case any person
liable for payment of the tax imposed by this Division fails to file a return when and as herein
required, but hereafter, prior to the Department’s issuance of a notice of tax liability under this
SEC. 25.10-9(Cont.1)
Section, files a return and pays the tax, he shall also pay a penalty as set forth in Division 13 of this
Chapter.
In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this Division files the return at
the time required by this Division but fails to pay the tax, or any part thereof, when due, a penalty as
set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter shall be added thereto.
In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this Division fails to file a
return when and as herein required, but thereafter, prior to the Department’s issuance of a notice of
tax liability under this Section, files a return but fails to pay the entire tax, a penalty as set forth in
Division 13 of this Chapter shall be added thereto.
In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this Ordinance, fails to file a
return, the Department shall determine the amount of tax due from him according to its best
judgment and information, which amount so fixed by the Department shall be prima facie correct
and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown in such
determination. In making any such determination of tax due, it shall be permissible for the
Department to show a figure that represents the tax due for any given period of six (6) months
instead of showing the amount of tax due for each month separately. Proof of such determination
by the Department may be made at any hearing before the Department or in any legal proceeding by
a reproduced copy of the Department's record relating thereto in the name of the Department under
the certificate of the Director. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be admitted into
evidence before the Department or in any legal proceeding and shall be prima facie proof of the
correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown therein. The Department shall issue to the tax
collector or person liable for payment of the tax a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax
claimed by the Department to be due, together with a penalty as set forth in Division 13 this
Chapter. (Amended 1/16/96 by Ord. No. 4366)
However, where the failure to file any tax return required under this Division on the date
prescribed therefor (including any extensions thereof), is due to reasonable cause, the penalties
imposed by this Division shall not apply.
In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty provided for in this
Division, or interest, when due, the Department may bring suit against the tax collector or the
purchaser or user to recover the amount of such tax or portion thereof, or penalty or interest; or, if
the tax collector or purchaser or user has died or become incompetent, may file a claim therefore
against his estate; provided that no such suit with respect to any tax, or portion thereof, or penalty,
or interest shall be instituted more than two (2) years after the date any proceedings in court for
review thereof have terminated or the time for the taking thereof has expired without such
proceedings being instituted, except with the consent of the person from whom such tax or penalty
or interest is due; nor, except with such consent, shall such suit be instituted more than two (2) years
after the date any return is filed with the Department in cases where the return constitutes the basis
for the suit for unpaid tax or portion thereof, or penalty provided for in this Division, or interest:
Provided that the time limitation period on the Department’s right to bring any such suit shall not
run during any period of time in which the order of any court has the effect of enjoining or
restraining the Department from bringing such suit.
SEC. 25.10-9(Cont.2)
The collection of tax or penalty or interest by any means provided for herein shall not be a
bar to collection by and any other means or to any prosecution under this Division.
In addition to any penalty provided for in this Division, any amount of tax which is not paid
when due shall bear interest at the rate set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter from the date when
such tax becomes past due until such tax is paid or a judgment therefore is obtained by the
Department; provided, if an audit of a tax collector’s books and records is extended with the tax
collector’s consent, at the request of and for the convenience of the Department, beyond the date on
which the statute of limitations upon the issuance of a notice of tax liability by the Department
otherwise would run, no interest shall accrue during the period of such extension. (Sec. 25.10-9
Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.10-10 RECORDS; AUDITS. Every person engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the Town shall keep records and books of all such sales,
together with invoices, sales records, copies of bills of sale, inventories prepared as of December 31
of each year or otherwise annually as has been the custom in the specific trade and other pertinent
papers and documents. Every person who is engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the Town and who, in connection with such business, also engages in other
activities, shall keep such additional records and books of all such activities as will accurately reflect
the character and scope of such activities and the amount of receipts realized therefrom.
All books and records and other papers and documents which are required by this Division
to be kept shall be kept in the English language and shall, at all times during business hours of the
day, be subject to inspection by the Department or its duly authorized agents and employees.
To support deductions made on the tax return form, or authorized under this Division, on
accounts of receipts from isolated or occasional sales, on account of receipts from sales to
government bodies or other exempted types of purchasers, on account of receipts from sales in
interstate commerce, and on account of receipts from any other kind of transaction that is not
taxable under this Division, entries in any books, records or other pertinent papers or documents of
the tax collector in relation thereto shall be in detail sufficient to show the name and address of the
tax collector’s customer in each such transaction, the character of every such transaction, the date of
every such transaction, the amount of receipts realized from every such transaction, and such other
information as may be necessary to establish the nontaxable character of such transaction under this
Division.
It shall be presumed that all sales of tangible personal property are subject to tax under this
Division until the contrary is established, and the burden of proving that a transaction is not taxable
hereunder shall be upon the person who would be required to remit the tax to the Department if such
transaction is taxable. In the course of any audit or investigation or hearing by the Department with
reference to a given taxpayer, if the Department finds that the taxpayer lacks documentary evidence
needed to support the taxpayer’s claim to exemption from the tax hereunder, the Department is
authorized to notify the taxpayer in writing to produce such evidence, and the taxpayer shall have 60
days subject to the right in the Department to extend this period on request for good cause shown or
on its own motion from the date when such notice is sent to the taxpayer by certified or registered
mail (or delivered to the taxpayer if the notice is served personally) in which to obtain and produce
SEC. 25.10-10(Cont.1)
such evidence for the Department’s inspection, failing which the matter shall be closed, and the
transaction shall be conclusively presumed to be taxable hereunder.
Books and records and other papers reflecting gross receipts received during any period with
respect to which the Department is authorized to issue notices of tax liability as provided by Sec.
25.10-9 and Sec. 25.10-10 of this Division shall be preserved until the expiration of such period
unless the Department, in writing, shall authorize their destruction or disposal prior to such
expiration.
SEC. 25.10-11 PROCESS; SERVICE. Any resident of the Town who incurs liability
under this Division and who subsequently removes from the Town or conceals his whereabouts, and
any person who incurs tax liability under this Division as a purchaser in the Town and who removes
from the Town or conceals his whereabouts, shall be deemed thereby to appoint the City Clerk his
agent for the service of process or notice in any or judicial or administrative proceeding under this
Division. Such process or notice shall be served by the Department to the City Clerk by leaving, at
the office of the City Clerk at least fifteen (15) days before the return day of such process or notice,
a true and certified copy thereof, and by sending to the taxpayer by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, a like and true certified copy, with an endorsement thereon of the service upon said
City Clerk, addressed to such taxpayer or tax collector at his last known address.
Service of process of notice in the manner provided for in this Section, under the
circumstances specified in this Section, shall be of the same force and validity as if served upon the
taxpayer personally within the Town. Proof of such service upon the taxpayer through the City
Clerk as his agent and by mailing to the last known address of the taxpayer may be made in such
judicial or administrative proceeding by the affidavit of the Director, or by his duly authorized
representative who made such service, with a copy of the process or notice that was so served
attached to such affidavit.
SEC. 25.10-12 RULES AND REGULATIONS. It shall be the duty of the Department to
collect and receive the tax imposed by this Division. The Department shall keep an accurate and
separate account of all such tax payments received by it showing the name and address of the person
remitting the tax and the date of each payment. The Director is hereby empowered to adopt and
promulgate, and to enforce, rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Division, including provisions for reexamination,
correction and amendment of all returns. The Director, or any agent or employee
designated in writing by him, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
tax collector during regular business hours, in order to certify the accuracy of any return made, or if
no return was made, to ascertain the tax imposed by this Division.
SEC. 25.10-13 ERROR; CLAIM FOR CREDIT; HEARING.
A. Whenever it appears to a person paying or remitting the tax that an amount of tax,
interest or penalty has been paid in error to the Department by him, whether such
amount be paid through a mistake of fact or error of law, not later than one (1) year
from the date upon which such payment was made, such person may file a claim for
SEC. 25.10-13(Cont.1)
credit or refund with the Department on forms provided by said Department for that
purpose.
B. A claim for credit or refund shall be considered to have been filed with the
Department on the date upon which it is received by the Department, and receipt of
any claim for credit filed under this Section shall be acknowledged by the Director
of any designated person on his behalf, said receipt to describe the claim in sufficient
detail as to identify it, and to state the date upon which the claim was received by the
Department.
C. As soon as practicable after a claim for credit or refund is filed, the Director, or his
designate, shall examine the same and determine the amount of credit or refund due,
if any, and shall issue a Notice of Tentative Determination of Claim and notify the
claimant of such determination. If the claimant disagrees with the determination, he
shall file a protest and challenge thereto within the twenty (20) days allowed. The
City Manager, or his designate, shall fix the time and place for a hearing thereon,
giving notice to the claimant thereof, not less than seven (7) days prior thereto. At
any hearing held as herein provided, the Tentative Determination of Claim shall be
prima facie correct and the burden shall be upon the claimant to prove that it is
incorrect. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, a decision shall be made by the City
Manager, or his designate, and notice thereof given to the claimant. In the event no
protest or challenge to the Tentative Determination of Claim is filed within the
twenty (20) day period hereinabove set forth, said notice shall thereafter become and
operate as a final determination.
D. The Director may in his discretion issue a letter of credit to a claimant who may be
able to use said credit in the foreseeable future, or a refund certificate in lieu of a
credit memorandum on application by a person who cannot use said credit, or sell or
assign the same. Refund certificates shall be numbered serially as they are issued
and shall be paid in the order of their issuance from funds that are appropriated to
the Department for that purpose.
SEC. 25.10-14 DEFICIENCY DEMAND; NOTICE; HEARING.
A. If it shall appear to the Director that any person has violated any provision of this
Division or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or if the amount of any
tax payment is incorrect in that it does not include all taxes payable for such calendar
quarter or period, or if the Director shall find that the collection of any taxes which
have accrued but are not yet due will be jeopardized by delay, and declares said
taxes to be immediately due and payable, or if it shall appear to the Director that he
has made any final assessment which did not include taxes payable for the periods
involved, or if it appears to the Director that any person has, by reason of any act or
omission or by operation of law, become liable for the payment of any taxes, interest
or penalties, the Director may in any of the above events determine and assess the
amount of such taxes of deficiency, as the case may be, together with the interest and
penalties due and unpaid, and immediately serve notice upon such person of such
SEC. 25.10-14(Cont.1)
determination and assessment and make a demand for payment of the tax together
with interest and penalties thereon. If the person incurring any such liability has
died, such assessment may at the discretion of the Director be made against his
personal representative. Such determination and assessment by the Director shall be
final at the expiration of forty-five (45) days from the date of the service of such
written notice thereof and demand for payment, unless such person shall have filed
with the City Manager a written protest and a petition for a hearing, specifying its
objections thereto. Upon the receipt of such petition within the forty-five (45) days
allowed, the City Manager, or his designee, shall fix the time and place for a hearing
and shall notify the petitioner thereof. The Director may amend his determination
and assessment at any time before it becomes final. In the event of such
amendment, the person affected shall be given notice thereof and an opportunity to
be heard in connection therewith. At any hearing held as herein provided, the
determination and the burden shall be upon the protesting person to prove that it is
incorrect. Upon the conclusion of such hearing, a decision shall be made by the City
Manager, or his designate, either canceling, increasing, modifying or affirming such
determination or assessment and notice thereof given to the petitioner. Such notice
shall contain a statement by the City Manager, or his designee, of the cost of the
certification of the record computed at the rate of five (5) cents per one hundred
(100) words, which cost shall be charged to the petitioner if the determination or
assessment is affirmed. The record shall consist of the notices and demands caused
to be served by the Director, the written protest and petition for hearing, the
testimony introduced at such hearing, the exhibits produced at such hearing, or
certified copies thereof, the decisions of the City Manager, or his designee, and such
other documents in the nature of pleading filed in the proceeding. (Amended
1/16/96 by Ord. No. 4366)(Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
B. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the Corporation
Counsel shall, upon the request of the Department, bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Town in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
C. If the City Manager, after notice and hearing, shall find that any person has willfully
evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this Division, he
may suspend or revoke all Town licenses held by such tax evader. Said person shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven (7)
days after notice is given to him of the time and place of the hearing to be held,
addressed to him at this last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and
finding, any license issued by the Town possessed by said person may be
temporarily suspended. Any suspension or revocation of any license shall not release
or discharge said person from his civil liability for the payment or collection and
remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense.
SEC. 25.10-15 INVESTIGATION; HEARING; EVIDENCE. For the purpose of
administering and enforcing the provisions of this Division, the City Manager, or any officer or
employee of the Department or Town designated, in writing, by the City Manager thereof, may
SEC. 25.10-15(Cont.1)
hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Division and may
examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the sales or purchases of
services of any such person, and may require the attendance of such person or any officer or
employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge of such business, and may take
testimony and require proof for its information. In the conduct of any investigation or hearing,
neither the Department nor any officer or employee thereof shall be bound by the technical rules
of evidence, and no informality in any proceeding, or in the manner of taking testimony, shall
invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made or approved or confirmed by the
Department. The City Manager, the Director, or any officer or employee of the Department or
Town authorized by the City Manager or Director thereof, shall have power to administer oaths
to such persons. The books, papers, records and memoranda of the Department, or parts thereof,
may be proved in any hearing, investigation, or legal proceeding by a reproduced copy thereof
under the certificate of the Director. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be
admitted into evidence before the Department or in any legal proceeding.
SEC. 25.10-16 TESTIMONY; PERJURY. No person shall be excused from testifying or
from producing any books, papers, records or memoranda in any investigations or upon any
hearing, when ordered to do so by the City Manager or Department or any officer or employee
thereof, upon the grounds that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, may tend to
incriminate him or subject him to a criminal penalty, but no person shall be prosecuted or subjected
to any criminal penalty for, or on account of, any transaction made or thing concerning which he
may testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, before the City Manager or Department
or an officer or employee thereof; provided, that such immunity be granted by the appropriate
executive branch of government and extend only to a natural person who in obedience to a
subpoena, gives testimony under oath or produces evidence, documentary or otherwise, under oath.
No person so testifying shall be exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in
so testifying.
SEC. 25.10-17 SUBPOENAS; CONTEMPT. The Department, the City Manager, or any
officer or employee of the Town or Department designated, in writing, by the Director, shall at its or
his own instance, or on the written request of any other party to the proceeding, issue subpoenas
duces tecum requiring the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. All subpoenas and
subpoenas duces tecum issued under the terms of this Division may be served by any person of full
age. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of witnesses
before the Circuit Court of this State; such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further
attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Town or any other employee
thereof, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses of the Department, and when
the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to any such proceeding, the Town may
require that the cost of service of the subpoena or subpoena duces tecum and the fee of the witness
be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Town, in its
discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. A subpoena or
subpoena duces tecum issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued
out of a court.
Any circuit of this State, or any judge thereof, upon the application of the City Manager or
any officer or employee of the Town, or upon the application of any other party to the proceeding,
SEC. 25.10-17(Cont.1)
may, in its or his discretion, compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers,
records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the Department or any officer or
employee thereof conducting an investigation or holding a hearing authorized by this Division by an
attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be
compelled before said court.
The Department or any officer or employee thereof, or any other party in an investigation or
hearing before the Department, may cause the depositions of witnesses to be taken in the manner
prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State, and to that end compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda.
SEC. 25.10-18 PRIVACY. All information received by the Department from returns filed
under this Division, or from any investigation conducted under this Division, shall be confidential,
except for official purposes, and any person who divulges any such information in any manner,
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
Nothing in this Division prevents the Director from publishing or making available to the
public the names and addresses of persons filing returns under this Division, or reasonable statistics
concerning the operation of the tax by grouping the contents of returns for the information in any
individual return is not disclosed.
Nothing in this Division prevents the Director from divulging to the United States
Government or the government of any state, or any officer or agency thereof, for exclusively official
purposes, information received by the Department in administering this Division, providing that
such other governmental agency agrees to divulge requested tax information to the Department.
The Department’s furnishing of information derived from a tax collector’s return or from an
investigation conducted under this Division to the surety on a tax collector’s bond that has been
furnished to the Department under this Article, in order to support the Department’s demand for
payment from such surety under this bond, is an official purpose within the meaning of this Section.
The furnishing upon request of the Town’s Auditor or his authorized agents, for official use,
or returns filed and information related thereto under this Division is deemed to be an official
purpose within the meaning of this Section.
SEC. 25.10-19 SERVICES OF NOTICES. Whenever notice is required by this
Ordinance, such notice may be given by United States registered or certified mail, addressed to the
person concerned at his last known address, and proof of such mailing shall be sufficient for the
purposes of this Division. Notice of any hearing provided for by this Division shall be so given not
less than seven (7) days prior to the day fixed for the hearing. Following the initial contact of a
person represented by an attorney, the Department shall not contact the person concerned but shall
only contact the attorney representing the person concerned.
All hearings provided for in this Division shall be at the Town’s office or at a place
designated by the hearing officer.
SEC. 25.10-20
SEC. 28.10-20 CORPORATIONS; OFFICERS. Any officer or employee of any
corporation subject to the provisions of this Division who has the control, supervision or
responsibility of filing returns and collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein
imposed and who willfully fails to file such return or to collect and make such payment to the
Department shall be personally liable for such amounts, including interest and penalties thereon, in
the event that after proper proceedings for the collection of such amounts, as provided in this
Division, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts to the Department; and the personal
liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the
Corporation.
SEC. 25.10-21 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. Any person found guilty of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Division except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than
$10,000.00 for the first offense and not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $100,000.00 or five (5)
times the amount of tax imposed, if any, whichever is higher, for the second and each subsequent
offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the
imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.) A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof. (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No. 4143)(Amended 6/3/02
by Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 25.10-22 LEGISLATIVE INTENT - SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this
Division or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this Division which can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this end each such invalid provision
or invalid application of this Division is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Division. In
particular, but without limitation, each provision creating an exception to or an exemption or
exclusion from the imposition of the tax is severable. It is hereby declared to be the legislative
intent of the Town Council that this Division would have been adopted had any such
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or application not been included.
(Entire Division 10 Added 5/21/90 by Ord. No. 3910)
SEC. 25.11-1
DIVISION 11
SEC. 25.11-1 ENTITLEMENT. This Division shall be known and cited as the Town of
Normal privilege tax upon the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail, and the tax herein
imposed shall be known and cited as the Town of Normal privilege tax upon the privilege of
purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail.
SEC. 25.11-2 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Division, whenever any of the
following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them
in this section:
A. Alcoholic liquor. Alcoholic liquor is defined in the same manner as the term is
defined in Sec. 4.2-1 of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended, except, however, the term shall not include alcoholic liquor beverages
purchased for immediate consumption on the premises where sold. (Amended
11/18/02 – Eff. 1/1/03)
B. Liquor establishment. Any premises required to obtain a retail liquor license
pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended, and any premises which may sell alcoholic liquor at retail without a Town
of Normal license.
C. Owner. Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in conducting
the operation of a liquor establishment so as to entitle such a person or persons to all
or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
D. Person. The term shall mean any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm co-partnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association,
syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual,
cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, whenever the term "person" is used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations
shall mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
E. Sale at retail. Means any transfer of the ownership of alcoholic liquor to a purchaser
for the purposes of use or consumption and shall include any transfer to a purchaser
for use or consumption by any other person to whom such purchaser may transfer
the alcoholic liquor without a valuable consideration.
F. Town. The Town of Normal.
SEC. 25.11-3 IMPOSITION OF TAX. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the
privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at any liquor establishment in the Town, a tax of four
percent (4%) of the purchase price, exclusive of any other tax charged for such alcoholic liquor.
SEC. 25.11-4
SEC. 25.11-4 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
A. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the
person who seeks the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail at any liquor
establishment, said person hereinafter referred to as "consumer".
B. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of every liquor establishment
to secure said tax from the consumer of a liquor establishment and remit to the Town
of Normal said tax under the rules and regulations prescribed by the City Manager
and as otherwise provided in this article.
SEC. 25.11-5 COLLECTION OF TAX. Every person required to collect the tax levied by
this article shall secure said tax from the consumer at the time he collects payment for the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail. The amount due under the tax provided in this article shall be stated
separately on the invoice receipt or other statement or memorandum of the payment given to the
consumer at the time of payment, unless the person required to collect the tax does not have a cash
register that separately states such tax. In any event the person required to collect the tax shall keep
records that clearly support total liquor sales and liquor taxes due hereunder. (Amended 3/21/94 by
Ord. No. 4215)
SEC. 25.11-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager of the Town of Normal
may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Division
concerning the enforcement and application of this Division. The term "rules and regulations"
includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination whether or not the tax imposed by this
Division applies.
SEC. 25.11-7 FILING OF RETURN. The owner or owners of each liquor establishment
within the Town of Normal shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each monthly
period on forms prescribed by the City Manager. The returns shall be due on or before the 25th day
of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period. At the time of filing said
returns, the owner shall remit to the Town of Normal all taxes collected for the period to which the
tax return applies.
SEC. 25.11-8 FAILURE TO PAY, COLLECT, OR REMIT TAX. If for any reason any
tax is not collected or remitted when due, interest as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter on the
amount of tax which remains unremitted shall be added and collected. Additionally, a one (1) time
late filing penalty as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter may be imposed and collected for any
filings received or payments remitted after the 25th of the month. If for any reason, a tax return is
not filed before the Town sends a Notice of Tax Due, a penalty as set forth in Division 13 of this
Chapter may be imposed and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay, collect, or remit any
tax as herein provided, the Corporation Counsel upon the request of the City Manager shall bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce compliance in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Sec.
25.11-8 Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.11-9
SEC. 25.11-9 RECORDS.
A. Every owner, manager, or operator of a liquor establishment in the Town of Normal
shall keep books and records which, at a minimum, include a daily sheet showing:
1. The amount of taxable receipts within the twenty-four (24) hour period; and
2. The actual liquor establishment tax receipts collected for the date in question.
B. The City Manager or his delegate shall at all reasonable times have full access to
said books and records.
C. The financial records of any liquor establishment submitted pursuant to this article
or any rule and regulation promulgated thereunder shall not be available for public
inspection in order to protect the owners' right to privacy except when necessary in
any action to enforce collection of tax under this Division.
SEC. 25.11-10 EXEMPTIONS. The tax imposed under this Division shall not apply or be
imposed upon a person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious, or educational
purposes to the extent alcoholic liquor is purchased by such person and used solely for the
charitable, religious or educational purposes of such person and is not resold for profit.
SEC. 25.11-11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE
TO COMPLY; HEARING.
A. Procedure for persons not holding a Town liquor license: If the City Manager, after
a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has willfully avoided
collection or remittance of the tax imposed by this Division, he may suspend or
revoke all city licenses held by such person. The owner, manager, or operator of the
liquor establishment shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing to be
held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing
addressed to the owner, manager, or operator at his last known place of business.
The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the owner,
manager, or operator of the liquor establishment from his civil liability for the
collection or remittance of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.
B. Procedure for persons holding a Town liquor license: If the Liquor Commissioner,
after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has willfully avoided
collection or remittance of the tax imposed by this Division , he may suspend or
revoke the retail liquor license held by said person. The suspension or revocation of
the retail liquor license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator
of the liquor establishment from his civil liability for the collection or remittance of
the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.
SEC. 25.11-12 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX. All proceeds resulting from
the imposition of the tax under this Division, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of
SEC. 25.11-12(Cont.1)
the Town of Normal, and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the Town.
SEC. 25.11-13 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Division, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Entire Division 11 Added 2/21/94 by Ord. No. 4210)
SEC. 25.12-1
DIVISION 12 - TAX UPON THE PRIVILEGE OF USING
OR CONSUMING ELECTRICITY
SEC. 25.12-1 TAX IMPOSED.
A. A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and
used or consumed within the corporate limits of the municipality at the following
rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
1. For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.5274 cents
per kilowatt-hour;
2. For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3459
cents per kilowatt-hour;
3. For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3113
cents per kilowatt-hour;
4. For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3026
cents per kilowatt-hour;
5. For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2940
cents per kilowatt-hour;
6. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2767
cents per kilowatt-hour;
7. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2724
cents per kilowatt-hour;
8. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2680
cents per kilowatt-hour;
9. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.2637 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
10. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours
in a month; 0.2594 cents per kilowatt-hour.
(Entire Section A Amended 7/20/98 by Ord. No. 4541)
B. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in subsection (a) above shall be
effective: (A) for residential customers on August 1, 1998; and (B) for nonSEC.
25.12-1(Cont.1)
residential customers on the earlier of (1) the last bill issued prior to December 31,
2000, or (2) the date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
C. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the Town of Normal Gross Receipts Utility Tax for
persons engaged in the occupation of supplying electricity (Chapter 25, Division 6,
Town of Normal Municipal Code, 1969 as amended) shall specifically remain in
effect: (A) for receipts attributable to residential customers, until July 31, 1998; and
(B) for receipts attributable to non-residential customers, until the earlier of (1)
through the last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000, or (2) the date of the first bill
issued to such non-residential customer pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
D. The provisions of Division 12 shall not be effective until August 1, 1998.
SEC. 25.12-2 EXCEPTIONS. None of the taxes authorized by this Division 12 may be
imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statues of the United States, be made
the subject of taxation by this State or any political sub-division thereof; nor shall any persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting electricity,
or engaged in the business of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this Division for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act as
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this Division be imposed upon any
person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the
same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the municipality, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
municipality.
SEC. 25.12-3 ADDITIONAL TAXES. Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied
upon the taxpayer or its business.
SEC. 25.12-4 COLLECTION. The tax authorized by this Division shall be collected
from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the
original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
Division and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to
the municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall collect
the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal
to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping
records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the
manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity shall file returns pursuant to
this Division at least monthly and shall at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the
SEC. 25.12-4(Cont.1)
amount of the tax due pursuant to this Division. Persons delivering electricity shall include in all
returns detailed information required by the Town Treasurer.
SEC. 25.12-5 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY. On or before the last day of each
month, each deliverer of electricity and each taxpayer who has not paid the tax imposed by this
Division to a person delivering electricity as set forth above and who is not otherwise exempted
from paying such tax shall make a return to the City Treasurer for the preceding month stating:
A. his name.
B. his principal place of business.
C. his gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed.
D. amount of tax.
E. such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may
require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return,
pay to the Town of Normal, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that a return filed by a
deliverer of electricity may report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between
such billings, and the amount of tax actually remitted to the deliverer of electricity.
SEC. 25.12-6 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT. If it shall appear that an amount of tax
has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Division, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this Division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that
no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall
be so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Division shall be
commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
SEC. 25.12-7 PENALTY. Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, pay the tax due, or
who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Division, shall
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
SEC. 25.12-7(Cont.1)
In addition to the foregoing, if for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty of 10%
of the amount of tax due shall be added and collected, plus interest at a rate provided in Chapter 25
of the Municipal Code, Town of Normal for funds due the Town.
SEC. 25.12-8 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Town Treasurer, or his authorized
representative, may upon reasonable notice examine the books and records of any taxpayer and
deliverer of electricity, in order to determine compliance with this act and assure the enforcement
and collection of the tax imposed. It shall be the duty of every taxpayer and deliverer of electricity
to keep accurate and complete books and records, which reflect the kilowatt-hour of usage of
electricity delivered to and consumed within the Town by individual customers.
SEC. 25.12-9 DEFINITIONS. Unless a contrary definition is provided or evident, the
words and terms used in this Division shall have the meanings provided in Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and Division 6 of Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code,
Town of Normal, Illinois.
SEC. 25.13-1
DIVISION 13 – LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS’
BILL OF RIGHT
SEC. 25.13-1 TITLE. This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the
"Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance."
SEC. 25.13-2 SCOPE. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the Town’s
procedures in connection with all of the Town’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
SEC. 25.13-3 DEFINITIONS. Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
A. Act. The "Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act."
B. Corporate Authorities. The Town’s President and Board of Trustees/Mayor and
City Council.
C. Locally Imposed and Administered Tax or Tax. Each tax imposed by the Town
that is collected or administered by the Town not an agency or department of the
State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property
Tax Code or fees collected by the Town other than infrastructure maintenance
fees.
D. Local Tax Administrator, the Town’s Treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local
tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this ordinance to
give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such authority by the local tax
administrator shall not be inconsistent with this ordinance and the Act.
E. Town. The Town of Normal, Illinois.
F. Notice. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the Town’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
G. Tax Ordinance. Each ordinance adopted by the Town that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
H. Taxpayer. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required
to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the Town.
SEC. 25.13-4
SEC. 25.13-4 NOTICES. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day
fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The
notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned
at the persons’ last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery.
SEC. 25.13-5 LATE PAYMENT. Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing
required to be made to the Town pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is (a) physically received by the Town on or before the due date, or (b) received in an envelope
or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date,
properly addressed to the Town, with adequate postage prepaid.
SEC. 25.13-6 PAYMENT. Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall
be applied in the following order: (1) first to the tax due for the applicable period; (2) second to
the interest due for the applicable period; and (3) third to the penalty for the applicable period.
SEC. 25.13-7 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
A. The Town shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written
protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the
tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under
duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be one (1) year after
the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The Town shall
not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or
penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Town.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim
for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the
claim;
b. the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
SEC. 25.13-7(Cont.1)
c. the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled
check or receipt for the payment;
d. the taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties
overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only
a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the
Town.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. grant the claim; or
b. deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to
the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim
for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of six per cent (6%) per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to
the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
SEC. 25.13-8 AUDIT PROCEDURE. Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any
local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. the tax;
2. the time period of the audit; and
3. a brief description of the books and records to be made available for the
auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and
time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer,
another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The
audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days from the date the notice is
SEC. 25.13-8(Cont.1)
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other
convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the
date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s business
or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability,
exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall
be subject to and available for inspection by the Town.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and
records for inspection by the Town. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide
the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax
administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and
administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the Town’s
determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental
entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity
imposing such tax.
SEC. 25.13-9 APPEAL.
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local
tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim
denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include
the following information:
1. the reason for the assessment;
2. the amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. the obligations of the Town during the audit, appeal, refund and collection
process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a
determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a
written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer’s
SEC. 25.13-9(Cont.1)
request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed
with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice
to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer
requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45)
day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill
due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the
contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the
local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after
the expiration of the forty-five day period.
SEC. 25.13-10 HEARING.
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and
petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall
conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed
fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony
and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment.
The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer
or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
SEC. 25.13-11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES. In the event a determination has been
made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest. The Town hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a
late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be two percent (2%) per
SEC. 25.13-11(Cont.1)
month for each month in which the payment remains unremitted past the date
upon which the payment was due. (Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
B. Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five
percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be
imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Town issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure-to-file penalty shall be
assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or
payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance.
SEC. 25.13-12 ABATEMENT. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.
SEC. 25.13-13 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS. The Town may enter into an
installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax
ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless
the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax
administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen
(14) days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the
fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment
contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.
SEC. 25.13-14 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS. The Town, through the local tax
administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of
any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable
period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for which a notice of
tax determination or assessment may be issued by the Town, the tax paid was less
than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum
after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was
due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was
filed.
SEC. 25.13-14(Cont.1)
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the
taxpayer. (Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.13-15 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE. For any locally imposed and
administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation,
or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with
the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary
disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent
(1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4)
years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the
amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in
which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest
must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure
application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must
be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of
the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is
longer.
SEC.25.13-16 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES. Any locally administered
tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of
a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Town Clerk's office.
SEC.25.13-17. The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the
local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the
lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
A. timely remove the lien at the Town’s expense;
B. correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
C. correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
SEC. 25.13-18 APPLICATION. This ordinance shall be liberally construed and
administered to supplement all of the Town’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be
controlling.
SEC. 25.13-19 SEVERABILITY. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 25.13-20
SEC. 25.13-20 EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect,
after passage, approval and publication as required by law.
SEC. 25.13-21 CODIFICATION. The Town Clerk is hereby directed and authorized to
codify this Ordinance as Division 13 of Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code Town of Normal 1969
as amended.
(Entire Division 13 Added 12/4/00 by Ord. No. 4694)
SEC. 25.14-1
DIVISION 14 - TOWN OF NORMAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SEC. 25.14-1 TITLE. This Division shall be known and cited as the “Town of Normal
Telecommunications Tax Ordinance.” The tax imposed by this Division shall be known as the
“telecommunications tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Town of
Normal, the State of Illinois or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 25.14-2 DEFINITIONS. When any of the following words or terms are used in
this Division whether or not capitalized, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed
them in this Section:
A. City. The Town of Normal, Illinois.
B. Department or Department of Finance. The Department of Finance of the City.
C. Director or Director of Finance. The Director of Finance of the City.
D. Amount paid. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address located in
the City regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
E. Gross charge. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the City, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, services and property of every kind and nature, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the
cost of materials used, labor or service costs or any other expenses whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid.
However, “gross charge” shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
a. the tax imposed by this Division.
b. additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill pursuant to Section
9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act.
c. the tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
d. the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code; or
SEC. 25.14-2(Cont.1)
e. the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by Division 10 of
Chapter 26 of this Code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the City.
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. This subdivision
(E)(3) applies, but is not limited, to the use of calculations, computers,
data processing equipment, tabulating equipment and accounting
equipment and also applies to the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;
4. Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased or
rented by the customer from any source, provided that such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs;
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
tax imposed under this Division previously was paid to a retailer, but only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, represent
an expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of
profit for the corporation rendering such service;
7. Bad debts; provided, however, that if any portion of a debt deemed to be
bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion of the debt paid during the reporting period; or
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
F. Bad debt. Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail, for which gross
charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or
uncollectible as determined by applicable federal income tax standards.
G. Interstate telecommunications. All telecommunications originating in the City
that terminate outside the State of Illinois and all telecommunications originating
outside the State of Illinois which terminate in the City.
SEC. 25.14-2(Cont.2)
H. Intrastate telecommunications. All telecommunications originating in the City
that terminate within the State of Illinois and all telecommunications which
originate within the State of Illinois and terminate in the City.
I. Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court,
the Federal or State governments, including State universities created by a statute,
or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State.
J. Purchase at retail. The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
K. Retailer. Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in subsection (M) of this Section.
L. Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, or any like designation,
means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or an agent or other
representative operating within the State of Illinois under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent or
other representative is located in the State of Illinois permanently or temporarily,
or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in Illinois.
M. Sale at retail. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration:
1. To persons other than the City, Federal and State governments, and State
universities created by statute; and
2. Other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the
tax previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one
such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross
charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.
N. Service address. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications are originated or at which telecommunications are received
by a taxpayer. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of mobile
phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like,
“service address” shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
SEC. 25.14-2(Cont.3)
O. Taxpayer. A person which individually, or through its agents, employees or
permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating telecommunications in
the City or receiving telecommunications in the City and that incurs a tax liability
under this Division.
P. 1. Telecommunications. In addition to the usual and popular meaning,
includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, private line
services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio services, paging service or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities.
2. The definition of telecommunications set forth in subsection (P)(1) shall
not include:
a. value-added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission; or
b. purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by it
to the ultimate retail consumer originating or terminating the
taxable end-to-end telecommunications. Carrier access charges,
right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities,
and all telecommunications resold in Section 25.14-3(D) used as a
component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale.
c. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements as defined in Section 2-27
of the Retailers Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-27).
Q. Originating. Initiating the transmission of messages or information and includes,
but is not limited to, activating a mobile or portable telecommunications device
for the purpose of sending or accepting messages or information.
SEC. 25.14-3 TAX IMPOSED.
A. Beginning April 1, 2002, a tax is hereby imposed upon:
1. The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the city intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
SEC. 25.14-3(Cont.1)
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer and
charged to a service address in the City; and
2. The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the city interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer and
charged to a service address in the City.
B. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to
taxation under subsection (A)(2) of this section, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a municipal tax in another state on the same event, shall be
allowed a credit against the tax authorized by subsection (A)(2) to the extent of
the amount of such municipal tax properly due and paid in such other state which
was not previously allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this Division.
C. The tax imposed by this Division is not imposed on any act or privilege to the
extent that such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution or statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by the City.
D. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company
facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used
as a component of or integrated into end-to-end telecommunications service are
sales for resale and are not subject to the tax imposed by this Division.
SEC. 25.14-4 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
A. 1. Any retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and making or
effectuating a sale at retail shall collect the tax imposed by this Division
from the taxpayer and remit it to the department as provided by Sec.
25.14-5 of this Division.
2. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Division and any tax
collected by retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the City.
3. The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the
gross charge for the act or privilege of originating telecommunications
when sold for use in the manner prescribed by this Division.
4. The tax imposed by this Division shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to
the retailer providing taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for taxable
services.
B. The Director shall, upon application, authorize the collection of this tax by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business in this state who, to the satisfaction of
the Director, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
SEC. 25.14-4(Cont.1)
tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect the tax
imposed by this Division. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer
to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications originated
in the City in the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer
maintaining a place of business in this state.
C. The tax authorized by this Division shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.
D. Retailers may retain 1.75 percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for
expenses incurred in connection with collecting and remitting the tax, less any
charge allowed by the Illinois Commerce Commission that permits them to
recover such expenses. This commission shall not be allowed for taxes not timely
remitted to the department.
SEC. 25.14-5 FILING RETURNS AND REMITTANCES BY RETAILERS. On or
before the 15th day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a place of business in this
state and every retailer authorized by the Director to collect the tax imposed by this Division
shall file with the department a remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding
calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Director, containing such
information as the Director may reasonably require.
SEC. 25.14-6 REGISTRATION. Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this
state shall register with the department within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Division or the date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later.
SEC. 25.14-7 OBLIGATION OF TAXPAYERS TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY
TAX.
A. If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by this Division from a taxpayer, as
required by Sec. 25.14-4, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the
department.
B. On or before the 15th day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that has not
paid the tax imposed by this Division to a retailer shall file with the department a
tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the taxpayer paid to the retailer
during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Director, containing such information as the Director may
reasonably require.
SEC. 25.14-8 RESALE NUMBERS.
A. If a person who originates telecommunications in the City claims to be a reseller
of telecommunications, that person shall apply to the department for a resale
number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax
SEC. 25.14-8(Cont.1)
imposed by this Division on any purchases of telecommunications and shall
furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to
the applicant and shall certify the number of the applicant.
C. The department may cancel the resale number of any person if the number:
1. was obtained through misrepresentation;
2. is used to originate telecommunications tax-free when such
telecommunications are not for resale; or
3. is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
D. The act or privilege of originating telecommunications in the City shall not be
made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number issued by the department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that a sale is nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
SEC. 25.14-9 MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS. Every retailer maintaining
a place of business in this state, every retailer authorized by the Director to collect the tax
imposed by this Division and every taxpayer required by Sec. 25.14-7 to pay the tax directly to
the department shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including
original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may
have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the
English language and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and
available for inspection and audit by the department.
SEC. 25.14-10 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Director is authorized to adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this Division.
SEC. 25.14-11 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Division, or the application
of any provision of this Division, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence
shall not affect other provisions of this Division, or their application, that can be given effect
without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or
invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by
this Division. In particular, if subsection (A)(2) of Sec. 25.14-3 of this Division is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under Section (A)(1) of Sec. 25.14-3 shall
remain in full force and effect.
SEC. 25.14-12 STATUS OF ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 8-11-17. If
Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code is repealed, or becomes ineffective for any
SEC. 25.14-12(Cont.1)
reason, then Division 6 of Chapter 25 of the Town of Normal Municipal Code (insofar as
Division 6 is applicable to persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, or radio magnetic waves or fiber optics) declared ineffective in favor of this Article,
shall be deemed to be in full force and effect as of the date Section 8-11-17 is repealed or
becomes ineffective during such time that Section 8-11-17 is not in effect. This Division shall be
in full force and effect at any time that Section 8-11-17 is deemed to be in effect or authorizes
the imposition of the tax imposed under this Division. Provided, however, in the event Section
8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code is repealed or becomes ineffective due to imposition of a
substitute telecommunications tax collected by the state and remitted to municipalities, then it is
the intent of the Normal Town Council to convert to such new state tax based on the
telecommunications tax imposed by this Division rather than the Gross Receipts Utility Tax
provided in Division 6 of this Chapter.
SEC. 25.14-13 PENALTY. Any retailer or taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who
makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Division shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of
tax due. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
SEC. 25.14-14 LATE PAYMENT FEE. Any retailer or taxpayer who fails to file a
return on time or remit payment of any tax due on time shall be liable for and pay a late payment
fee as assessed by the Director up to One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day. The late payment
fee shall be in addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to Sec. 25.14-13 and shall constitute a
debt owed to the City.
SEC. 25.14-15 OVERPAYMENT OF TAX. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this division, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under the division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided
that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor
shall be so credited.
(Entire Division 14 of Chapter 25 Added 2/18/02 by Ord. No. 4775)
SEC. 25.15-1
DIVISION 15 - FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
SEC. 25.15-1 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Chapter, whenever any of the
following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this Section:
A. Alcoholic Liquor means any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing
more than one half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being.
B. Prepared Food Item for Immediate Consumption means and includes any and all
material, whether solid, semi-solid or liquid used or intended to be used for
human consumption and for nourishment of the human body. The term defined
herein includes any and all alcoholic liquor except alcoholic liquor purchased in
original package for consumption off the premises where sold. The term excludes
soft drinks as defined in Section 2-10 of the Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax
Act (35 ILCS 120/2-10). The term shall include and be limited to:
1. Food items purchased at a restaurant, bar or other establishment where
facilities are provided for on-premise consumption, but such term shall not
include food items purchased from other areas of any such establishment
where such facilities providing on-premise consumption utilize a separate
means of collecting receipts for such food purchased for immediate
consumption and are physically separated from such other areas in the
establishment.
2. Food items purchased from concession stands, snack shops and other
establishments which sell food items primarily in individual sized
servings, such as ice cream cones, candy bars and individually serve
sandwiches, for immediate on-premises or off-premises consumptions;
and
3. Food items which are purchased hot or are otherwise purchased prepared
by immediate on-premise or off-premise consumption from catering
establishments and restaurants with delivery services, except food items
prepared off the premises.
For purposes of this Section, “food items prepared off the premises” means food
items which are grilled, broiled, baked, fried or cooked in some other similar
manner off the premises of the retailer. Such term shall not include food items
which are precooked and then heated or warmed-up off the premises or food
items which were previously cooked or prepared and then reheated off the
premises.
C. Retailer. Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
SEC. 25.15-1(Cont.1)
conducting a business which sells prepared food items for immediate
consumption so as to entitle such person or persons to all or a portion of the net
receipts from the sale thereof.
D. Person. Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or
owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representatives, acting either
for himself or herself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine,
singular or plural is included in any circumstance.
E. Restaurant. Means and includes any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public, as a place at which prepared food items for
immediate consumption are served and/or prepared, whether or not consumed or
intended to be consumed on the premises, but shall not include coin-operated
automatic food dispensing machines.
F. Bar. means and includes an establishment for the serving of alcoholic liquor.
SEC. 25.15-2 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
A. From and after January 1, 2003, there is hereby levied and imposed upon the
privilege of purchasing food items prepared for immediate consumption in the
Town of Normal, a tax of two (2%) percent of the purchase price, exclusive of
any other tax charged for such food items.
B. Exempt from the tax imposed above are persons purchasing food items prepared
for immediate consumption served or prepared at:
1. A restaurant owned by a church, grade school, junior high school or high
school within the Town of Normal.
2. Restaurants used primarily in conjunction with institutional living
establishments within the Town of Normal, including but not limited to
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, residential care facilities and hospitals;
3. Premises or operations of not-for-profit organizations who serve food on
an occasional and irregular basis.
SEC. 25.15-3 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
A. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by
the person who purchases prepared food for immediate consumption. Said person
hereinafter referred to as “consumer.”
SEC. 25.15-3(Cont.1)
B. All retailers shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and shall collect
and account for the tax imposed in Sec. 25.15-2 from each consumer at the time
that the consideration for such purchase is paid. Such retailers shall be the trustee
for the Town in the collection and remittance of said taxes.
SEC. 25.15-4 COLLECTION OF TAX. Every person required to collect the tax levied
by this Section shall secure said tax from the consumer at the time he collects payment for the
service of prepared food. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or memorandum of the
payment given to the consumer at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in
this Division shall be stated separately on said documents or combined with the amount of the
Illinois Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act.
SEC. 25.15-5 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Finance Director of the Town of
Normal may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Division concerning the enforcement and application of this Division. The term “rules and
regulations” includes, but it not limited to, a case-by-case determination whether or not the tax
imposed by this Division applies.
SEC. 25.15-6 FILING OF APPLICATION. The owner of each restaurant shall
complete a Town of Normal Application for Registration within thirty (30) days of opening for
business. The application shall be filed with the Finance Division of the Town.
SEC. 25.15-7 FILING OF RETURN.
A. All retailers shall pay to the Town all taxes collected. The owner of each
restaurant within the Town of Normal shall file monthly tax returns showing tax
receipts received during each monthly period on forms prescribed by the Finance
Director. The return shall be filed before the 25th day of the calendar month next
succeeding the month for which the return is made and shall be accompanied by
payment of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by said return.
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this Section shall commence on January
1, 2003, and the tax return and payment for such period shall be due on or before
February 25, 2003. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax payments shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
C. Any payment made by check which is returned to the Town because of
insufficient funds may result in the Finance Department requiring the retailer to
make future payments by cashier’s check or money order.
SEC. 25.15-8 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN AND PAY TAX.
A If for any reason any tax is not paid when due or a return is not filed when due, a
penalty as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter shall be added and collected.
(Amended 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5198)
SEC. 25.15-8(Cont.1)
B. In addition to the penalty assessed, any amount of tax which is not paid when due
shall bear interest as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter form the date when
such tax becomes past due until such tax is paid.
C. As compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of this tax,
retailers filing a tax return may retain an amount of money equal to one percent
(1%) of the tax due. However, a retailer may not retain one percent (1%) for any
payment which is late or for which a late return is filed.
D. If for any reason a tax return is not filed before the Town sends a Notice of Tax
Due, a penalty as set forth in Division 13 of this Chapter may be added and
collected.
(Sec. 25.15-8 Amended 3/18/2013 by Ord. No. 5487)
SEC. 25.15-9 FINANCIAL RECORDS.
A. All retailers shall cause complete and accurate books, records and accounts
showing the gross receipts for sale of taxable prepared food items and the taxes
collected each day, which shall be made available in the Town for examination by
the Town upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours.
B. The financial records of any restaurant submitted pursuant to this Division or any
rule and regulation promulgated thereunder shall be considered confidential
proprietary information and shall not be disclosed except as allowed by law.
SEC. 25.15-10 FAILURE TO REMIT; LICENSING. Payment and collection of said
tax may be enforced by action in any court of competent jurisdiction and failure to collect,
account for and pay over any tax collected from purchasers of taxable items shall be cause for
revocation of any Town license of such retailer or applicable to the premises thereof, in addition
to any other penalty provided in this Ordinance.
SEC. 25.15-11 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. Any retailer found guilty of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provision of this Division, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than Seventy-five
Dollars ($75.00) nor more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for the first offense, and not
less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00), nor more than Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000.00) for the second offense, and not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more
than Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) for the third offense, and not less than
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for the
fourth and each subsequent offense, or five (5) times the amount of the tax imposed, if any,
whichever is higher, for the second and each subsequent offenses. A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day said retailer shall continue any such violation,
or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof.
(Entire Division 15 Added 11/18/02 by Ord. No. 4831 – Eff. 1/1/03)
SEC. 25.16-1
DIVISION 16 – FEES
SEC. 25.16-1 PURPOSE. This Division shall impose fees for services provided by
identified Town Departments. The fees shall be reviewed annually by the President and Board of
Trustees and adjusted periodically as directed by Ordinance amending this Division.
SEC. 25.16-2. Fees hereby imposed by the Town and collected by the Town Clerk:
A. Fee to record an easement dedication plat or easement vacation
plat: $150.00
B. Fee to apply for a zoning variation in any Zoning District
Except R-1AA, R-1A, R-1B, and R-2: $150.00
C. Fee to apply for a zoning variation in the R-1AA, R-1A,
R-1B, or R-2 Zoning District: $125.00
D. Fee to apply for a Zoning District map amendment (change in
Zoning classification): $300.00
E. Fee to apply for a Special Use Permit: $300.00
F. Fee to apply for a Site Plan Review: $300.00
G. Fee to apply for approval of a Preliminary Planned Unit
Development Plan or approval of a non-minor change in an
Approved Preliminary or Final Planned Unit Development Plan:
1. Less than 2 acres: $400.00
2. 2 acres to less than 15 acres: $500.00
3. 15 acres to less than 25 acres: $600.00
4. 25 acres or more: $700.00
H. Fee to apply for a minor change in an approved Planned
Unit Development Plan (Preliminary or Final Plan): $100.00
I. Fee to annex property to the Town of Normal with an
Annexation Agreement: $1,000.00
J. Fee to annex property to the Town of Normal without
an Annexation Agreement: $250.00
K. Fee to apply for an amendment to an Approved
Annexation Agreement: $500.00
SEC. 25.16-2(Cont.1)
L. Fee to apply for approval of a Preliminary Subdivision
Plan or apply for changes to an Approved Preliminary
Subdivision Plan:
1. Less than 2 acres: $300.00
2. 2 acres to less than 15 acres: $400.00
3. 15 acres to less than 25 acres: $500.00
4. 25 acres or more: $600.00
M. Fee to apply for approval of a Final Plat or to apply for
an expedited review of a Final Plat:
1. Less than 2 acres: $200.00
2. 2 acres to less than 15 acres: $300.00
3. 15 acres to less than 25 acres: $400.00
4. 25 acres or more: $500.00
N. Appeal of Zoning Administrator $ 50.00
O. Zoning Text Amendments $100.00
(N and O Added 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
P. Fee to pay liquor license fee in installments $100.00*
*due on or before the last working day in February
(Subsection P Added 3/2/09 by Ord. No. 5241)
SEC. 25.16-3. The fees hereby imposed by the Town and collected by the Director of Parks
and Recreation are in the amounts set forth in the Annual Budget passed by the Board of Trustees
or, if the fee for a particular program is not included in the Annual Budget, as determined by the
City Manager. (Fees Amended 3/21/2011 by Ord. No. 5375) (Amended 6/20/2016 by Ord. No.
5647)
SEC. 25.16-4. Fees hereby imposed by the Town and collected by the Town Building
Commissioner:
A. Request for Letter from Building Commissioner regarding zoning
or code violations for a specific property: $100.00
B. Fire Sprinkler System Permit Fee: $200.00
C. Fire Alarm Permit Fee: $ 50.00
D. Contractor Registration Fee: $ 50.00
E. Building Permit Fees based on the following cost of work:
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.1)
Cost of Work Fees
1. $0 to $1,000.00: $30.00
2. $1,001.00 to $3,000.00: $45.00
3. $3,001.00 to $10,000.00: $45.00 plus $6.00 per $1,000
over $3,000.00
4. $10,001.00 to $50,000.00: $90.00 plus $5.50 per $1,000
over $10,000.00
5. $50,001.00 to $500,000.00: $310.00 plus $4.25 per $1,000
over $50,000.00
6. $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00: $2,222.50 plus $3.00 per
$1,000 over $500,000.00
7. $1,000,001.00 and up: $3,722.50 plus $2.00 per
$1,000 over $1,000,000.00
F. (Deleted 12/7/09, by Ord. 5304 and Reserved for Future Use)
G. (Deleted 12/7/09, by Ord. 5304 and Reserved for Future Use)
H. Fee to review construction plans:
Single-family Dwelling: $90.00
Two-family Dwelling: $120.00
Multiple-family Dwelling: $300.00
New Commercial: the greater of 0.0018% of estimated
valuation or $300.00
Commercial remodel: the greater of 0.003% of estimated
valuation or $50.00
I. For each plumbing permit, the charges shall be $9.00 per opening for one or twofamily
construction and $12.00 per opening for all other work with a $30.00
minimum.
When changes in soil, waste or vent pipes are made, but no changes are made in
number or location of the fixtures, the person obtaining said permit hereinabove,
shall pay a permit fee computed at the rate of .004 x material and labor valuation
required to complete the requested changes, with a $30.00 minimum.
J. Replacing water heater: $30.00
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.2)
K. Lawn sprinkler systems: $30.00
L. Sewer service based on estimated valuation:
$0.00 to $5,000.00: $30.00
$5,000.00 or more: $30.00 plus .004% of estimated
valuation
M. Water service based on estimated valuation:
$0.00 to $5,000.00 $30.00
$5,000.00 or more: $30.00 plus .004% of estimated
valuation
N. The fees hereby imposed for mechanical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, or
refrigeration permits and inspection of work shall be based on the total estimated
cost of the proposed heating, ventilating, air conditioning, or refrigeration work, as
follows: (Amended 12/17/12 by Ord. No. 5478)
Estimated Cost New Work and Installation or
Unit Replacement or Unit
Addition
$2,000.00 or less $30.00
More than $2,000 but not $30.00 plus $13.50 per
more than $20,000 Thousand or portion thereof
More than $20,000 but $273.00 plus $7.50 per
not more than $50,000 Thousand over $20,000 or
portion thereof
More than $50,000 but $500.00 plus $5.00 per
not more than $100,000 Thousand over $50,000 or
portion thereof
More than $100,000 $750.00 plus $4.25 per
Thousand over $100,000 or
portion thereof
Minimum Fee – For Heating and Air Conditioning –
taken out on one permit $25.00
O. The fees hereby imposed for electrical permits and inspection of work performed
thereunder shall be as follows:
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.3)
1. Fee Schedule Based on Amperage:
INSTALLATION IN
REPLACEMENT A NEW BUILDING
SERVICE ENTRANCE OR ADDITION OF OR NEW BUILDING
FEEDER SERVICE ONLY ADDITION________
0 to 60 amp $ 30.00 $ 30.00
61 to 100 amp 30.00 60.00
101 to 200 amp 50.00 100.00
201 to 400 amp 100.00 150.00
401 to 600 amp 125.00 210.00
601 to 800 amp 165.00 330.00
801 to 1000 amp 255.00 510.00
1001 to 1200 amp 300.00 600.00
OVER 1200 amp 360.00 720.00
ALL PERMITS, excluding the 1 and 2 Family construction, shall be charged a fee in
addition to the service fee based on a percentage of the valuation as listed:
$0.00 to $10,000.00 $16.00 per $1,000 of valuation
$10,000.00 to $50,000.00 $160.00 plus $5.00 per $1,000 of
valuation over $10,000.00
$50,000.00 and above $360.00 plus $3.50 per $1,000 of
valuation over $50,000.00
FOR EACH MULTI-METER INSTALLATION, THERE WILL BE A CHARGE
OF $10.00 FOR EACH METER.
2. Fee Schedule based on Valuation where no change in service amperage is
made, including any remodeling work such as: new circuits and feeders,
replacement light fixtures and electrical equipment of any kind. When
service change and up-grade is made, both schedules will be charged.
VALUATION OF WORK TO BE DONE:
$500.00 or less $30.00
$500.00 to $1,000.00 $45.00
$1,000.00 to $10,000.00 $45.00 plus $16.00 per $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof over $1,000.00
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.4)
$10,000.00 to $50,000.00 $189.00 plus $5.00 per $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof over $10,000.00
Above $50,000.00 $389.00 plus $2.50 per $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof over $50,000.00
P. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in accordance with the following
fee schedule hereby adopted within this jurisdiction:
1. Permit fees for Temporary Signs:
$1.00 per day and not more than 84 days in a calendar year.
A sticker with the expiration date shall be issued for each Temporary Sign.
Such sticker shall be affixed to the sign for duration of display. If additional
display time is permitted, a new sticker will be issued.
2. Permit fee for Free Standing Sign and Wall Sign:
Value of Sign Permit Fee
Up to $1,000 $30.00 Minimum Permit Fee
Up to $10,000 $30.00 and $16.00 for each thousand
over $1,000.00
Up to $50,000 $174.00 and $7.50 for each thousand
over $10,000.00
Over $50,000 $474.00 and $3.75 for each thousand
over $50,000.00
Q. Multiple-Family License Fees. The Building Commissioner shall assess and collect
the following fees:
1. Rooming Houses. For rooming houses which are licensed for less than ten
(10) occupants, forty dollars ($40.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each
roomer allowed. For rooming houses which are licensed for ten (10) or more
occupants, one-hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) plus twenty-one dollars
($21.00) for each roomer allowed. The Building Commissioner may reduce
the license fee for rooming houses licensed for ten (10) or more occupants to
forty dollars ($40.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each roomer allowed if
the Building Commissioner finds that the building or property has passed
three consecutive inspections and has not had more than three violations of
Town ordinances regarding Fire Safety, Building, Property Maintenance, or
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.5)
Zoning Codes within a twelve (12) month period. After the Building
Commissioner has reduced the license fee for rooming houses licensed for
ten (10) or more occupants, the Building Commissioner may increase the
license fee to one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) plus twenty-one dollars
($21.00) for each roomer allowed if the Building Commissioner finds that
the building or property has failed an inspection or has had more than three
violations of Town ordinances regarding Fire Safety, Building, Property
Maintenance, or Zoning Codes within a twelve (12) month period. Said fees
shall be paid no later than the later of August 1 of each year or the first day
upon which a building requiring this license is occupied.
2. Multiple-Family and Multiple-Use Dwellings. Forty dollars ($40.00) per
building plus seven dollars ($7.00) per dwelling unit but no less than $50.00.
Said fees shall be paid no later than the later of August 1 of each year or the
first day upon which a building requiring this license is occupied.
3. Hotels and Motels. Forty dollars ($40.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) per unit
but no less than $50.00. Said fees shall be paid no later than the later of
August 1 of each year or the first day upon which a building requiring this
license is occupied.
4. Delinquent Penalty. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty percent (20%)
of the license fee, whichever is greater, per month after the due date of the
license fee.
5. Replacement Application. Five dollars ($5.00) for a replacement application
form.
6. Missed Inspections Appointment Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
every missed inspection appointment.
7. Re-inspection Fee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for every re-inspection caused by a
defect or deficiency not corrected in a previous re-inspection.
8. Transfer Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for transferring a license from
one owner to another.
9. Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Fifty dollars ($50.00). Said fees shall be
paid no later than the later of August 1 of each year or the first day upon
which a building requiring this license is occupied.
(Subsection Q Added 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
R. Single-Family Rental License Fees. The Building Commissioner shall assess and
collect the following fees:
SEC. 25.16-4(Cont.6)
1. Single-Family Dwellings. Fifty dollars ($50.00) and two-family dwellings –
seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Said fees shall be paid no later than the later
of August 1 of each year or the first day upon which a building requiring this
license is occupied.
2. Delinquent Penalty. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month after the due
date of the license fee.
3. Replacement Application. Five dollars ($5.00) for a replacement application
form.
4. Missed Inspections Appointment Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
every missed inspection appointment.
5. Re-inspection Fee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for every re-inspection caused by a
defect or deficiency not corrected in a previous re-inspection.
6. Transfer Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for transferring a license from
one owner to another.
(Subsection R Added 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
S. Mobile Home Park License. The Building Commissioner shall assess and collect
the following fees:
1. Mobile Home Park Fee. One hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) plus seven
dollars ($7.00) per lot. Said fees shall be paid no later than the later of
August 1 of each year or the first day upon which any building or mobile
home in a mobile home park is occupied.
2. Delinquent Penalty. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty percent (20%)
of the license fee, whichever is greater, per month after the due date of the
license fee.
3. Replacement Application. Five dollars ($5.00) for a replacement application
form.
4. Missed Inspections Appointment Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
every missed inspection appointment.
5. Re-inspection Fee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for every re-inspection caused by a
defect or deficiency not corrected in a previous re-inspection.
6. Transfer Fee. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for transferring a license from
one to another.
(Subsection S Added 6/16/08 by Ord. No. 5199)
SEC. 25.16-5
SEC. 25.16-5 FEES HEREBY IMPOSED BY THE TOWN.
A. Fee to reclaim a vehicle towed in connection with an arrest
for any of the offenses identified in Chapter 17, Division 10,
of this Code, subject, however, to a refund based on proof of
any defense provided in said Division 10 of Chapter 17 $500.00
B. Fee for a Mass Gathering Permit $ 50.00
C. Fee for Sound Amplification Permit $ 20.00
D. Fee to apply for employment as Town Police Officer $ 25.00
E. Fees for emergency medical services, related transportation
services, and other emergency services services as follows:
1. Basic Life Support (BLS) $500.00
2. Advanced Life Support 1 (ALS1) $600.00
3. Advanced Life Support 2 (ALS2) $673.00
4. Mileage $12.00/Mile
5. Medical Treatment with No Transport $150.00
6. Oxygen $ 15.00
The charges for the foregoing services shall be adjusted on January 1 of each year by
multiplying the then current fee by 1.03, and the product shall be the new fee for
such service.
(Sec. 25.16-5 Added 3/2/09 by Ord. No. 5241)(Amended 3/16/09 by Ord. No. 44)(Amended
4/5/2010 by Ord. No. 5334)
F. Fees for Specialized Rescue Services provided by the Fire Department, including
but not limited to structural collapse, tactical rescue, high angle rescue, confined
space rescue, below grade rescue, trench rescue, and other technical rescue services
as follows:
1. $125.00 per hour per vehicle used in said specialized rescue services;
2. $35.00 per hour per firefighter employed in rendering said specialized rescue
services; and
3. $500.00 for auto extrication services.
SEC. 25.16-5(Cont.1)
The following persons are jointly and severally liable for the specialized rescue
services set forth above:
1. The owner of the property on which the specialized rescue services occurred;
2. Any person involved in an activity that caused or contributed to the
emergency giving rise to the specialized rescue services;
3. Any individual who is rescued during the emergency and his or her
employer if the person was acting in furtherance of the employer’s interest;
and
4. In cases involving the recovery of property, any person having control,
ownership, or custody of the property at the time of the emergency.
(Subsection F Added 2/1/2010 by Ord. No. 5324)
G. Fees for the response to any Hazardous Materials Incident, including natural gas
leaks by the Fire Department where the response causes resources of the Fire
Department to remain on scene for more than one hour and involving more than one
apparatus. Fees shall be assessed as follows:
1. $125.00 per hour per vehicle used in said response;
2. $35.00 per hour per firefighter employed in rendering said response;
The following persons are jointly and severally liable for the responding Fire
Services set forth above:
1. A person who owns or has custody of hazardous material that is involved in
an incident requiring emergency action by an emergency response agency;
2. A person who owns or has custody of bulk or non-bulk packaging or a
transport vehicle that contains hazardous material that is involved in an
incident requiring emergency action by an emergency response agency;
3. A person who causes or substantially contributed to the cause of the incident.
(Subsection G Added 3/20/2017 by Ord. No. 5685)
SEC. 25.16-6 CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODE SECTIONS. In the event the fee
amounts set forth in this Division conflict with fee amounts set forth in other Chapters of this Code
for the same described services, licenses or permits, then the fees set forth in this Division shall be
controlling. (Renumbered 3/2/09 by Ord. No. 5241)
SEC. 25.16-7 WAIVER OF FEES. The City Manager shall have the authority to waive
the following fees set forth in this Division:
SEC. 25.16-7(Cont.1)
A. Building Permit and Electrical Permit Fees associated with the installation of an
electric vehicle charging station. Such fee waiver authority shall be valid only until
January 1, 2015, and shall apply only to electric vehicle charging stations for the
recharging of electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric/gasoline vehicles and other
such rechargeable vehicles licensed by the State of Illinois for use on public
highways within the State. (Added 12/5/2011 by Ord. No. 5416)
(Entire Division 16 Added 2/4/08 by Ord. No. 5170)
SEC. 25.17-1
DIVISION 17 – LINER HOUSING
SEC. 25.17-1 USE OF ADJACENT PARKING GARAGE. With respect to any liner
housing development in the B-2 Central Business District where such liner housing is connected to
a Town owned parking garage, each tenant in the attached liner housing shall have a license to
purchase, at the then current market rate, no more than one monthly parking pass for use by the
tenant in accordance with rules of general applicability for monthly parking passes for the attached
parking garage. The license to purchase a monthly parking pass shall expire upon the earlier of
termination of such tenant’s lease in the attached liner housing unit or termination of such license by
action of the Normal Town Council. The Normal Town Council reserves the right to terminate the
license granted herein at any time and for any reason. No property rights are granted hereby other
than a license terminable by will.
SEC. 25.17-2 PEDESTRIAN INGRESS AND EGRESS. With respect to any liner
housing development in the B-2 Central Business District where such liner housing is connected to
a Town owned parking garage, each tenant in the attached liner housing shall have a license to use
any connected stairwell, elevator, or other means of public ingress and egress to and from the
parking garage, for ingress and egress to and from the attached liner housing and the attached
parking garage or other public way. Such license shall terminate upon the earlier of termination of
such tenant’s lease in the attached liner housing unit or termination of such license by action of the
Normal Town Council. The Normal Town Council reserves the right to terminate the license
granted herein at any time and for any reason. No property rights are granted hereby other than a
license terminable by will.
(Entire Division 17 Added 6/18/2012 by Ord. No. 5445)
SEC. 25.18-1
DIVISION 18 – NORMAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
SEC. 25.18-5 DEFINITIONS. In this Division 18:
Finance Department. The Finance Department of the Town of Normal.
Finance Director. The Finance Director of the Town of Normal.
Motor fuel has the definition set forth in Section 1.1 of the Motor Fuel Tax Law (35 ILCS
505/1.1).
Motor-fuel retailer. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling
motor fuel at retail, and not for resale within the Town of Normal.
Motor-fuel tax means the tax imposed under Sec. 25.18-10.
SEC. 25.18-10 TAX IMPOSED.
A. A tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming motor fuel that is
purchased at retail within the Town of Normal. The tax is imposed at the rate of
$0.04 per gallon or fraction thereof.
B. The tax imposed under this Section is in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges. The tax imposed under this Section is not based on the selling or
purchase price of the motor fuel or on the gross receipts from the sale or purchase
of motor fuel.
C. The purchaser bears the liability for the payment of the tax. Each motor-fuel
retailer is required to collect the tax from the purchaser and remit it as set forth in
this Division 18.
D. The tax under this Section is imposed on and after July 1, 2015.
SEC. 25.18-15 COLLECTION OF TAX BY MOTOR FUEL RETAILER.
A. Each motor-fuel retailer has the duty to collect and account for the motor-fuel tax
from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for the retail purchase is
paid.
B. Any person who collects the motor-fuel tax shall do as a trustee for and on
account of the Town of Normal.
SEC. 25.18-20 REQUIRED RETURNS AND REMITTANCE OF TAX.
A. Each motor-fuel retailer has the duty to remit the motor-fuel tax collected under
SEC. 25.18-20(Cont.1)
Sec. 25.18-15 to the Town of Normal in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
B. Each month, the motor-fuel retailer must file a tax return with the Finance
Department. The return must be prepared and submitted in the form and manner
required by the Finance Director. The return must be accompanied by the
payment to the Town of all motor-fuel taxes that are due and owing for the period
covered by the return. The due date for the return is the same monthly filing date
that is established for the motor-fuel retailer for filing sales and use tax returns
with the Illinois Department of Revenue (Form ST-1 or similar filings as required
by the Department of Revenue) covering the same reporting period.
SEC. 25.18-25 RECORDKEEPING; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
A. Each motor-fuel retailer has a duty to maintain complete and accurate books,
records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and the
motor-fuel taxes collected from purchasers.
B. The books, records, and accounts under this Section must be available in the
Town for examination and for audit by the Town. Any examination by the Town
may be made only after reasonable notice and may be made only during
customary business hours.
SEC. 25.18-30 REGISTRATION OF MOTOR FUEL RETAILERS. Each motor-fuel
retailer doing business in the Town is required to register with the Finance Department on or
before the later of: (1) July 1, 2015 or (2) 20 days after commencing business as a motor-fuel
retailer. The registration must be in the form and manner required by the Finance Director.
SEC. 25.18-35 COMPENSATION OF MOTOR FUEL RETAILER. A motor-fuel
retailer who files a timely return under Sec. 25.18-20 is entitled to retain an amount equal to 1%
of the amount to be remitted with that return. This retention is allowed for the purpose of
compensating the motor-fuel retailer for the costs incurred in complying with the duties and
obligations set forth under this Division 25.18. The motor-fuel retailer may not retain any
amount if the return is not timely filed.
SEC. 25.18-40 PENALTY. If, for any reason, any tax imposed by this Division 25.18 is
not paid or remitted when due, then interest and penalties apply as set forth in Division 13 of this
Chapter.
(Entire Division 18 Added 3/2/2015 by Ord. No. 5584, Effective July 1, 2015)
SEC. 26.1-1
CHAPTER 26 - EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES
DIVISION 1 --ILLINOIS POWER COMPANY d/b/a AMERENIP
SEC. 26.1-1. It is the intent of the parties by this Ordinance to extend for an additional
term, subject to the terms and conditions here stated, the authorization to AmerenIP, its successors
and assigns, to construct, operate and maintain a utility system within the Town as originally
authorized by Ordinance No. 160 approved on November 6, 1944, and extended monthly by
Extension Ordinance No. 4488, and approved on December 26, 1997. The parties acknowledge that
by so doing they are continuing an existing relationship authorizing the services of a utility for the
provision of electric energy and other purposes within the Town for the benefit of its citizens and
residents as well as other consumers of electric energy located within its corporate limits. For
purposes of construing the terms, rights and obligations of the parties, this authorization is granted
pursuant to Section 14 of the Electric Supplier Act, 220 ILCS 30/14, and the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1, etc. seq.
SEC. 26.1-2. There is hereby given and granted to AmerenIP, its successors and assigns
(hereinafter referred to as the “Company”), the right, privilege and authority to construct, operate,
maintain, and/or extend within the corporate limits, as the same now exists or may hereafter be
extended, of the Town of Normal (hereinafter referred to as “Municipality”), an electric utility
system for the transmission, distribution and/or sale of electric energy (the “System”), together with
the right, privilege and authority to erect, construct, install, operate, and/or maintain all poles,
conductors, wires, cables, conduits, equipment, and/or other apparatus as may be necessary or
convenient for the System, in, upon, along, over, under, through, and/or across each and all of the
streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, easements, rights of way, and /or other public ways.
SEC. 26.1-3. All poles and other equipment placed or installed under this Ordinance in
streets, alleys, avenues, and other public places, shall be so placed as not to interfere unnecessarily
with travel on such streets, alleys, avenues, and other public places. All poles and other equipment
placed or installed under this Ordinance shall be so located as not to injure any pipes, conduits,
sewers, drains, pavement, or other like public improvements, and said Company shall forthwith
repair any damage caused to such improvements to the satisfaction of the official or officials of said
Municipality having charge of the supervision thereof, and, in default thereof, said Municipality
may repair such damage and charge the cost thereof to, and collect the same from, the Company.
All facilities of the Company in said Municipality shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
When any street, avenue, or other public facility or structure shall be graded, curbed, paved,
or otherwise changed so as to make the resetting or relocation of any poles or other equipment
placed or installed under this Ordinance necessary, the Company shall make such resetting or
relocation at the Company’s cost and expense. The Municipality shall provide the Company with a
suitable location for the resetting or relocation of such poles or other equipment, and the Company’s
obligation shall be limited to resetting or relocating poles or other equipment of the same type and
configuration as the displaced poles or other equipment. The Company shall make such resetting or
relocation within a reasonable time after receiving written notice of the need for the same from the
SEC. 26.1-3(Cont.1)
authorized representative of the Municipality and the establishment by the Municipality of the
permanent grade at the new location.
SEC. 26.1-4. In order for the Company to render efficient, safe, and continuous services, it
will be necessary for the Company to conduct vegetation management activities, including the
trimming or pruning and cutting down of the trunks and branches of trees and/or vines and shrubs
along or over the streets, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, squares, bridges, and other public places in said
Municipality and areas dedicated to the Municipality for public utility use wherever the same are
likely to interfere with its equipment; therefore, the Company is hereby granted the right to conduct
such vegetation management activities so as to enable it to erect, operate and maintain its equipment
in a regular consistent form and manner and to enable it to provide the most efficient, safe, and
continuous service that the circumstances will permit; provided, however, that the Company shall
exercise proper care and discretion in its vegetation management activities. The Company shall
conduct its vegetation management activities in accordance with applicable law, including without
limitation, 220 ILCS 5/8-505.1, and any amendments thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the
extent applicable law may be superceded or modified by an agreement between the Municipality
and the Company, the Municipality and the Company reserve the right to enter into such an
agreement.
SEC. 26.1-5. The rates to be charged by the Company for electric service rendered under
this Ordinance shall be such as are approved from time to time by the Illinois Commerce
Commission of the State of Illinois and/or such other duly constituted governmental authority as
shall have jurisdiction thereof. All Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission of
the State of Illinois applicable to the rights, privileges and authority granted by the Ordinance, in the
event of conflict herewith, shall govern, but only to the extent such rules and regulations preempt
Home Rule authority.
SEC. 26.1-6. As a further consideration for the rights, privileges and authorities granted by
this Ordinance, the Company shall, in Year 1 of the agreement, furnish the Municipality
compensation in the amount of $240,200 (payable in 12 equal monthly payments by the 15th of each
month, beginning within 30 days of the acceptance of this ordinance by the Municipality). In
subsequent years, payment will be made after the anniversary date on the following graduated scale:
Year 2 - $255,400 (payable in 12 equal monthly payments by the 15th of each month); Year 3 -
$270,600 (payable in 12 equal monthly payments by the 15th of each month); Year 4 - $285,800
(payable in 12 equal monthly payments by the 15th of each month); and Year 5 – and all remaining
years -$301,000 (payable in 12 equal monthly payments by the 15th of each month). The
Municipality may request a revision to the compensation amount after five years from the date of
passage of this ordinance if the Municipality has a reasonable belief that its population has increased
or decreased by 3% or more. The Municipality must request the revision at least 60 days prior to
the next anniversary date. If the Company confirms that the number of customers served by the
System within the Municipality’s corporate limits has increased or decreased by 3% or more, the
compensation amount will be revised by that percentage for the next and succeeding payments. The
Municipality may request similar revisions to compensation amounts under these criteria in
additional five-year periods throughout the term of this ordinance.
SEC. 26.1-7
SEC. 26.1-7. If at any time during the term of this contract, the Municipality permits
another entity or person to provide electric distribution of similar services, and the Company
reasonably believes the other entity or person is granted more favorable treatment, terms, or
conditions, then the Company shall notify the Municipality of such treatment, terms or conditions.
Alternatively, if the Municipality reasonably believes the other entity or person grants the
Municipality more favorable treatment, terms or conditions, then the Municipality shall notify the
Company of such treatment, terms or conditions. Upon receipt of such notice, the Municipality and
the Company shall negotiate in good faith to amend this ordinance to provide the Company or the
Municipality such more favorable treatment, terms or conditions on an equivalent basis. Such
amendment shall take into consideration all circumstances that distinguish between the Company
and the entity or person receiving the more favorable or less favorable treatment, terms, or
conditions.
SEC. 26.1-8. The Company shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license,
rental, or other charge during the term of this Ordinance on all poles, conductors, wires, cables,
conduits, equipment, and other apparatus placed in the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, easements,
rights of way, or other public places within the corporate limits of the Municipality.
SEC. 26.1-9. The rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall inure to and be
vested in the Company, its successors and assigns, successively, subject to all of the terms,
provisions and conditions herein contained, and each of the obligations hereby imposed upon the
Company shall devolve and be binding upon its successors and assigns, successively, in the same
manner.
SEC. 26.1-10. This Ordinance shall confer no right, privilege or authority on the Company,
it successors or assigns unless the Company shall within ninety (90) days after due notice to the
Company of the enactment of this Ordinance, file with the Town Clerk an acceptance of the terms
and provisions hereof; provided, however, that if such acceptance be not so filed within said period
of ninety (90) days, all rights, privileges and authority herein granted shall become null and void.
SEC. 26.1-11. All rights, privileges and authority given and granted by this Ordinance are
granted for a term of 20 years from and after the acceptance of this Ordinance as hereinafter
provided (the “Initial Term”), and, thereafter, on a year-to-year basis (each a “Subsequent Term”)
unless either the Company or the Municipality notifies the other in writing of its desire to terminate
this Ordinance at least six (6) months prior to the expiration of the Initial Term or any Subsequent
Term.
SEC. 26.1-12. The Municipality acknowledges that the Company is vested in rights,
permissions and authority independent of this Ordinance. Neither acceptance of this Ordinance nor
compliance with its provisions shall impair in any way or waive any right, permission or authority
which the Company may have independent of this Ordinance. In addition, neither use by the the
Company of public property or places as authorized by this Ordinance nor service rendered by the
Company in said Municipality shall be treated as use solely of the rights, permission and authority
provided for by this Ordinance and in no way shall indicate non-use of any right, permission or
authority vested in the Company independent of this Ordinance. In the event the Municipality
vacates any streets, avenues, alleys, easements, rights of way, bridges, or other public places during
SEC. 26.1-12(Cont.1)
the term of this Ordinance, the Municipality agrees to reserve unto the Company the rights,
privileges and authority herein given and granted to the Company in upon, along, over, and across
each and all of such vacated premises which are at the time in use by the Company.
SEC. 26.1-13. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance or
with any of its provisions are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SEC. 26.1-14. The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the Municipality and all
contractors, officers, employees, and representatives thereof from all claims, demands, causes of
action, liability, judgments, costs and expenses, or losses for injury or death to persons, or damage
to property owned by, and Worker’s Compensation claims against any parties indemnified herein,
arising out of, caused by, or as a result of the Company’s construction, erection, maintenance, use,
or presence of, or removal of any poles, wires, lines, cables, conduit, appurtenances thereto, or
equipment or attachments thereto. The foregoing indemnification shall not apply to the extent any
such claim, demand, cause of action, liability, judgment, cost, expense, or loss arises out of, is
caused by, or results from the negligent or wrongful willful act or omission of the Municipality or
any contractor, officer, employee, or representative thereof.
SEC. 26.1-15. This Ordinance shall not relieve the Company of the obligation to comply
with any ordinance of uniform application now existing in the Municipality or enacted in the future
including, but not limited to, ordinances requiring the Company to obtain written permits or other
approval from the Municipality prior to commencement of construction of facilities within the
streets thereof, except the Company shall not be required to obtain permits or other approval from
the Municipality for the maintenance, upgrading, and repair of its constructed facilities provided no
excavation is necessary; provided, however, if excavation is necessary, no permit fee shall be
payable by the Company. The Company shall provide notice of excavation hereunder in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1, et. seq.).
SEC. 26.1-16. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of such provision to
particular circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance or the application of
such provision to circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid shall not be affected
thereby.
SEC. 26.1-17. Any conflict between the Franchise Ordinance and the provisions contained
in the Electric Service Customer Choice and Rate Relief Law of 1997 (Public Act 90-561) will be
resolved by giving the state statute mandatory priority over any contrary language contained in the
Franchise Ordinance as to electric service customer choice and electric rates only.
SEC. 26.1-18. This Ordinance shall take effect, and the rights, privileges and authority
hereby granted and renewed shall vest in the Company upon its filing of an acceptance with the
Town Clerk according to the terms prescribed herein and as provided for in Section 12 and in IL
Rev 35 ILCS 645/5-4. This Ordinance shall be in full force from and after its passage, approval and
ten- (10) day period of publication in the manner provided by law.
(Entire Division 1 Approved on 5/18/09 by Ord. No. 5266, and Expires on May 18, 2029)
SEC. 26.2-1
DIVISION 2 – NORTHERN ILLINOIS GAS COMPANY
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF NORMAL,
COUNTY OF McLEAN, STATE OF ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.2-1 DEFINITIONS.
The following terms have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
Annual Meeting. The meeting provided under Subsection 13.A. of this Ordinance.
Assignee. The entity that accepts an assignment under this Ordinance from the Grantee
with the authorization of the Municipality, as provided in Subsection 13.B of this
Ordinance.
Corporate Authorities. The corporate authorities of the Municipality.
Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance, being January 1, 2016.
Emergency. An event involving the Gas System that (i) poses an imminent threat to the
public health or safety within the Municipality or (ii) is likely to result in a prolonged and
unplanned interruption of gas service to a significant number of customers within the
Municipality.
Gas. Natural gas or manufactured gas, or a mixture of gases, that is distributed to the
Grantee's customers in the Municipality through the Gas System.
Gas System. The Grantee's system of pipes, tubes, mains, conductors, and other devices,
apparatus, appliances, and equipment for the production, distribution, and sale of gas for
fuel, heating, power, processing, and other purposes within and outside the corporate
limits of the Municipality.
Gas System Work. Any construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal or
replacement of the Gas System conducted by the Grantee within the Public Right-of-Way
or conducted by the Grantee immediately adjacent to the Public Right-of-Way if such
activity physically disturbs the Public Right-of-Way.
ICC. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
Public Right-of-Way. The Municipality's streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, easements,
and other property of the Municipality used as right-of-way.
Requirements of Law. Any and all reasonable regulations which may now or hereafter
be prescribed by general ordinance of the Municipality with respect to the use of the
Public Right-of-Way or the conduct of Gas System Work.
Term. The term of the Franchise under Section 3 of this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.2-2
SEC.26.2- 2 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. The Municipality grants the right, permission
and authority to the Grantee to construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, and replace its Gas
System within the corporate limits of the Municipality, subject to the conditions and regulations
of this Ordinance. The right, permission and authority granted by the Municipality to the
Grantee by this Franchise may not be exclusive to the Grantee, provided that any other such
rights or authority granted by the Municipality may not interfere with the right, permission and
authority granted to the Grantee pursuant to this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.2-3 TERM. The Franchise authorized and granted pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be for a term of 25 years, commencing on the Effective Date, and expiring on January 1,
2041 (Term).
SEC. 26.2-4 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The Grantee shall be authorized
to use the Public Right-of-Way for the Gas System and Gas System Work subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance, including without limitation the following provisions:
A. General Coordination, Location and Repair. Those portions of the Gas System in
the Public Right-of-Way shall be installed and maintained under the general
supervision of the Director of Public Works of the Municipality, or other duly
authorized agent of the Municipality. The portions of the Gas System within the
Public Right-of-Way shall be located as not to injure any drains, sewers, catch
basins, water pipes, pavements or other like public improvements. If any drain,
sewer, catch basin, water pipe, pavement or other like public improvement is
injured by the location of the portions of the Gas System within the Public Rightof-
Way, the Grantee shall forthwith repair the damage to the satisfaction of the
Municipality and in default thereof the Municipality may repair such damage and
charge the cost thereof to, and collect the same from, the Grantee.
B. Compliance with Requirements of Law. The Grantee shall be subject to the
specific standards provided in this Ordinance for work in the Public Right-of-Way
and with all other Requirements of Law.
C. Conduct of Gas System Work; Restoration. The Grantee will conduct Gas
System Work in accordance with the Requirements of Law. The Grantee will
undertake to minimize the disturbance or obstruction of the Public Right-of-Way
caused by Gas System Work, including, without limitation, having Gas System
Work, once started, undertaken and completed without unreasonable delay. The
Grantee will promptly restore Public Right-of-Way, as well as any fences, roads,
pavements and other improvements in the Public Right-of-Way, disturbed by Gas
System Work as nearly as reasonably practicable to its condition immediately
before the Gas System Work.
D. Emergencies. In the case of an Emergency, the Grantee will notify the
Municipality by the most practical, timely, and available means under the
circumstances of the Emergency and the conditions that are affecting the Gas
SEC. 26.2-4(Cont.1)
System and its customers. Notwithstanding Section 10, the notice will be no
more than 24 hours after the Grantee learns of the Emergency, except if notice
within 24 hours is not practicable under the circumstances of the Emergency, in
which case the Grantee will provide the notice required under this Subsection as
soon as is practicable under the circumstances. Each Party will provide the other
Party with an Emergency contacts list, including 24-hour contact information for
at least two representatives. The Grantee will keep the Municipality apprised of
the status of the Emergency to the extent reasonably practicable and will advise
the Municipality when the Emergency has been resolved.
E. Coordination Regarding Capital Improvements; System Information. The
Grantee and the Municipality believe that it is in their mutual interests to be
informed of their respective capital improvement programs, so that whenever
practicable those programs can be undertaken to minimize the cost of construction
and public inconvenience. To that end, the following provisions apply:
1. Meeting. At Annual Meetings (see Subsection 13.A of this Ordinance),
representatives of the Grantee and the Municipality will be prepared to
discuss significant known Gas System Work and Municipal projects that
could impact the Gas System and that will or may be undertaken within
the Municipality.
2. Capital Improvement Plans and General System Information. The Grantee
will establish and maintain an information medium (“Information
Sharing System”), at no cost to the Municipality, that will provide the
Municipality access, on reasonable terms, to information identifying (a)
anticipated Gas System Work, (b) Grantee’s planned capital improvement
plans and major maintenance work related to the Gas System within the
Municipality, (c) maps or other documents showing the locations of gas
distribution mains in or under Public Right-of-Way within the
Municipality; and (d) the status of ongoing Gas System Work and capital
improvement plans and major maintenance work related to the Gas
System within the Municipality (collectively, “General System
Information”). The Grantee reserves the right to modify or replace the
Information Sharing System from time to time at its discretion. Absent
gross negligence or intentional misconduct by the Grantee, the Grantee
shall have no monetary liability to the Municipality due to defects in the
design or performance of the Information Sharing System or errors or
omissions in the information disclosed through the Information Sharing
System; provided, however, that this sentence does not change the
Grantee’s obligation under Paragraph 1 of this Subsection and Subsection
13.A of this Ordinance with respect to General System Information. As
part of the Annual Meeting, the Parties may discuss the performance of
the Information Sharing System and any adjustments and refinements to
the Information Sharing System and, if requested by the Municipality, the
SEC. 26.2-4(Cont.2)
Grantee will provide information regarding any updates or other
operational changes or improvements to the Information Sharing System.
SEC. 26.2-5 CONSIDERATION FOR USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
A. Payments; Provision of Gas. The Grantee shall make the Renewal Payment
provided in Paragraph 1 of this Subsection and, commencing with calendar year
2016, either (but never both) (i) make the Annual Payments as provided and
calculated in Paragraph 2 of this Subsection, or (ii) provide for Unbilled Gas as
provided and calculated in Paragraphs 3 of this Subsection. The Municipality
shall notify the Grantee in writing within sixty days after the Effective Date
whether it has chosen to receive Annual Payments or Unbilled Gas. In the event
the Municipality has not notified the Grantee in writing within sixty days after the
Effective Date, the Municipality shall be deemed to have chosen to receive
Annual Payments as provided and calculated in Paragraph 2 of this Subsection.
Upon written notice to Grantee given on or before June 30 of the calendar year
preceding the date of change, the Municipality may change the method of
compensation from Annual Payments to Unbilled Gas, or vice versa, effective as
of January 1 of any or all of the third, sixth, ninth, twelfth, fifteenth, eighteenth,
twenty-first, or twenty-fourth calendar year following the Effective Date. In the
event the Municipality has not so notified the Grantee of a change in the method
of compensation by the applicable June 30, the method of compensation then in
effect shall continue and may not be changed by the Municipality during the
ensuing three calendar year period.
1. Renewal Payment. Within ninety days after the Effective Date, the
Grantee will pay the Municipality, solely as consideration for renewal of
the franchise granted under the Previous Agreement, a one-time franchise
renewal payment (“Renewal Payment”) of $42,192, being equal to 75
percent of the value of (a) the “Therm Allocation” (as calculated under
Paragraph 4 of this Subsection) as of the Effective Date multiplied by (b)
the “Gas Cost per Therm” (as calculated under Paragraph 2 of this
Subsection).
2. Annual Payment. In January of each year except 2016 and in March of
2016, the Grantee will pay the Municipality an annual payment (“Annual
Payment”) if the Municipality has chosen or has been deemed to have
chosen to receive Annual Payments rather than Unbilled Gas for such
calendar year. The amount of each Annual Payment will be calculated by
the Grantee by multiplying (a) the “Therm Allocation” (as calculated
under Paragraph 4 of this Subsection) times (b) the applicable Gas Cost
per Therm. As used herein, the term “Gas Cost per Therm” means, with
respect to a calendar year, the sum of (i) the average per therm gas cost for
the preceding three calendar years, based on the Grantee’s prudently
incurred purchased gas cost and (ii) the per therm rate for general gas
SEC. 26.2-5(Cont.1)
service under the Grantee’s rate structure in effect as of the last day of the
preceding calendar year.
3. Unbilled Gas. If the Municipality has chosen to receive Unbilled Gas, the
Grantee shall supply, during each billing year (start and finish of each year
shall begin and end with regular meter reading date nearest to January 1)
that the Municipality’s choice to receive Unbilled Gas remains in effect,
without charge to the Municipality, an amount of gas (“Unbilled Gas”) not
to exceed the Therm Allocation (as calculated under Paragraph 4 of this
Subsection), to be used in buildings which may be occupied from time to
time by the Municipality solely for municipal purposes, or such part of
these buildings as may from time to time be occupied for ongoing
municipal purposes, and not for purposes of revenue.
4. Therm Allocation. For purposes of determining the Annual Payment or
the amount of Unbilled Gas under Paragraphs 2 and 3, respectively, of this
Subsection, the Therm Allocation will be based on the following formula:
3.6 therms per person up to 10,000 of population; 2.4 therms per person
for the next 10,000 of population; 1.2 therm per person for the next 80,000
of population; 1.45 therms per person for the next 20,000 of population;
and 1.8 therms per person for the population over 120,000. For purposes
of the Therm Allocation, the population of the Municipality as of the
Effective Date shall be deemed to be the same as the population of the
Municipality at the 2010 decennial census, which was 52,497. This
population number will be adjusted by the Grantee based on each
decennial census count. Between decennial census counts, the Therm
Allocation may be increased prospectively on the basis of changes in
population of the Municipality as shown by revised or special census.
Upon the submission of a written request by the Municipality
accompanied by the official State notification of census change, the Therm
Allocation will be adjusted by the Grantee.
B. Limitations on Gas Use. None of Unbilled Gas to be supplied to the Municipality
under Paragraph A3 of this Section, shall be resold by the Municipality for any
purpose whatsoever. In the event the Municipality uses less than the amount of
Unbilled Gas calculated and authorized under Paragraph A3 of this Section, there
shall be no payment due to the Municipality from the Grantee for gas not used
during that billing year, nor shall any such unused therms be carried over for the
following billing year’s use.
C. Offset. If the Municipality has chosen or has been deemed to have chosen to
receive Annual Payments, the Grantee shall have the right to reduce the Annual
Payment for a calendar year by the amount of any fees that the Municipality has
been paid by the Grantee during the preceding calendar year for permits, street or
parkway openings, or inspections related to the Gas System or Gas System
Works. If the Municipality has chosen to receive Unbilled Gas, the Grantee shall
SEC. 26.2-5(Cont.2)
have the right to reduce the Therm Allocation for a billing year by an amount of
therms equal to (a) the amount of any fees that the Municipality has been paid by
the Grantee during the preceding billing year divided by (b) the Gas Cost per
Therm determined for the calendar year that begins with the January 1 nearest to
the end of such billing year.
SEC. 26.2-6 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS. Within 90 days following a written
request by the Municipality made no more frequently than once during each calendar year of the
Term, the Grantee will provide the Municipality with a written statement showing the gross
operating revenue generated during the immediately preceding calendar year by the Grantee
from the distribution of gas to customers identified in the Grantee’s billing records as located
within the corporate limits of the Municipality, which statement will, if requested as part of the
Municipality’s request, show the distribution of such gross operating revenue among the
following categories of users: Residential, Commercial, and Industrial, or by such other
categories as may be agreed to by the Grantee and the Municipality.
SEC. 26.2-7 SUBSTITUTION OF MORE FAVORABLE PROVISIONS.
A. Amended Ordinance. If during the Term of this Franchise, the Municipality
learns of a Grantee franchise (“Grantee Franchise”) from any other municipality
in Illinois (“Other Franchisor”) adopted or otherwise provided by the Other
Franchisor after the Effective Date and containing “More Favorable Provisions”
(as defined in Subsection C of this Section), then the Municipality may adopt, no
sooner than 30 days from the date of providing the notice to the Grantee required
pursuant to Subsection B of this Section, an ordinance amending this Ordinance
solely to substitute for the provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance replacement
provisions that are substantially identical to the More Favorable Provisions
(“Amended Ordinance”). If the Municipality adopts an Amended Ordinance in
conformity with this Section 7, the Grantee will accept the Amended Ordinance
and execute a Consent Agreement consistent with Section 15 of this Ordinance.
B. Notice. At least 30 days before adopting an Amended Ordinance pursuant to this
Section 7, the Municipality shall provide the Grantee with written notice that
explicitly (i) states that the Municipality intends to invoke its right under this
Section 7 to adopt an Amended Ordinance; (ii) identifies the Other Franchisor;
(iii) states the date, time, and place of the meeting at which adoption of the
Amended Ordinance will be considered; and (iv) includes the Amended
Ordinance.
C. More Favorable Provisions. The provisions in a Grantee Franchise (i)
establishing the compensation to be paid by the Grantee to the Other Franchisor,
including, without limitation, the formulas and procedures utilized to determine
the form and amount of such compensation (“Compensation Formulas and
Procedures”); and (ii) that the Municipality has reasonably concluded are more
advantageous to or protective of the public interest of the Other Franchisor than
the existing provisions of Section 5 of this Ordinance are to the Municipality.
SEC. 26.2-7(Cont.1)
“More Favorable Provisions” shall not include provisions providing consideration
to the Other Franchisor for franchise renewal (it being understood that the
exercise by the Municipality of its right under this Section 7 shall not be deemed a
franchise renewal). Replacement provisions in a proposed Amended Ordinance
shall not be deemed to be substantially identical to More Favorable Provisions if
those replacement provisions do not utilize the Compensation Formulas and
Procedures as applied to the Municipality to determine the form and amount of
compensation to be paid by the Grantee to the Municipality. The Municipality
shall not have the right to invoke this Section solely to effect a change in the form
of compensation (between payments or unbilled gas) if that form of compensation
had been available to the Municipality to select under Section 5 of this Ordinance,
and neither the procedures for changing the form of compensation in Section 5 of
this Ordinance nor those in the Compensation Formulas and Procedures would
then have permitted the Municipality to make a change in the form of
compensation.
D. No Notification Required. Nothing in this Section shall require the Grantee to
notify the Municipality of new franchises that the Grantee obtains with other
municipalities in Illinois or new provisions within any existing franchise
agreements.
SEC. 26.2-8 INDEMNIFICATION.
A. Grantee. The Grantee must, and will, fully indemnify the Municipality (but not
any other third party) against and from any and all claims, liabilities, actions,
damages, judgments, and costs, including without limitation injury or death to any
person and damage to any property or Public Right-of-Way and including without
limitation attorneys’ fees (collectively, “Claims”) that the Municipality may incur
or suffer, or that may be obtained against the Municipality, as a result of or related
to the Grantee’s failure to perform any of its obligations under this Ordinance, or
the Grantee’s negligent, unlawful, or intentional wrongful acts or omissions that
relate to (i) the use or occupation by Grantee of the Public Right-of-Way under
this Ordinance, or (ii) the construction, operation, maintenance, or repair of the
Gas System located within the Public Right-of-Way. The Municipality must give
the Grantee written notice within 30 calendar days after the Municipality has
received written notice of a Claim. The Municipality may tender to the Grantee
the defense of a Claim, in which case the Grantee must defend the Municipality
against that Claim, or the Municipality may defend itself against that Claim
at the Grantee’s expense. The Grantee shall not be required to indemnify, defend,
or hold harmless the Municipality for any Claims to the extent the Municipality,
its officers, agents, or employees are liable under the laws of the State of Illinois
(including for conduct that constitutes gross negligence, malicious or intentional
wrongful acts, or the willful misconduct of the Municipality, its officers, agents,
or employees while acting on behalf of the Municipality).
SEC. 26.2-8(Cont.1)
B. Municipality.
1. The Municipality must, and will, fully indemnify the Grantee (but not any
other third party) against any and all Claims arising as a result of damages
to the Grantee’s Gas System caused by the conduct of the Municipality, its
officers, employees, or agents for which the Municipality is liable under
the laws of the State of Illinois (including for conduct that constitutes
gross negligence, malicious or intentional wrongful acts, or the willful
misconduct of the Municipality, its officers, agents, or employees while
acting on behalf of the Municipality). The Municipality shall not be
required to indemnify, defend, or hold harmless the Grantee for any
damages to the extent the Grantee, its officers, agents, or employees are
liable under the laws of the State of Illinois (including for conduct that
constitutes gross negligence, malicious or intentional wrongful acts, or the
willful misconduct of the Grantee, its officers, agents, or employees while
acting on behalf of the Grantee).
2. The Grantee recognizes the Municipality’s right to exercise its police
powers over the Public Right-of-Way in case of fire, disaster, or other
emergency as reasonably determined by the Municipality.
Notwithstanding Paragraph 1 of this Subsection, the Municipality shall not
be liable to the Grantee for any damages to the Grantee’s Gas System
when the damage results from the exercise by the Municipality of its
police powers in order to protect the public in case of fire, disaster or other
emergency. When practicable, as reasonably determined by the
Municipality, the Municipality shall consult with the Grantee prior to the
exercise by the Municipality of these police powers, where the exercise
may affect the Grantee’s Gas System, and to permit the Grantee to take
necessary action to protect the public and the Gas System.
SEC. 26.2-9 INSURANCE. If the Grantee’s total stockholder equity as determined in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“Stockholder Equity”) as of the end
of its most recently completed fiscal year is less than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the
Grantee shall be obligated under this ordinance to maintain during its current fiscal year, at its
sole cost and expense, insurance against the liabilities assumed under this ordinance consisting of
the following coverages at the following minimum limits:
A. Comprehensive General Liability. Comprehensive general liability insurance
with coverage written on an “occurrence” or “claims made” basis and with limits
no less than: (1) General Aggregate: $2,000,000; (2) Bodily Injury: $2,000,000
per person, $2,000,000 per occurrence; and (3) Property Damage: $2,000,000 per
occurrence. Coverage must include: Premises Operations, Independent
Contractors, Personal Injury (with Employment Exclusion deleted), Broad Form
Property Damage Endorsement, Blanket Contractual Liability, and bodily injury
and property damage. Exclusions “X,” “C,” and “U” must be deleted. Railroad
exclusions must be deleted if any portion of the Gas System Work is within 50
SEC. 26.2-9(Cont.1)
feet of any railroad track. Every employee of the Grantee engaged in Gas System
Work within the Municipality must be included as an insured.
B. Comprehensive Motor Vehicle Liability. Comprehensive motor vehicle liability
insurance with a combined single limit of liability for bodily injury and property
damage of not less than $2,000,000 for vehicles owned, non-owned, or rented.
The coverage required by this subsection shall include bodily injury and property
damage for all motor vehicles engaged in Gas System Work within the
Municipality that are operated by any employee, subcontractor, or agent of the
Grantee.
C. Workers’ Compensation. Workers’ compensation coverage in accordance with
applicable law.
D. General Standards for All Insurance. If obligated under this Section to maintain
the foregoing insurance coverages, (i) the Grantee may satisfy that obligation, in
whole or in part, through insurance provided by a captive insurance company
affiliated with the Grantee to the extent permitted under applicable law if such
captive insurance company and the Grantee are both controlled by a company
with Stockholder Equity as of the end of its most recently completed fiscal year of
at least fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), or through commercial insurance; (ii)
all commercial insurance policies obtained by the Grantee to satisfy such
obligation must be written by companies customarily used by public utilities for
those purposes, including, if permitted by this Subsection, policies issued by a
captive insurance company affiliated with the Grantee; (iii) the Grantee must
provide the Municipality, upon request, with reasonable evidence of insurance
and with certificates of insurance for commercial coverage designating the
Municipality and its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents, and
employees as additional insured and demonstrating that the Grantee is
maintaining the insurance required in this Section; and (iv) each policy shall
provide that no change, modification, or cancellation of any insurance coverage
required by this Section shall be effective until the expiration of 30 calendar days
after written notice to the Municipality of any such change, modification, or
cancellation and providing that there is no limitation of liability of the insurance if
the Grantee fails to notify the Municipality of a policy cancellation.
SEC. 26.2-10 CURE. In addition to every other right or remedy provided to the
Municipality under this Ordinance, if the Grantee fails to comply in a material respect with any
of its material obligations under this Ordinance (for reason other than force majeure), then the
Municipality may give written notice to the Grantee specifying that failure. The Grantee will
have 30 calendar days after the date of its receipt of that written notice to take all necessary steps
to cure such material non-compliance, unless the cure cannot reasonably be achieved within 30
calendar days but the Grantee promptly commences the cure and diligently pursues the cure to
completion.
SEC. 26.2-11
SEC. 26.2-11 FORCE MAJEURE. Neither the Grantee nor the Municipality will be
held in violation or breach of this Ordinance when a violation or breach occurred or was caused
by (a) riot, war, earthquake, flood, terrorism, or other catastrophic act beyond the respective
Party’s reasonable control or (b) governmental, administrative, or judicial order or regulation
other than, in the case of the Municipality, an order or regulation issued by the Municipality not
in the exercise of its police powers in order to protect the public in the case of fire, disaster or
other emergency.
SEC. 26.2-12 NOTICE. With respect to an Emergency, Grantee shall provide notice to
the Municipality in accordance with Subsection 4.D. of this Ordinance. Any other notice that (a)
requires a response or action from the Municipality or the Grantee within a specific time frame
or (b) would trigger a timeline that would affect one or both of the parties’ rights under this
Ordinance must be made in writing and must be sufficiently given and served on the other party
by hand delivery, first class mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage
prepaid, or by reputable overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
If to Municipality:
Town of Normal
11 Uptown Circle
PO Box 589
Normal, IL 61761-0589
Attention: City Manager
If to Grantee:
Northern Illinois Gas Company d/b/a Nicor Gas Company
1844 Ferry Road
Naperville, Illinois 60563
Attention: President
with a copy to:
Northern Illinois Gas Company d/b/a Nicor Gas Company
1844 Ferry Road
Naperville, Illinois 60563
Attention: Community Relations and Economic Development Department
For other notices regarding the general business between the parties, e-mail messages and
facsimiles will be acceptable when addressed to the persons of record specified above.
SEC. 26.2-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Communications and Annual Meeting.
1. General Communications. The Grantee and the Municipality believe that
SEC. 26.2-13(Cont.1)
it is in their mutual interests to maintain consistent and reliable means of
communications regarding all matters under this Franchise. Nothing in
this Section precludes the parties in any way from conducting meetings
and communications not specifically provided in this Section on any other
dates and times during the Term as necessary, required, or otherwise
desired.
2. Annual Meeting. Except as the Grantee and the Municipality may
otherwise agree, upon 45 days prior written notice from the Municipality
to the Grantee given no more frequently than once during each calendar
year of the Term, the representatives of the Grantee and the Municipality
will meet at the offices of the Municipality or another mutually acceptable
location (“Annual Meeting”).
3. Annual Meeting Matters. At the Annual Meetings the Parties will review,
as necessary, any matters related to this Ordinance and the Franchise as
generally identified by the Municipality in its written notice provided
pursuant to Paragraph 2 of this Subsection related to (i) the Gas System
and Gas System Work; (ii) issues that have arisen since the prior Annual
Meeting regarding the Grantee’s activities conducted under the authority
granted by this Ordinance, (iii) efforts and initiatives by the Grantee or the
Municipality, or both, to promote energy efficiency and cost savings
related to the use of gas supplied by the Grantee; and (iv) identification of
anticipated future capital improvement programs by the Municipality and
the Grantee in an effort to coordinate those programs whenever practical
in an effort to minimize costs for both the Municipality and the Grantee
and to reduce public inconvenience (collectively, “Annual Meeting
Matters”). The Grantee’s and the Municipality’s representatives at Annual
Meetings shall include individuals with the knowledge, experience and
authority required to address competently and to seek to resolve the
Annual Meeting Matters identified from discussion at the Annual Meeting.
4. Good Faith Efforts to Resolve Annual Meeting Matters. The Municipality
and the Grantee will constructively discuss the Annual Meeting Matters at
the Annual Meetings. The goal of these discussions is to ensure that the
Grantee and the Municipality have sufficient information to address and, if
possible, resolve the Annual Meeting Matters and the Parties will share
information reasonably necessary for those purposes; provided, however
that neither the Grantee nor the Municipality will be required to respond to
unduly burdensome information requests or to provide confidential or
privileged information to the other party. The parties will work in good
faith to resolve Annual Meeting Matters on mutually acceptable terms and
to do so within a reasonable period of time. To the extent that resolution
of an Annual Meeting Matter is not otherwise provided by the terms of
this Franchise, the parties may memorialize their understandings related to
resolution of Annual Meeting Matters through memoranda of
SEC. 26.2-13(Cont.2)
understanding, supplemental agreements, or other arrangements mutually
agreed to.
B. Assignments of Rights by Grantee. All provisions of this Ordinance that are
obligatory upon, or which inure to the benefit of, NICOR GAS shall also be
obligatory upon and shall inure to the benefit of any and all successors and
permitted assigns of NICOR GAS, and the word “Grantee” wherever appearing in
this Ordinance shall include and be taken to mean not only NICOR GAS, but also
each and all of such successors and permitted assigns. The Grantee may not
assign any right it has under this Ordinance without the prior express written
authorization of the Municipality by ordinance or resolution of the Corporate
Authorities. The Municipality will not withhold that authorization if (a) the
Assignee is technically and financially capable of operating and maintaining the
Gas System in the reasonable judgment of the Municipality and (b) the Assignee
assumes all of the obligations of the Grantee under this Ordinance except as they
may be amended in writing and approved by the Municipality.
C. Entire Agreement; Interpretation. This Ordinance embodies the entire
understanding and agreement of the Municipality and the Grantee with respect to
the subject matter of this Ordinance and the Franchise. This Ordinance
supersedes, cancels, repeals, and shall be in lieu of the Previous Agreement.
D. Governing Law; Venue. This Ordinance has been approved executed in the State
of Illinois and will be governed in all respects, including validity, interpretation,
and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of Illinois.
Any court action against the Municipality may be filed only in McLean County,
Illinois, in which the Municipality’s principal office is located.
E. Amendments. Except as otherwise provided pursuant to Section 7 of this
Ordinance, no provision of this Ordinance may be amended or otherwise
modified, in whole or in part, to be contractually binding on Grantee, except by an
instrument in writing duly approved and executed by the Municipality and
accepted by the Grantee by execution of a Consent Agreement consistent with
Section 15 of this Ordinance.
F. No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to confer
third-party beneficiary status on any person, individual, corporation, or member
of the public to enforce the terms of this Ordinance.
G. No Waiver of Rights. Nothing in this Ordinance may be construed as a waiver of
any rights, substantive or procedural, the Grantee or the Municipality may have
under federal or State of Illinois law unless such waiver is expressly stated in this
Ordinance.
SEC. 26.2-14 MUNICIPALITY AUTHORITY RESERVATION. The Municipality
reserves, subject to the limitations of applicable federal and State of Illinois laws, (i) its powers
SEC. 26.2-14(Cont.1)
necessary or convenient for the conduct of the Municipality’s municipal affairs and for the public
health, safety and general welfare; and (ii) its right to own and operate a gas utility in
competition with the Grantee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Municipality will not take any
such action that would have the effect of depriving Grantee of the rights, permissions and
authorities granted to Grantee under this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.2-15 CONSENT AGREEMENT. Within ninety days after the Effective Date,
the Grantee will file with the Municipality a written agreement to accept and comply with the
terms of this Ordinance as attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit A (“Consent Agreement”), duly
executed by authorized representatives of the Grantee. The Grantee’s failure to provide the
Consent Agreement within ninety days after the Effective Date shall be deemed a rejection of
this Ordinance by the Grantee, and the rights and privileges herein granted shall absolutely cease
and terminate, unless, within ninety days after the Effective Date, the time period for the Grantee
to file the Consent Agreement is extended by the Municipality by ordinance duly passed for that
purpose and the Grantee has agreed in writing to such extension.
EXHIBIT A
Pursuant to Section 15 of that certain Natural Gas Franchise Ordinance duly passed by
the City Council/Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal (the “Municipality”) on January 19,
2016, and duly approved by the Mayor/President of the Municipality on January 20, 2016 (the
“Ordinance”), a copy of which is attached hereto, Northern Illinois Gas Company d/b/a Nicor
Gas Company, an Illinois corporation hereby accepts and agrees to comply with the Ordinance.
NORTHERN ILLINOIS GAS COMPANY D/B/A NICOR GAS COMPANY
By: Patrick E. Whiteside
Name: Patrick E. Whiteside
Title: Vice President
Date: March 11, 2016
SEC. 26.3-1
DIVISION 3 – GTE NORTH
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF NORMAL,
McLEAN COUNTY, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.3-1. GTE North Incorporated, its lessees, successors and assigns (hereinafter
referred to as the “Company”) are hereby granted the right, privilege, authority and franchise to
construct, erect, maintain, repair, replace and operate in, upon, along, across, under and over the
public streets, alleys, and public utility easements, rights of way, and other public ways (hereinafter
referred to as “public ways”) within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, as the same now
exist or may hereafter be extended (hereinafter referred to as the “Municipality”) lines of poles,
anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals and other fixtures and equipment, and to use the
same for the transmission of voice, sounds, signals, pictures, writing, or signs of all kinds by means
of electricity and/or light, and especially for the conduct of a general telephone system and business,
for the period of ten (10) years from January 1, 1990, until January 1, 2000, and thereafter until
terminated by sixty (60) days’ written notice, either by the Municipality to the Company, or by the
Company to the Municipality. The grant of authority herein shall not include the right to use public
ways to conduct customary cable television services as the same is defined in the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/11-42-11 State Bar Edition, 1992, as amended). (Amended 6/7/93 by Ord. No.
4143)
SEC. 26.3-2. The location and height above or the depth below the public ways of the
existing lines of poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals and other fixtures and
equipment of said Company within the Municipality are hereby approved, and the same shall be
maintained and operated under and subject to the provisions of this Division. Any change in or
extension of any said poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and
equipment (herein referred to as “structures”), or the construction of any additional structures, in,
upon, along, across, under or over the public ways of the Municipality shall be made under the
direction of the Director of Public Works of the Municipality, or such other officers as may be
designated from time to time by the Municipal Manager of the Municipality for that purpose, who
shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions of the then
current Town codes, ordinances, and regulations of uniform application, issue written permits
therefore. The height above public ways of all aerial wires and cables hereafter constructed shall
conform to the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission or other regulatory body having
jurisdiction thereof. All structures hereafter installed shall not unreasonably interfere with
customary travel, and all work in connection with such installation shall be so performed as not to
interfere unreasonably with customary travel on the streets of the Municipality or with any
municipal facility then in place, and in case of the municipality bringing to grade or change of grade
or change of width or improvement of any street and/or alley or the municipality installing,
maintaining, improving, or relocating municipal water or municipal sewer pipes said Company,
provided it is notified within reasonable time prior to the commencement thereof, shall change its
structures so as to conform thereto, except where such change of grade or the width or any
improvement of street or alley is made in connection with the rearrangement, separation or
alteration of railroad crossings or is incident to any such rearrangements, separation or alteration.
The tops of all vaults constructed by said Company within the Municipality shall present an even
SEC. 26.3-2(Cont.1)
surface with the pavement at the point where laid, and, subject to the exception contained in the last
preceding sentence, shall be lowered or raised by said Company to conform to the tops of paving or
improvement as required by the governing body of the Municipality whenever the grade of the
street or alley in which any such vault is located may be at any time hereafter lowered or raised.
SEC. 26.3-3. The Company, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of the
ground in a neatly graded condition. All public ways disturbed by said Company shall be restored
by it to as good condition as before said areas were disturbed by it, and in the event that any such
areas shall become uneven, unsettled or otherwise requires repairing because of such disturbance by
the Company, then said Company, as soon as climatic conditions will permit, shall, promptly upon
receipt of notice from the Municipality cause such areas to be repaired or restored to as good
condition as before said areas were disturbed by said Company. The Company shall keep all
structures which it shall construct by virtue of this Division, in a reasonable safe condition at all
times, and shall maintain such barriers and danger signals during the construction, repair or renewal
work performed hereunder as will reasonably avoid damage to life, limb and property.
SEC. 26.3-4. The Company shall, at its own expense, defend all claims, demands or suits
that may be brought against the Municipality on account of or in connection with any of the
obligations and/or rights hereby imposed upon or granted in this franchise to the Company, or by
reason of or in connection with any damage to life, limb or property as a result of any of the work
done on structures located within public ways by it under or by virtue of this Division, and shall
save and keep harmless the Municipality from any and all damages, judgments, costs and expenses
of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof; provided, that notice in writing shall be promptly
given to said Company of any claim or suit against the Municipality which, by the terms hereof, the
said Company shall be obligated to defend, or against which the Company has hereby agreed to
save and keep harmless the Municipality and provided further that the Municipality shall furnish to
said Company all information in its possession relating to said claim or suit, co-operate with said
Company in the defense of said claim or suit. The Municipality may, if it so desires, assist in
defending any such claim or suit. The Company will not rely upon governmental immunity
afforded to the Municipality, and further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the
Municipality for the necessary defense of any suit not only against the Municipality but also against
its officers and employees resulting from this franchise agreement.
SEC. 26.3-5. As a consideration for the rights, privileges, and authority hereby granted,
while said Company is using any pole or poles erected or maintained hereunder, it will permit the
Municipality the use of sufficient space on the poles or adequate facilities for the successful
operation of the Municipality’s police and fire alarm signal systems to be accomplished by two
methods: (1) by means of one pole fixture to be placed, in accordance with the Company’s
specifications, by the Municipality at its expense at the top of the space available for the use of the
Company on any said poles, it being understood that the poles upon which space is permitted in the
Municipality shall be considered, for the purpose of this agreement, as personal property; provided
that such wires shall be so placed and maintained by the Municipality that the use of the same will
not interfere with the operation and maintenance of the Company’s equipment or its use of said
poles, and provided further that a thirty (30) inch climbing space shall be maintained between the
pole pin on poles jointly used with another public utility. All such police and fire alarm signal wires
shall be attached and maintained under the direction and supervision of said Company’s authorized
SEC. 26.3-5(Cont.1)
representatives, and only upon the following conditions: No such police and fire alarm signal wire
shall be attached to any of said poles of said Company if such wires shall carry a voltage of more
than four hundred (400) volts, nor if the transmitted power exceeds one hundred fifty (150) watts,
nor if, in any part of the circuit of such wire, it is supported upon a pole on which there is any wire
carrying a constant potential A.C. exceeding five thousand (5,000) volts between conductors, or
twenty-five hundred (2,500) volts normally to ground, or a constant potential D.C. exceeding seven
hundred fifty (750) volts to ground, or a constant current series arc or incandescent light circuit,
carrying in excess of seven and five-tenths (7.5) amperes. In case any such police and fire alarm
signal wire in any part of its circuit is supported upon a pole on which there is any wire used for the
supply of electrical energy for lighting, heating or power purposes, carrying a constant potential
alternating current of five thousand (5,000) volts or less between conductors, or twenty-five hundred
(2,500) volts or less normally to ground, or a D.C. circuit of seven hundred fifty (750) volts or less
to ground or a constant current series arc or incandescent light circuit carrying seven and five-tenths
(7.5) amperes or less, then such police or fire alarm signal wire shall be attached to such pole at a
point not less than four (4) feet below such wire used for the supply of electrical energy. (2) In the
event sufficient space is not available on said poles for the attachment of the fixtures, said Company
will permit the Municipality the use of other facilities furnished by it for the successful operation of
the police and fire alarm systems. The Company reserves the right to designate the type of facilities
to be furnished to the Municipality for the purposes as stated herein. The Municipality shall, at its
own expense, defend all claims, demands, or suits on account of any injury to life, limb or property
that may result by reason of or in connection with the presence, use, maintenance, erection or
removal of the Municipality’s police and fire alarm signal wires and their appurtenances pursuant
hereto, and hereby agrees to save and keep harmless said Company from any and all damages,
judgments, costs and expenses of any kind which may arise by reason thereof.
SEC. 26.3-6. In addition to the consideration described above, Company agrees to pay
Municipality prior to March 1 of each year, commencing March 1, 1990, three dollars and fifty
cents ($3.50) for each switched access line in the Town of Normal. For purposes of computation, a
switched access line is any line that goes through a switch, including but not limited to residence
lines, business lines, Centrex, PBX trunks, FX and key lines. Lines not included are non-switchable
lines such as point to point lines. The number of switched access lines shall be determined as of
December 31st of each preceding year.
SEC. 26.3-7. The amount per switched access line ($3.50) shall be subject to adjustment in
accordance with changes in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for the Chicago,
Illinois, area as promulgated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of
Labor, using the years 1982-1984 as a base of 100 (the CPI) or such successor price index.
Adjustments shall be made in January every two (2) years as follows: January, 1992; January,
1994; January, 1996; January, 1998. In no event, however, shall any adjustment cause the annual
payment provided in Section 26.3-6 to be less than $3.50 per switched access line.
SEC. 26.3-8. The Company after five (5) days written notice from a representative of the
Municipality to do so, shall remove or raise or lower its structures temporarily to permit the moving
of a building or any other object along a street, provided the benefited party or parties shall agree to
pay the Company an amount equal to the actual cost of effecting such temporary changes in its
structures; and provided further that, pending the determination of such actual cost, the benefited
SEC. 26.3-8(Cont.1)
party or parties shall have deposited with the Company an amount equal to the costs as estimated by
the Company. Should any amount of said deposit remain unexpended, after deducting the actual
cost involved, said amount shall be returned to the party making the deposit.
SEC. 26.3-9. The Company does further agree to furnish an indemnifying performance
bond in the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
SEC. 26.3-10. In case said Company shall fail or neglect to comply with any or all of the
provisions of this Division (unless by order of the Illinois Commerce Commission or any other
body, board, commission or court of competent jurisdiction), the Municipality reserves the right to
repeal this Division or rescind this contract, and forfeit the rights hereby created or sought to be
created, provided that no such repeal, rescission or forfeiture shall exist or be claimed because of
such failure or neglect, until written notice of such failure or neglect so claimed shall have been
given to said Company, and a reasonable opportunity afforded it to comply with the provisions
hereof or to prove that such compliance already exists. In the event that said Illinois Commerce
Commission or any other body, board, commission or court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
any provision or provisions hereof invalid or illegal, or direct a change by the company in any
matter or thing herein contained such invalidity or illegality or change shall in no way affect the
remaining provisions of this Division, or their validity or legality, and this Division in all other
respects shall continue in full force and effect, as if said provision or provisions had not been so
adjusted invalid or illegal or such change directed provided however either party may upon a sixty
(60) day notice request negotiations of this Agreement in whole or in part.
SEC. 26.3-11. All grants, franchises, rights, licenses and privileges heretofore made or
granted the Company by the Municipality by Ordinance No. 435, approved January 7, 1963, are
hereby revoked and repealed, it being the intention that this Division shall contain all grants,
franchises, rights, licenses and privileges of said Company, and all obligations of said Company in
connection therewith.
SEC. 26.3-12. Whenever the word “Company” or the words “GTE North Incorporated” are
used in this Division, they shall be construed to mean GTE North Incorporated, its lessees,
successors, and assigns, and this Division shall be binding upon the inure to the benefit of the said
Company, its lessees, successors and assigns.
SEC. 26.3-13. This Division shall be in full force upon receipt, by the Clerk of the
Municipality, of the Company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this
Division executed by its proper officers thereunto duly authorized, under the corporate seal of said
Company, and attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
(Entire Division 3 of Section 26 Amended 3/19/90)
GTE NORTH, INC
SEC. 26.4-1
DIVISION 4 – CORN BELT ENERGY CORPORATION
SEC. 26.4-1. Corn Belt Energy Corporation, an Illinois Corporation, (hereinafter referred
to as “Company”) is hereby granted the right, privilege, authority and franchise to construct,
erect, maintain, repair, replace and operate in, upon, along, across, under and over the public
streets, alleys, and public utility easements, rights of way, and other public ways (hereinafter
referred to as “public ways”) within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal, as the same now
exist or may hereafter be extended (hereinafter referred to as the “Town” or “Municipality”)
lines of poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals and other fixtures and equipment,
and to use the same for the transmission, distribution, and sale of electric energy, for the period
from acceptance of the franchise until December 31, 2025, and thereafter until terminated by
sixty (60) days’ written notice, either by the Municipality to the Company, or by the Company to
the Municipality. The grant of authority herein shall not include the right to use public ways to
conduct customary cable television services as the same is defined in the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/11-42-11). The grant of authority shall not include the right to allow other entities to
use Company’s fixtures and equipment unless such other entities or persons have an agreement
with the Town to use Town public ways.
SEC. 26.4-2. The location and height above or the depth below the public ways of the
existing lines or poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals and other fixtures and
equipment of said Company within the Municipality are hereby approved and the same shall be
maintained and operated under and subject to the provisions of this Franchise. Any change in or
extension of any said poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and
equipment (herein referred to as “structures”), or the construction of any additional structures, in,
upon, along, across, under or over the public ways of the Municipality shall be made under the
direction of the Director of Public Works of the Municipality, or such other officers as may be
designated from time to time by the Manager of the Municipality for that purpose, who shall, if
the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions of the then current
Town codes, ordinances, and regulations of uniform application, issue written permits therefore.
In the event the municipality fails to respond to a request for a permit within five (5) days, then
Company may proceed with the proposed work subject to the right of the municipality to stay
work. New wires and cables shall be buried as required by the Town Subdivision Code, except
in subdivisions outside the corporate limits subject to Town control new wires and cables may be
overhead along unimproved roadways, provided such wires and cables shall be buried as
required by the Town Subdivision Code when the adjacent road is improved to urban standards.
Main distribution lines (12.5 KV or higher) serving multiple subdivisions may be overhead. All
structures hereafter installed shall not unreasonably interfere with customary travel, and all work
in connection with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with
customary travel on the streets of the Municipality or with any municipal facility then in place.
The tops of all vaults constructed by said Company within the Municipality shall present an even
surface with the pavement at the point where laid, and, shall be lowered or raised by said
Company to conform to the tops of paving or improvement as required by the governing body of
the Municipality whenever the grade of the street or alley in which any such vault is located may
be at any time hereafter lowered or raised.
SEC. 26.4-3
SEC. 26.4-3. The Company, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of the
ground in a neatly graded condition. All public ways disturbed by said Company shall be
restored by it to a condition reasonably similar to the condition that existed before said areas
were disturbed by it as determined by the Town, and in the event that any such areas shall
become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require repairing because of such disturbance by the
Company, then said Company, as soon as climatic conditions will permit, shall, promptly upon
receipt of notice from the Municipality cause such areas to be repaired or restored to as good
condition as before said areas were disturbed by said Company. The Town shall promptly
inspect repaired and restored areas to determine compliance with this franchise. If the repair or
restoration is satisfactory, then Town shall notify Company and Company shall be obligated for
one (1) year from notice to maintain the repaired and restored areas. The Company shall keep all
structures which it shall construct by virtue of this Division, in a reasonable safe condition at all
times, and shall maintain such barriers and danger signals during the construction, repair or
renewal work performed hereunder as will reasonably avoid damage to life, limb and property.
SEC. 26.4-4. All streetlight poles erected under this ordinance shall be not more than
thirty (30) feet out of ground unless authorized by the Town and all poles and conduits shall be
located as not to injure any municipal property. In the event Company causes any injury to
municipal property, Company shall forthwith repair the damage caused by such injury. All
streetlight poles shall be set in a straight line as far as possible and no wires shall be attached to
any tree. All abandoned poles shall be removed as soon as service is disconnected and the
ground restored level with the adjoining surface. Company agrees to only use luminair types
approved by Municipality.
SEC. 26.4-5. No buildings shall be erected by Company on any public way within the
Town.
SEC. 26.4-6. Municipality gives and grants to the Company the right, privilege and
authority, at all times deemed necessary by the Company, to trim trees, or any portion of said
trees, or any portion of said trees, upon, along, over and/or across each and all of such streets,
avenues, alleys, bridges, easements, rights of way and/or other public places in accordance with
Town of Normal ordinances and Illinois Statutes regulating tree trimming by utility companies.
SEC. 26.4-7. When any street, avenue, public way, or other public facility or structure
shall be graded, curbed, paved, or otherwise changed so as to make the resetting or relocation of
any poles or other equipment placed or installed under this Ordinance necessary, the Company
shall make such resetting or relocation at the Company’s cost and expense. The Municipality
shall provide the Company with a suitable location for the resetting or relocation of such poles or
other equipment, and the Company’s obligation shall be limited to resetting or relocating poles
or other equipment of the same type and configuration as the displaced poles or other equipment
of the same type and configuration as the displaced poles or other equipment. The Company
shall make such resetting or relocation within a reasonable time after receiving written notice of
the need for the same from the authorized representative of the Municipality and the
establishment by the Municipality of the permanent grade at the new location.
SEC. 26.4-8
SEC. 26.4-8. The Company shall, (except as provided in Sec. 26.4-9), at its own expense,
defend all claims, demands or suits that may be brought against the Municipality on account of
or in connection with any of the obligations and/or rights hereby imposed upon or granted in this
franchise to the Company, or by reason of or in connection with any damage to life, limb or
property as a result of any of the work done on structures located within public ways by it under
or by virtue of this Franchise, and shall save and keep harmless the Municipality from any and
all damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof;
provided, that notice in writing shall be promptly given to said Company of any claim or suit
against the Municipality which, by the terms hereof, the said Company shall be obligated to
defend, or against which the Company has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the
Municipality and provided further that the Municipality shall furnish to said Company all
information in its possession relating to said claim or suit, co-operate with said Company in the
defense of said claim or suit. The Municipality may, at no charge to Company, if it so desires,
assist in defending any such claim or suit. The Company will not rely upon governmental
immunity afforded to the Municipality, and further agrees that it will pay the costs including
attorney fees incurred by the Municipality for the necessary defense of any suit not only against
the Municipality but also against its officers and employees resulting from this franchise
agreement.
SEC. 26.4-9. As a consideration for the rights, privileges, and authority hereby granted,
while said Company is using any public way, it will permit the Municipality the use of sufficient
space on the poles or adequate facilities for municipal purposes (including, but not limited to
traffic regulatory signs, telecommunications and data transmission lines), except municipality
shall not use Company’s facilities for the retail sale of services. The Company reserves the right
to designate the type of facilities to be furnished to the Municipality for the purposes as stated
herein. Such use by Municipality shall not unreasonably interfere with Company facilities. If the
Company modifies or plans to remove poles, municipality shall remove facilities from poles
within thirty (30) days. The Municipality shall, at its own expense, defend all claims, demands,
or suits on account of any injury to life, limb or property that may result by reason of or in
connection with the presence, use, maintenance, erection or removal of the Municipality’s wires
and their appurtenances pursuant hereto, and hereby agrees to save and keep harmless said
Company from any and all damages, judgments, costs and expenses of any kind which may arise
by reason thereof.
SEC. 26.4-10. Company agrees to furnish free of charge all electric service for lighting
purposes for all Town owned facilities, including but not limited to, buildings, water treatment
plant, sewer lift stations, water well pumps, yard lights, and parking lot lights. Free service
pursuant hereto shall apply only if separately metered. It is agreed the following athletic facilities
shall not be separately metered: Athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools and golf course
driving ranges.
SEC. 26.4-11. (Reserved)
SEC. 26.4-12. (Reserved)
SEC. 26.4-13
SEC. 26.4-13 FRANCHISE FEE. As consideration for the rights, privileges, and
authority hereby granted, while Company is using any public way, Company agrees to pay Town
a fee equal to 3% of the residential receipts received by Company for services provided by
Company to customers within the Town of Normal. The fee shall be assessed and collected on a
monthly basis for electricity service provided within Town to each residential customer of
Company.
In the event Town elects to impose an infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to 35 ILCS
645/5-1 et seq. or other similar legislation authorizing such fee, the parties agree that the value of
the franchise fee provided in this agreement is a minimum amount as determined herein and
subject to increase based on growth of kilowatt hours of electricity consumed within the Town.
The assessment rate will be the same rate imposed on Ameren/IP.
Any fee provided herein shall be payable on a monthly basis beginning 30 days following
the effective date of this agreement.
Town shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to audit Company’s books of records
for the purpose of determining compliance with this Section.
SEC. 26.4-14. The Company, after ten (10) working days written notice from a
representative of the Municipality to do so, shall remove or raise or lower its structures
temporarily to permit the moving of a building or any other object along a street, provided the
benefited party or parties shall agree to pay the Company an amount equal to the actual cost of
effecting such temporary changes in its structures; and provided further that, pending the
determination of such actual cost, the benefited party or parties shall have deposited with the
Company an amount equal to the costs as estimated by the Company. Should any amount of said
deposit remain unexpended, after deducting the actual cost involved, said amount shall be
returned to the party making the deposit.
SEC. 26.4-15. The Company does further agree to furnish an indemnifying performance
letter of credit or cash escrow in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars
$100,000.00). Form and bank to be approved by the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.4-16. In case said Company shall fail or neglect to comply with any or all of the
provisions of this Franchise (unless by order of the Illinois Commerce Commission or any other
body, board, commission or court of competent jurisdiction), the Municipality reserves the right
to repeal this Franchise or rescind this contract, and forfeit the rights hereby created or sought to
be created, provided that no such repeal, rescission or forfeiture shall exist or be claimed because
of such failure or neglect, until written notice of such failure or neglect so claimed shall have
been given to said Company, and a reasonable opportunity afforded it to comply with the
provisions hereof or to prove that such compliance already exists.
Alternatively, or in addition to the revocation rights provided above, Municipality and
Company may mutually invoke binding arbitration concerning any dispute between Company
and Municipality arising out of this Franchise. The arbitration panel shall consist of three (3)
members, being one member chosen by each party and one member chosen by agreement of
SEC. 26.4-16(Cont.1)
those two members. Arbitration shall be expedited and shall be conducted in accordance with the
Illinois Uniform Arbitration Act (710 ILCS 5/1 et seq). The arbitration panel shall have authority
to order compliance with the Franchise Agreement and assess against the non-complying party
actual damages incurred by the other party.
In the event the Illinois legislature, the Illinois Commerce Commission or any other
body, board, commission or court of competent jurisdiction shall preempt, or adjudge any
provision or provisions hereof invalid or illegal, or direct a change by the company in any matter
or thing herein contained such invalidity or illegality or change shall in no way affect the
remaining provisions of this Franchise, or their validity or legality, and this Franchise in all other
respects shall continue in full force and effect, as if said provision or provisions had not been so
adjusted invalid or illegal or such change directed provided however, in the event of any of the
preceding conditions, either party may upon a sixty (60) day notice request re-negotiations of
this Agreement in whole or in part.
SEC. 26.4-17. In the event Company breaches any term or condition of this agreement,
Town shall have in addition to the remedies provided in Sec. 26.4-16 any other remedy provided
by law including the right to seek equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the
event of litigation, Company consents to venue in McLean County, Illinois. The parties may, by
mutual agreement, submit disputes to arbitration in accordance with the Illinois Uniform
Arbitration Act.
SEC. 26.4-18. All grants, franchises, rights, licenses and privileges heretofore made or
granted the Company, are hereby revoked and repealed, it being the intention that this Franchise
shall contain all grants, franchises, rights, licenses and privileges of said Company, and all
obligations of said Company in connection therewith.
SEC. 26.4-19. This Agreement is binding upon the parties, its successors, and assigns.
This Agreement shall not be assigned in whole or in part without the written consent of
municipality.
SEC. 26.4-20. This Franchise shall be in full force upon receipt, by the Clerk of the
Municipality, of the Company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this
Division executed by its proper officers thereunto duly authorized, under the corporate seal of
said Company, and attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
SEC. 26.4-20(Cont.1)
ACCEPTANCE
Corn Belt Energy Corporation, in consideration of the rights and privileges granted by
Ordinance No. 5612 of the Town of Normal, Illinois, passed on December 21, 2015 and
approved on December 22, 2015, and entitled An Ordinance Amending Division 4 of chapter 26
of the Municipal Code—Corn Belt Energy Corporation Franchise Agreement, accepts that
ordinance and all of the provisions thereof.
In Witness Whereof, Corn Belt Energy Corporation has caused these presents to be
signed by its President or a Vice President and attested by its Secretary or an Assistant Secretary
and its corporate seal to be affixed on January 12, 2015
Corn Belt Energy Corporation
By: /s/ Steven H. Hancock (Name)
VP of Electric Distribution (Title)
(Corporate Seal)
Attest:
By: /s/ Lynn Oleson (Name)
Director of Accounting & Finance (Title)
(Entire Division 26 Amended 12/19/05 by Ord. No. 5045)(Entire Division 26 Amended
12/21/2015 by Ord. No. 5612)
SEC. 26.5-1
DIVISION 5 -- CATV
(This Section Deleted 10/19/98 by Ord. No. 4556)
SEC. 26.5.1-1
DIVISION 5.1 -- COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM
This Franchise Agreement (hereinafter, the “Agreement” or “Franchise Agreement”) is
made between the Town of Normal, Illinois (hereinafter, the “Town”) and Comcast of Illinois/
Indiana/ Ohio, LLC, (hereinafter, “Grantee”) this 7th day of August, 2017 (the “Effective Date”).
The Town, having determined that the financial, legal, and technical abilities of the
Grantee are reasonably sufficient to provide the services, facilities, and equipment necessary to
meet the future cable-related needs of the community, desires to enter into this Franchise
Agreement with the Grantee for the construction, operation and maintenance of a Cable System
on the terms and conditions set forth herein.
This Agreement is entered into by and between the parties under the authority of the
Cable Act, the Illinois Constitution of 1970, including the Town’s home rule powers, and the
Illinois Municipal/Counties Code, as amended from time to time, and shall be governed by the
Cable Act and the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended from time to time; provided that any
provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code that are inconsistent with the Cable Act shall be
deemed to be preempted and superseded.
SEC. 26.5.1-1 DEFINITION OF TERMS. For the purpose of this Franchise
Agreement, capitalized terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Cable Act, unless otherwise defined herein.
Cable Act or Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the
Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time.
Cable Operator means any Person or group of Persons who provides Cable Service over a Cable
System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable
System; or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a Cable System.
Cable Service or Service means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of Video Programming
or Other Programming Service and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection or use of such Video Programming or Other Programming Service.
Cable System or System, has the meaning set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522 of the Cable Act, and
means Grantee's facilities, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment, that is designed to provide Cable Service which
includes Video Programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Franchise
Area, but such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to re-transmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves Subscribers without
using any public right-of-way, (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that
such a facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of
SEC. 26.5.1-1(Cont.1)
the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of Video Programming
directly to Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide Interactive On-Demand
Services; (iv) an open video system that complies with section 653 of the Cable Act; or (v) any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
Channel or Cable Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is
used in a Cable System and which is capable of delivering a television channel as a television
channel is defined by the Federal Communications Commission by regulation.
Customer or Subscriber means a Person who lawfully receives and pays for Cable Service with
the Grantee’s express permission.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto.
Franchise means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of the Cable
System.
Franchise Agreement or Agreement shall mean this Agreement and any amendments or
modifications hereto.
Franchise Area means the present legal boundaries of the Town as of the Effective Date, and
shall also include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means as provided in this
Agreement.
Grantee shall mean Comcast of Illinois/ Indiana/ Ohio, LLC.
Gross Revenue means the Cable Service revenue received by the Grantee from the operation of
the Cable System in the Franchise Area to provide Cable Services, calculated in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. Cable Service revenue includes monthly basic,
premium and pay-per-view video fees, advertising and home shopping revenue, installation fees
and equipment rental fees. Gross revenues shall also include such other revenue sources from
Cable Service delivered over the Cable System as may now exist or hereafter develop, provided
that such revenues, fees, receipts, or charges may be lawfully included in the gross revenue base
for purposes of computing the Town’s permissible franchise fee under the Cable Act, as
amended from time to time. Gross Revenue shall not include refundable deposits, bad debt,
investment income, programming launch support payments, third party advertising sales
commissions and agency fees, nor any taxes, fees or assessments imposed or assessed by any
governmental authority. Gross Revenues shall include amounts collected from Subscribers for
Franchise Fees pursuant to City of Dallas, Texas v. F.C.C., 118 F.3d 393 (5th Cir. 1997), and
amounts collected from non-Subscriber revenues in accordance with the Court of Appeals
decision resolving the case commonly known as the “Pasadena Decision,” City of Pasadena,
California et. al., Petitions for Declaratory Ruling on Franchise Fee Pass Through Issues, CSR
5282-R, Memorandum Opinion and Order, 16 FCC Rcd. 18192 (2001), and In re: Texas
Coalition of Cities for Utility Issues v. F.C.C., 324 F.3d 802 (5th Cir. 2003).
SEC. 26.5.1-1(Cont.2)
Initial Franchise Service Area means that portion of the Franchise Area served by the Grantee’s
Cable System as of the Effective Date of this Franchise Agreement.
Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, but shall not
mean the Town.
Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access Channel shall mean a video Channel
designated for non-commercial use by the public, educational institutions such as public or
private schools, but not “home schools”, community colleges, and universities, as well as the
Town.
Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access Programming shall mean noncommercial
programming produced by any Town residents or organizations, schools, and government
entities and the use of designated facilities, equipment and/ or Channels of the Cable System in
accordance with 47 U.S.C. 531 and this Agreement.
Public Way shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public way,
drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements,
dedicated utility strips, or easements dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Town in the
Franchise Area, which shall entitle the Town and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose
of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the Cable System. Public Way shall also
mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Town within the Franchise Area for the purpose
of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall
include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the
Town and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing, operating, and
maintaining the Grantee’s Cable System over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to the Cable System.
Standard Installation means those installations to Subscribers that are located up to one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system (Cable System).
Town means the Town of Normal, Illinois or the lawful successor, transferee, designee, or
assignee thereof.
Video Programming or Programming means programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
SEC 26.5.1-2 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
2.1. Pursuant to Section 621(a) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541 (a), and 65 ILCS
5/11-42-11(a) of the Illinois Municipal Code, the Illinois Constitution, an
SEC. 26.5.1-2(Cont.1)
Ordinance No. 5699 approving and authorizing the execution of this Agreement,
the Town hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise authorizing the
Grantee to construct and operate a Cable System in the Public Ways within the
Franchise Area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct, maintain, or retain in any Public Way such poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or
appurtenant to the Cable System, and to provide such services over the Cable
System as may be lawfully allowed.
2.2. Term of Franchise. The term of the Franchise granted hereunder shall be ten (10)
years from the Effective Date, unless the Franchise is renewed or is lawfully
terminated in accordance with the terms of this Franchise Agreement and/or
applicable law. From and after the Effective Date of this Franchise Agreement,
the Parties acknowledge that this Franchise Agreement is intended to be the sole
and exclusive Franchise Agreement between the Parties pertaining to the
Grantee’s Franchise for the provision of Cable Service.
2.3. Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by and comply with
the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, and any applicable
State law which may exist at the time of renewal and which is not superseded by
the Cable Act.
2.4. Police Powers. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as
an abrogation by the Town of any of its police powers to adopt and enforce
generally applicable ordinances deemed necessary for the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, and the Grantee shall comply with all generally applicable
laws and ordinances enacted by the Town pursuant to such police power.
2.5. Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall (A)
abrogate the right of the Town to perform any public works or public
improvements of any description, (B) be construed as a waiver of any codes or
ordinances of general applicability promulgated by the Town, or (C) be construed
as a waiver or release of the rights of the Town in and to the Public Ways.
2.6. Competitive Equity.
2.6.1. In the event the Town grants an additional Franchise to use and occupy
any Public Way for the purposes of operating a Cable System, the
additional Franchise shall only be granted in accordance with the Illinois
Level Playing Field Statute, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.
2.6.2. In the event an application for a new cable television franchise or
other similar authorization is filed with the Town proposing to serve the
Franchise Area, in whole or in part, the Town shall serve or require to be
served a copy of such application upon any existing Company or
SEC. 26.5.1-2(Cont.2)
incumbent cable operator by registered or certified mail or via nationally
recognized overnight courier service.
2.6.3. No application fee or Security Fund shall be required of the Granteefor
any permit required by the Town, provided that Grantee shall have timely
made all payments to the Town pursuant to Section 5.1 of this Franchise Agreement.
SEC. 26.5.1-3 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CABLE
SYSTEM.
3.1. Except as may be otherwise provided in this Franchise Agreement, Grantee
shall comply with all generally applicable provisions of Chapter 8 of the Town of
Normal Municipal Code as may be amended from time to time.
3.2. Aerial and Underground Construction. At the time of Cable System construction,
if all of the transmission and distribution facilities of all of the respective public or
municipal utilities in any area of the Franchise Area are underground, the Grantee
shall place its Cable Systems’ transmission and distribution facilities
underground, provided that such underground locations are actually capable of
accommodating the Grantee’s cable and other equipment without technical
degradation of the Cable System’s signal quality. In any region(s) of the
Franchise Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective
public or municipal utilities are both aerial and underground, the Grantee shall
have the discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed to require the Grantee to construct, operate, or maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as customer taps, line
extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other
related equipment.
3.3. Improvements of the Public Way. The Grantee agrees that it shall, upon
reasonable notice by the Town and at the Grantee’s own expense, protect,
support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place,
or remove from such street or other public place any network, system facilities, or
equipment when required to do so by the Town because of public health, safety
and welfare improvements as deemed necessary by the Town. Grantee shall be
entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds
raised for the project in the event such funds are made available to other users of
the Public Way.
3.4. Undergrounding and Beautification Projects.
3.4.1. In the event all users of the Public Way relocate aerial facilities
underground as part of an undergrounding or neighborhood beautification
project, Grantee shall participate in the planning for relocation of its aerial
SEC. 26.5.1-3(Cont.1)
facilities contemporaneously with other utilities. Grantee’s relocation costs
shall be included in any computation of necessary project funding by the
municipality or private parties. Grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement
of its relocation costs from public or private funds raised for the project
and made available to other users of the Public Way.
3.4.2. The Grantee shall not be required to relocate its facilities unless it
has been afforded at least ninety (90) days’ notice of the necessity to
relocate its facilities. Upon adequate notice the Grantee shall provide a
written estimate of the cost associated with the work necessary to relocate
its facilities. In instances where a third party is seeking the relocation of
the Grantee’s facilities or where the Grantee is entitled to reimbursement
pursuant to the preceding Section, the Grantee shall not be required to
perform the relocation work until it has received payment for the
relocation work.
SEC. 26.5.1-4 SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.
4.1. Initial Service Obligations. As of the Effective Date of this Agreement, Grantee’s
Cable System has been designed to provide, and is capable of providing, Cable
Service to residential Customers throughout the Initial Franchise Service Area.
The Grantee shall continue to make Cable Service available in the Initial Service
Area throughout the term of this Agreement and Grantee shall extend its Cable
System and provide service consistent with the provisions of this Franchise
Agreement.
4.2. General Service Obligation. The Grantee shall make Cable Service available
beyond the Initial Franchise Service Area to every residential dwelling unit within
the Franchise Area where the minimum density is at least sixty-six (66) dwelling
units per linear Cable System network mile as measured from the existing Cable
System’s technically feasible connection point. Subject to the density
requirement, Grantee shall offer Cable Service to all new homes or previously
unserved homes located within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of the
Grantee’s distribution cable (e.g., a Standard Installation).
4.2.1. The Grantee may elect to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting
the above density and distance standards. The Grantee may impose an
additional charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service
installation requiring a drop or line extension in excess of a Standard
Installation. Any such additional charge shall be computed on a time plus
materials basis plus a reasonable rate of return.
4.3. Programming. The Grantee agrees to provide cable programming services
in the following broad categories:
SEC. 26.5.1-4 (Cont.1)
Children
General Entertainment
Family Oriented
Ethnic/Minority
Sports
Weather
Educational
Arts, Culture and Performing Arts
News & Information
Pursuant and subject to federal law, all Video Programming decisions, excluding
PEG Access Programming, are at the sole discretion of the Grantee.
4.4. Technical Standards. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable technical
standards of the FCC as published in 47 C.F.R., Part 76, Subpart K, as amended
from time to time.
4.5. New/Planned Developments. The Town shall provide the Grantee with
written notice of the issuance of the building permits within the Franchise Area
for projects requiring undergrounding of cable facilities. Such notices shall be
provided at the time of notice to all utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s
rights-of-way. The Town agrees to require the builder or developer, as a condition
of issuing the permit, to give the Grantee access to open trenches for deployment
of cable facilities and at least sixty (60) business days written notice of the date of
availability of open trenches. The Town shall also provide the Grantee with
summaries of all planned developments in the Town at the same time as
provided to all utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s right-of-way. Said
notice is to allow the Grantee sufficient foresight into the future demands on its
design, engineering, construction, and capital resources. Should the Town fail to
provide advance notice of such developments the Grantee shall be allowed an
adequate time to prepare, plan and provide a detailed report as to the timeframe
for it to construct its facilities and provide the services required under this
Franchise.
4.6. Annexations. The Town shall notify the Grantee of all annexations by the
Town; and of any and all planned developments in areas expected to be annexed
at the same time the Town informs utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s
rights-of-way. Said notice is to allow the Grantee sufficient foresight into the
future demands on its design, engineering, construction, and capital resources.
Should the Town fail to provide advance notice of actual and planned
annexations, the Grantee shall be allowed an adequate time to prepare, plan and
provide a detailed report as to the timeframe for it to construct its facilities
and provide the services required under this Franchise. The parties agree that
Grantee’s Franchise and Franchise Fee obligations with respect to annexations are
as set forth in the Counties Code – 55 ILCS 5/5-1095(a) – as amended from time
to time; and that the period for which franchise fees shall continue to be paid to
SEC. 26.5.1-4(Cont.2)
the county shall commence on the later of the date on which the Grantee was
informed of the annexation or the actual date on which the annexation occurred.
The Town shall provide the Grantee with the issuance of building or development
permits within the Franchise Area for projects requiring undergrounding of cable
facilities. The Town agrees to require the builder or developer, as a condition of
issuing the permit, to give the Grantee access to open trenches for deployment of
cable facilities and at least sixty (60) business days written notice of the date of
availability of open trenches.
4.7. Service to School Buildings and Governmental Facilities.
4.7.1. The Town and the Grantee acknowledge the provisions of 220 ILCS
5/22-501(f), whereby the Grantee shall provide complimentary Basic
Cable Service and a free Standard Installation at one outlet to all eligible
buildings as defined in said state statute. Eligible buildings shall not
include buildings leased to non-governmental third parties or buildings
such as storage facilities at which government employees are not
regularly stationed.
4.7.2. Long Drops. The Grantee may impose an additional charge in
excess of its regular installation charge for any service installation
requiring a drop or line extension in excess of a Standard Installation. Any
such additional charge shall be computed on a time plus materials basis to
be calculated on that portion of the installation that exceeds a Standard
Installation.
4.8. Emergency Alerts. At all times during the term of this Franchise
Agreement, the Grantee shall provide and maintain an “Emergency Alert System”
(“EAS”) consistent with applicable Federal law and regulation – including 47
C.F.R., Part 11 and the “State of Illinois Emergency Alert System State Plan” – as
may be amended from time to time. The Town agrees to indemnify and hold the
Grantee harmless from any damages or penalties arising out of the negligence of
the Town, its employees or agents in using such system.
4.9. Customer Service Obligations. The Town and Grantee acknowledge that
the customer service standards and customer privacy protections are set forth in
the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., and
that the Town may enforce those requirements and standards and the penalties for
noncompliance in a manner consistent with that statute.
SEC. 26.5.1-5 OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION BY TOWN.
5.1. Franchise Fees. The Grantee shall pay to the Town a Franchise Fee in an
amount equal to five percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenues received from the
operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Service in the Franchise Area;
provided, however, that Grantee shall not be compelled to pay any higher
SEC. 26.5.1-5(Cont.1)
percentage of fees than any other video service provider, under state authorization
or otherwise, providing service in the Franchise Area. The payment of Franchise
Fees shall be made on a quarterly basis and shall be due forty-five (45) days after
the close of each calendar quarter. If mailed, the Franchise Fee shall be
considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each Franchise Fee payment shall be
accompanied by a report prepared by a representative of the Grantee
showing the basis for the computation of the franchise fees paid during that
period. Any undisputed Franchise Fee payment which remains unpaid in whole or
in part, after the date specified herein shall be delinquent. For any delinquent
Franchise Fee payments, Grantee shall make such payments including interest at
the prime lending rate as quoted by JP Morgan Chase & Company or its
successor, computed from time due until paid. Any undisputed overpayments
made by the Grantee to the Town shall be credited upon discovery of such
overpayment until such time when the full value of such credit has been
applied to the Franchise Fee liability otherwise accruing under this Section.
5.1.1. Change in Amount. The Parties acknowledge that, at present, the
Cable Act limits the Town to collection of a maximum permissible
Franchise Fee of five percent (5%) of Gross Revenues. If, during the term
of this Agreement, the Cable Act is modified so that the Town would
otherwise be authorized to collect a Franchise Fee at a rate greater than
five percent (5%) of Gross Revenues, the Town may unilaterally amend
this Agreement to increase the required percentage to be paid by the
Grantee to the Town up to the amount permitted by the Cable Act,
provided that: (i) such amendment is competitively neutral; (ii) the Town
conducts a public hearing on the proposed amendment; (iii) the Town
approves the amendment by ordinance; and (iv) the Town notifies Grantee
at least ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of such an amendment.
In the event a change in state or federal law reduces the maximum
permissible Franchise Fee percentage that may be collected, the parties
agree the Grantee shall reduce the percentage of Franchise Fees collected
to the lower of: i) the maximum permissible Franchise Fee percentage; ii)
the lowest Franchise Fee percentage paid by any other video service
provider, under state authorization or otherwise, providing service in the
Franchise Area or any other cable provider granted a cable franchise by
the Town pursuant to Title 47; or, iii) such Franchise Fee percentage as
may be approved by the Town, provided that : (a) such amendment is
competitively neutral; (b) the amendment is in compliance with the change
in state or federal law; (c) the Town approves the amendment by
ordinance; and (d) the Town notifies Grantee at least ninety (90) days
prior to the effective date of such an amendment.
5.1.2. Taxes Not Included. The Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the
term “Franchise Fee” does not include any tax, fee, or assessment of
general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed
on both utilities and Cable Operators on their services but not including a
SEC. 26.5.1-5(Cont.2)
tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against Cable
Operators or Cable Subscribers).
5.2. Franchise Fees Subject to Audit. The Town and Grantee acknowledge that
the audit standards are set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code at 65 ILCS 5/11-
42-11.05 (Municipal Franchise Fee Review; Requests For Information). Any
audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally applicable auditing
standards. The Town and/or its designee may be required to execute a
nondisclosure agreement with the Grantee prior to inspection of the Grantee’s
financial records. Enforcement of such requirements and standards and the
penalties for non-compliance with such standards shall be consistent with 65
ILCS 5/11-42-11.05.
5.3. Proprietary Information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
in this Agreement, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which
it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Town agrees
to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to
disclose it to those employees, representatives, and agents of the Town that have a
need to know in order to enforce this Franchise Agreement and who agree to
maintain the confidentiality of all such information. For purposes of this Section,
the terms “proprietary or confidential” include, but are not limited to, information
relating to the Cable System design, customer lists, marketing plans, financial
information unrelated to the calculation of Franchise Fees or rates pursuant to
FCC rules, or other information that is reasonably determined by the Grantee to
be competitively sensitive. Grantee may make proprietary or confidential
information available for inspection but not copying or removal by the Franchise
Authority’s representative. In the event that the Town has in its possession and
receives a request under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et
seq.), or similar law for the disclosure of information the Grantee has designated
as confidential, trade secret or proprietary, the Town shall notify Grantee of such
request and cooperate with Grantee in opposing such request. Grantee shall
indemnify and defend the Town from and against any claims arising from the
Town’s opposition to disclosure of any information Grantee designates as
proprietary or confidential.
SEC. 26.5.1-6 TRANSFER OF CABLE SYSTEM OR FRANCHISE OR
CONTROL OF GRANTEE.
6.1. Grantee shall notify the Town of any change in ownership of the Cable System
within thirty (30) days of any transfer of ownership totaling more than fifty-one
percent (51%) of the Cable System.
SEC. 26.5.1-7 INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.
7.1. Insurance. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Grantee
SEC. 26.5.1-7(Cont.1)
shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain Commercial General Liability
Insurance and provide the Town certificates of insurance designating the Town
and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds and demonstrating that the Grantee has obtained
the insurance required in this Section. Such policy or policies shall be in the
minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to any one person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury
or death of any two or more persons resulting from one occurrence, and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one
accident. Such policy or policies shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30)
days prior written notice to the City. The Grantee shall provide workers’
compensation coverage in accordance with applicable law. The Grantee shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Town from any workers compensation claims to
which the Grantee may become subject during the term of this Franchise
Agreement.
7.2. Indemnification. The Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Town, its officers, employees, and agents (the “Indemnitees”) from and against
any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense (the
“Indemnification Events”), arising in the course of the Grantee constructing and
operating its Cable System within the Town. The Grantee’s obligation with
respect to the Indemnitees shall apply to Indemnification Events which may occur
during the term of this Agreement, provided that the claim or action is initiated
within the applicable statute of limitations, notwithstanding that the claim may be
made or action filed subsequent to the termination or expiration of this
Agreement. The Town shall give the Grantee timely written notice of its
obligation to indemnify and defend the Town after the Town’s receipt of a claim
or action pursuant to this Section. For purposes of this Section, the word “timely”
shall mean within a time period that does not cause prejudice to the respective
positions of the Grantee and/or the Town. If the Town elects in its own discretion
to employ additional counsel, the costs for such additional counsel for the Town
shall be the responsibility of the Town.
7.2.1. The Grantee shall not indemnify the Town for any liabilities, damages,
costs or expense resulting from any conduct for which the Town, its
officers, employees and agents may be liable under the laws of the State of
Illinois.
7.2.2. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee’s duty to indemnify
the Town by reference to the limits of insurance coverage described in this
Agreement.
SEC. 26.5.1-8
SEC. 26.5.1-8 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL (PEG)
ACCESS.
8.1. PEG Capacity. The Grantee shall provide capacity for the Town’s noncommercial
Public, Educational and Governmental Access (“PEG”) Programming through
Grantee’s Cable System consistent with the requirements set forth herein. As of
the Effective Date of this Agreement, the Town utilizes two Channels which are
time shared with the City of Bloomington. Unless otherwise agreed to by the
Town and the Grantee to the extent required by applicable law, the Channel(s)
may be carried on the Grantee’s basic digital service tier. The Town’s PEG
programming shall be provided consistent with Section 611 of the Cable Act, as
amended from time to time.
8.2. The Grantee does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of control over
channel(s) by designating it for PEG use. However, the PEG channel(s) are, and
shall be, operated by the Town, and the Town may at any time allocate or
reallocate the usage of the PEG channel(s) among and between different noncommercial
uses and Users. The Town shall be responsible for the editorial
control of the Video Programming on the PEG Channel(s) except to the extent
permitted in 47 U.S.C. §531(e).
8.3. Origination Point. At such time that the Town determines that it wants to establish
capacity to allow its residents who subscribe to Grantee’s Cable Service to receive
PEG Access Programming originated from Schools and/or Town facilities; or at
such time that the Town determines that it wants to change or upgrade a location
from which PEG Access Programming is originated; the Town will give the
Grantee written notice detailing the point of origination and the capability sought
by the Town. The Grantee agrees to submit a cost estimate to implement the
Town’s plan within a reasonable period of time. After an agreement to reimburse
the Grantee for its expenditure, the Grantee will implement any necessary system
changes within a reasonable period of time.
8.4. PEG Signal Quality. Provided the PEG signal feed is delivered by the Town to the
designated signal input point without material degradation, the PEG Channel
delivery system from the designated signal input point shall meet the same FCC
technical standards as the remainder of the Cable System set forth in this
Agreement.
8.5. Grantee Use of Unused Time. Because the Town and Grantee agree that a blank
or underutilized PEG Access Channel is not in the public interest, in the event the
Town does not completely program a Channel, Grantee may utilize the Channel
for its own purposes. Grantee may program unused time on the Channel subject to
reclamation by the Town upon no less than sixty (60) days’ notice. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the programming of the PEG Access Channel with text
messaging, or playback of previously aired programming shall not constitute
unused time. Text messaging containing out of date or expired information for a
SEC. 26.5.1-8(Cont.1)
period of thirty (30) days shall be considered unused time. A programming
schedule that contains playback of previously aired programming that has not
been updated for a period of ninety (90) days shall be considered unused time.
Unused time shall be considered to be a period of time, in excess of six (6) hours,
where no community produced programming of any kind can be viewed on a
PEG Access Channel. Unused time shall not include periods of time where
programming cannot be viewed that are caused by technical difficulties, transition
of broadcast media, signal testing, replacement or repair of equipment, or
installation or relocation of facilities.
SEC. 26.5.1-9 ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE.
9.1. Notice of Violation or Default. In the event the Town believes that the Grantee
has not complied with a material term of the Franchise, it shall notify the Grantee
in writing with specific details regarding the exact nature of the alleged
noncompliance or default.
9.2. Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from
the receipt of the Town’s: (A) to respond to the Town, contesting the assertion of
noncompliance or default; or (B) to cure such default; or (C) in the event that, by
nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day
period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Town of the
steps being taken and the projected date that the cure will be completed.
9.3. Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, and following notice
and an opportunity to cure and respond pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.2
above, in the event the Town determines that the Grantee is in default of any
material provision of the Franchise, the Town may:
9.3.1. seek specific performance of any provision that reasonably lends
itself to such remedy or seek other relief available at law, including
declaratory or injunctive relief; or
9.3.2. in the case of a substantial or frequent default of a material provision
of the Franchise, declare the Franchise Agreement to be revoked in
accordance with the following: (i) The Town shall give written notice to
the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of
noncompliance by the Grantee. The notice shall set forth with specificity
the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have ninety (90)
days from the receipt of such notice to object in writing and to state its
reasons for such objection. In the event the Town has not received a
response from the Grantee or upon receipt of the response does not agree
with the Grantee’s proposed remedy or in the event that the Grantee has
not taken action to cure the default, it may then seek termination of the
Franchise at a public hearing. The Town shall cause to be served upon the
Grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to such public hearing, a written notice
SEC. 26.5.1-9(Cont. 1)
specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to
request termination of the Franchise. (ii) At the designated hearing, the
Town shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the
matter, present evidence and question witnesses, after which the Town
shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be terminated. The
public hearing shall be on the record. A copy of the transcript shall be
made available to the Grantee at its sole expense. The decision of the
Town shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Grantee in a manner
authorized by Section 10.2. The Grantee may appeal such determination to
any court with jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
Town’s decision.
9.4. Remedies Not Exclusive. In addition to the remedies set forth in this Section 9,
the Grantee acknowledges the Town’s ability pursuant to Section 4.9 of this
Franchise Agreement to enforce the requirements and standards, and the penalties
for noncompliance with such standards, consistent with the Illinois Cable and
Video Customer Protection Law, and, pursuant to Section 3.1 of this Franchise
Agreement to enforce the Grantee’s compliance with the Town’s regarding
construction of facilities in the Public Way. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to permit the Town to exercise such
rights and remedies in a manner that permits duplicative recovery from, or
payments by, the Grantee. Such remedies may be exercised from time to time and
as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by the Town.
SEC.26.5.1-10 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
10.1. Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in
noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement
or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination,
cancellation or revocation of the Franchise), where such noncompliance or
alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood,
tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other
catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, failure of utility service necessary to
operate the Cable System, governmental, administrative or judicial order or
regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the Grantee’s ability to
anticipate or control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting
for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which the
Grantee’s cable or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials or
qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
10.2. Notice. Any notification that requires a response or action from a party to this
franchise within a specific timeframe, or that would trigger a timeline that would
affect one or both parties’ rights under this franchise, shall be in writing and shall
be sufficiently given and served upon the other party by hand delivery, first class
mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or by
reputable overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
SEC. 26.5.1-10(Cont. 1)
To the Town: To the Grantee:
Town of Normal Comcast of Illinois/Indiana/ Ohio, LLC
11 Uptown Circle 1500 McConnor Parkway
P.O. Box 589 Schaumburg, IL 60173
Normal, IL 61761
ATTN: City Manager ATTN: Sr. Director of Government Affairs
With a copy to: With a copy to:
Corporation Counsel Comcast Cable
Town of Normal 1701 JFK Blvd., 49th Floor
P.O. Box 589 Philadelphia, PA 19103
Normal, IL 61761 ATTN: Government Affairs Department
Recognizing the widespread usage and acceptance of electronic forms of
communication, emails and faxes will be acceptable as formal notification related
to the conduct of general business amongst the parties to this contract, including
but not limited to programming and price adjustment communications. Such
communication should be addressed and directed to the person of record as
specified above. Either party may change its address and addressee for notice by
notice to the other party under this Section.
10.3. Entire Agreement. This Franchise Agreement embodies the entire understanding
and agreement of the Town and the Grantee with respect to the subject matter
hereof and supersedes all prior and contemporaneous agreements, understandings,
negotiations and communications, whether written or oral. All ordinances or parts
of ordinances that are in conflict with or otherwise impose obligations different
from the provisions of this Franchise Agreement are superseded by this Franchise
Agreement.
10.3.1. The Town may adopt a cable television/video service provider regulatory
ordinance that complies with applicable law, provided the provisions of
any such ordinance adopted subsequent to the Effective Date of this
Franchise Agreement shall not apply to the Grantee during the term of this
Franchise Agreement.
10.4. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion
of this Franchise Agreement is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in
part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and
effect. If any material provision of this Agreement is made or found to be
unenforceable by such a binding and final decision, either party may notify the
other in writing that the Franchise has been materially altered by the change and
of the election to begin negotiations to amend the Franchise in a manner
consistent with said proceeding or enactment; provided, however, that any such
SEC. 26.5.1-10(Cont.2)
negotiated modification shall be competitively neutral, and the parties shall be
given sufficient time to implement any changes necessitated by the agreed-upon
modification.
10.5. Governing Law. This Franchise Agreement shall be deemed to be executed in the
State of Illinois, and shall be governed in all respects, including validity,
interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State
of Illinois and/or Federal law, as applicable.
10.6. Venue. Except as to any matter within the jurisdiction of the federal courts or the
FCC, all judicial actions relating to any interpretation, enforcement, dispute
resolution or any other aspect of this Agreement shall be brought in the Circuit
Court of the State of Illinois, McLean County, Illinois. Any matter brought
pursuant to the jurisdiction of the federal court shall be brought in the United
States District Court of the Central District of Illinois.
10.7. Modification. Except as provided in Sections 5.1.1, no provision of this Franchise
Agreement shall be amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by
an instrument, in writing, duly executed by the Town and the Grantee, which
amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the Town through the adoption of an
appropriate ordinance or resolution by the Town, as required by applicable law.
10.8. No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement is intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any person, individual, corporation or
member of the public to enforce the terms of this Franchise Agreement.
10.9. No Waiver of Rights. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a
waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, Grantee may have under Federal
or state law unless such waiver is expressly stated herein.
10.10. Validity of Franchise Agreement. The parties acknowledge and agree in good
faith on the validity of the provisions, terms and conditions of this Franchise
Agreement, in their entirety, and that the Parties have the power and authority to
enter into the provisions, terms, and conditions of this Agreement.
10.11. Authority to Sign Agreement. Grantee warrants to the Town that it is authorized
to execute, deliver and perform this Franchise Agreement. The individual signing
this Franchise Agreement on behalf of the Grantee warrants to the Town that s/he
is authorized to execute this Franchise Agreement in the name of the Grantee.
SEC. 26.5.1-10(Cont.3)
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Franchise Agreement has been executed by the duly
authorized representatives of the parties as set forth below, as of the date set forth below:
For the Town of Normal: For Comcast of Illinois/Indiana/Ohio,
LLC
Name: Christopher Koos Name: John Crowley
Title: President of the Board of Trustees Title: Regional Senior Vice-President
Date: August 7, 2017 Date: August 7, 2017
SEC. 26.5.2-1
DIVISION 5.2 – CMN-RUS, INC., D/B/A METRONET
This Franchise Agreement (hereinafter, the “Agreement” or “Franchise Agreement”) is
made between the Town of Normal, Illinois (hereinafter, the “Town”) and CMN-RUS, Inc.
(hereinafter, “Grantee”) this 16th day of August, 2016 (the “Effective Date”). The Town, having
determined that the financial, legal, and technical abilities of the Grantee are reasonably
sufficient to provide the services, facilities, and equipment necessary to meet the future cablerelated
needs of the community, desires to enter into this Franchise Agreement with the Grantee
for the construction, operation and maintenance of a Cable System on the terms and conditions
set forth herein.
This agreement is entered into by and between the parties under the authority of and shall
be governed by the Cable Act.
SEC. 26.5.2-1 DEFINITION OF TERMS. For the purpose of this Franchise
Agreement, capitalized terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Cable Act, unless otherwise defined herein.
Cable Act or Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by
the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as the same may be amended
from time to time.
Cable Service or Service means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of Video
Programming or Other Programming Service and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is
required for the selection or use of such Video Programming or other programming
service.
Cable System or System, has the meaning set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522 of the Cable Act,
and means Grantee's facilities, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, that is designed to provide
Cable Service which includes Video Programming and which is provided to multiple
Subscribers within the Franchise Area, but such term does not include (i) a facility that
serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast
stations; (ii) a facility that serves Subscribers without using any Public Way, (iii) a
facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of
Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such a facility shall
be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Cable
Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of Video Programming directly
to Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide Interactive On-Demand
Services; (iv) an open video system that complies with section 653 of the Cable Act; or
(v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems.
SEC. 26.5.2-1(Cont.1)
Channel or Cable Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a Cable System and which is capable of delivering a television channel
as a television channel is defined by the Federal Communications Commission by
regulation.
Customer means a Person who lawfully receives and pays for Cable Service with the
Grantee’s express permission.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity
thereto.
Franchise means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes the construction
and operation of the Cable System.
Franchise Agreement or Agreement shall mean this Agreement and any amendments or
modifications hereto.
Franchise Area means the present legal boundaries of the Town as of the Effective Date,
and shall also include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means as
provided in this Agreement.
Grantee shall mean CMN-RUS, Inc.
Gross Revenue means the Cable Service revenue received by the Grantee from the
operation of the Cable System in the Franchise Area to provide Cable Services,
calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Cable Service
revenue includes monthly basic, premium and pay-per-view video fees, advertising and
home shopping revenue, installation fees and equipment rental fees. Gross revenues shall
also include such other revenue sources directly related to Cable Service delivered over
the Cable System as may hereafter develop, provided that such revenues, fees, receipts,
or charges are deemed lawful and to be included in the gross revenue base for purposes of
computing the Franchising Authority’s permissible franchise fee under the Cable Act, as
amended from time to time. Gross Revenue shall not include refundable deposits, bad
debt, investment income, programming launch support payments, advertising sales
commissions and third party agency fees, nor any taxes, fees or assessments imposed or
assessed by any governmental authority. Gross Revenues shall include amounts collected
from Subscribers for Franchise Fees pursuant to City of Dallas, Texas v. F.C.C., 118 F.3d
393 (5th Cir. 1997), and amounts collected from non-Subscriber revenues in accordance
with the Court of Appeals decision resolving the case commonly known as the “Pasadena
Decision,” City of Pasadena, California et. al., Petitions for Declaratory Ruling on
Franchise Fee Pass Through Issues, CSR 5282-R, Memorandum Opinion and Order, 16
FCC Rcd. 18192 (2001), and In re: Texas Coalition of Cities for Utility Issues v. F.C.C.,
324 F.3d 802 (5th Cir. 2003).
SEC. 26.5.2-1(Cont.2)
Person means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for profit, but
shall not mean the Town.
Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access Channel shall mean a video
Channel designated for non-commercial use by the public, educational institutions such
as public or private schools, but not “home schools,” community colleges, and
universities, as well as the Town.
Public, Educational and Government (PEG) Access Programming shall mean
noncommercial programming produced by any Town residents or organizations, schools
and government entities and the use of designated facilities, equipment and/or Channels
of the Cable System in accordance with 47 U.S.C. 531 and this Agreement.
Public Way shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public
way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility
easements, dedicated utility strips, or easements dedicated for compatible uses and any
temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held
by the Town in the Franchise Area, which shall entitle the Town and the Grantee to the
use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the Cable
System. Public Way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Town
within the Franchise Area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service
use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as
shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Town and the Grantee to the use
thereof for the purposes of installing, operating, and maintaining the Grantee’s Cable
System over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary
and pertinent to the Cable System.
Qualified Household shall mean any single family residential home where a resident has
agreed in writing to Grantee’s standard terms and conditions of service.
Town means the Town of Normal, Illinois or the lawful successor, transferee, designee,
or assignee thereof.
SEC. 26.5.2-2 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
2.1. The Town hereby grants to the Grantee a non-exclusive Franchise authorizing the
Grantee to construct and operate a Cable System in the Public Ways within the
Franchise Area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct, maintain, or retain in any Public Way such poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or
appurtenant to the Cable System, and to provide such services over the Cable
System as may be lawfully allowed.
SEC. 26.5.2-2(Cont.1)
2.2. Term of Franchise. The term of the Franchise granted hereunder shall be Ten (10)
years from the Effective Date, unless the Franchise is renewed or is lawfully
terminated in accordance with the terms of this Franchise Agreement and/or
applicable law. Upon passage and approval of this Franchise Agreement, the
Parties acknowledge that this Franchise Agreement is intended to replace all
existing franchise agreements – including the prior Franchise with the Grantee –
regardless of whether said prior Franchise or franchise agreements are in effect.
2.3. Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by and comply with
the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended.
2.4. Police Powers. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as an
abrogation by the Town of any of its police powers to adopt and enforce generally
applicable ordinances deemed necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the
public, and the Grantee shall comply with all generally applicable laws and
ordinances enacted by the Town pursuant to such police power.
2.5. Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall (A) abrogate
the right of the Town to perform any public works or public improvements of any
description, (B) be construed as a waiver of any codes or ordinances of general
applicability promulgated by the Town, or (C) be construed as a waiver or release
of the rights of the Town in and to the Public Ways.
2.6. Competitive Equity.
2.6.1. In the event the Town grants an additional Franchise to use and occupy the
public right-of-way for the purposes of operating a Cable System, the
additional Franchise shall only be granted in accordance with the Illinois
Level Playing Field Statute, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.
2.6.2 In the event an application for a new cable television franchise or other
similar authorization is filed with the Town proposing to serve the
Franchise Area, in whole or in part, the Town shall serve or require to be
served a copy of such application upon any existing Company or
incumbent cable operator by registered or certified mail or via nationally
recognized overnight courier service.
2.6.3. No application fee or Security Fund shall be required of the Grantee for
any permit required by the Town, provided that Grantee shall have timely
made all payments to the Town pursuant to Section 5.1 of this Franchise
Agreement.
SEC. 26.5.2-3 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CABLE
SYSTEM.
3.1. Except as may be otherwise provided in this Franchise Agreement, Grantee shall
SEC. 26.5.2-3(Cont.1)
comply with all generally applicable provisions of Chapter 8 of the Town of
Normal Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time.
3.2. Aerial and Underground Construction. At the time of Cable System construction,
if all of the transmission and distribution facilities of all of the respective public or
municipal utilities in any area of the Franchise Area are underground, the Grantee
shall place its Cable Systems’ transmission and distribution facilities
underground, provided that such underground locations are actually capable of
accommodating the Grantee’s cable and other equipment without technical
degradation of the Cable System’s signal quality. In any region(s) of the
Franchise Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective
public or municipal utilities are both aerial and underground, the Grantee shall
have the discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed to require the Grantee to construct, operate, or maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as customer taps, line
extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other
related equipment.
3.3. Improvements of Public Way. The Grantee agrees that it shall, upon reasonable
notice by the Town and at the Grantee’s own expense, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or
remove from such street or other public place any network, system, facilities, or
equipment when required to do so by the Town because of public health, safety
and welfare improvements as deemed necessary by the Town. Grantee shall be
entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds
raised for the project in the event such funds are made available to other users of
the Public Way.
3.4. Undergrounding and Beautification Projects. In the event all users of the Public
Way relocate aerial facilities underground as part of an undergrounding or
neighborhood beautification project, Grantee shall participate in the planning for
relocation of its aerial facilities contemporaneously with other utilities. Grantee’s
relocation costs shall be included in any computation of necessary project funding
by the municipality or private parties. Grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement
of its relocation costs from public or private funds raised for the project and made
available to other users of the Public Way.
3.5. The Grantee shall not be required to relocate its facilities unless it has been
afforded at least ninety (90) days’ notice of the necessity to relocate its facilities.
Upon adequate notice the Grantee shall provide a written estimate of the cost
associated with the work necessary to relocate its facilities. In instances where a
third party is seeking the relocation of the Grantee’s facilities or where the
Grantee is entitled to reimbursement pursuant to the preceding Section, the
Grantee shall not be required to perform the relocation work until it has received
payment for the relocation work.
SEC. 26.5.2-4
SEC. 26.5.2-4 SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.
4.1. General Service Obligation. Grantee shall extend and make service available to
every residential dwelling unit within the Franchise Area where a minimum of 15
Qualified Households have requested service within 1,200 feet of the existing
Cable System’s technically feasible connection point. Grantee shall offer Cable
Services to all new homes or previously unserved homes located within 125 feet
of Grantee’s distribution cable. Grantee may, at its sole expense, extend and
provide service to areas within the Franchise area that do not meet the provisions
of this Section.
4.1.1. The Grantee may elect to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting the
above density and distance standards. The Grantee may impose an
additional charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service
installation requiring a drop in or line extension in excess of the above
standards. Any such additional charge shall be computed on a time plus
materials basis plus a reasonable rate of return.
4.2. Technical Standards. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable technical
standards of the FCC as published in 47 C.F.R., Part 76, Subpart K, or technical
equivalent as amended from time to time.
4.3. New/Planned Developments. The Town shall provide the Grantee with written
notice of the issuance of building permits within the Franchise Area for projects
requiring undergrounding of cable facilities. Such notices shall be provided at the
time of notice to all utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s rights-of-way.
The Town agrees to require the builder or developer, as a condition of issuing the
permit, to give the Grantee access to open trenches for deployment of cable
facilities and at least sixty (60) business days written notice of the date of
availability of open trenches. The Town shall also provide the Grantee with
summaries of all planned developments in the Town at the same time as provided
to all utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s right-of-way. Said notice is to
allow the Grantee sufficient foresight into the future demands on its design,
engineering, construction, and capital resources. Should the Town fail to provide
advance notice of such developments the Grantee shall be allowed an adequate
time to prepare, plan and provide a detailed report as to the timeframe for it to
construct its facilities and provide the services required under this Franchise.
4.4. Annexations. The Town shall notify the Grantee of all annexations by the Town;
and of any and all planned developments in areas expected to be annexed at the
same time the Town informs utilities or other like occupants of the Town’s rightsof-
way. Said notice is to allow the Grantee sufficient foresight into the future
demands on its design, engineering, construction, and capital resources. Should
the Town fail to provide advance notice of actual and planned annexations, the
Grantee shall be allowed an adequate time to prepare, plan and provide a detailed
report as to the timeframe for it to construct its facilities and provide the services
SEC. 26.5.2-4(Cont.1)
required under this Franchise. The parties agree that Grantee’s Franchise and
Franchise Fee obligations with respect to annexations are as set forth in the
Counties Code – 55 ILCS 5/5-1095(a) – as amended from time to time; and that
the period for which franchise fees shall continue to be paid to the county shall
commence on the later of the date on which the Grantee was informed of the
annexation or the actual date on which the annexation occurred. The Town shall
provide the Grantee with written notice of the issuance of building or
development permits within the Franchise Area for projects requiring
undergrounding of cable facilities. The Town agrees to require the builder or
developer, as a condition of issuing the permit, to give the Grantee access to open
trenches for deployment of cable facilities and at least sixty (60) business days
written notice of the date of availability of open trenches.
4.5. Service to School Buildings and Governmental Facilities.
4.5.1. Service to School Buildings. The Town and the Grantee acknowledge the
provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501(f), and to the extent requested by any
eligible school Grantee shall provide complimentary basic Cable Service
and a free standard installation at one outlet to State accredited K-12
public and private schools not including “home schools,” located in the
Franchise Area within one hundred twenty five feet (125) of the Grantee’s
distribution cable.
4.5.2. Service to Governmental Facilities. The Town and the Grantee
acknowledge the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501(f), and to the extent
requested by any eligible governmental entity, Grantee shall provide
complimentary basic Cable Service and a free standard installation at one
outlet to municipal buildings located in the Franchise Area within one
hundred twenty five (125) feet of Grantee’s distribution cable. “Municipal
buildings” are those buildings owned or leased by the Town for
government administrative purposes, and shall not include buildings
owned by Town but leased to third parties or buildings such as storage
facilities at which government employees are not regularly stationed.
4.5.3. Long Drops. The Grantee may impose an additional charge in excess of its
regular installation charge for any service installation requiring a drop or
line extension in excess of the above standards. Any such additional
charge shall be computed on a time plus materials basis to be calculated
on that portion of the installation that exceeds the standards set forth
above.
4.6. Emergency Alerts. At all times during the term of this Franchise Agreement, the
Grantee shall provide and maintain an “Emergency Alert System” (“EAS”)
consistent with applicable Federal law and regulation – including 47 C.F.R., Part
11 and the “State of Illinois Emergency Alert System State Plan” – as may be
amended from time to time. The Town agrees to indemnify and hold the Grantee
SEC. 26.5.2-4(Cont.2)
harmless from any damages or penalties arising out of the negligence of the
Town, its employees or agents in using such system.
4.7 Customer Service Obligations. The Town and Grantee acknowledge that the
customer service standards and customer privacy protections are set forth in the
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., and that
the Town may enforce those requirements and standards and the penalties for
noncompliance in a manner consistent with that statute.
SEC. 26.5.2-5 OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION BY TOWN.
5.1. Franchise Fees. The Grantee shall pay to the Town a Franchise Fee in an amount
equal to five percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenues received from the operation
of the Cable System to provide Cable Service in the Franchise Area; provided,
however, that Grantee shall not be compelled to pay any higher percentage of fees
than any other video service provider, under state authorization or otherwise,
providing service in the Franchise Area. The payment of Franchise Fees shall be
made on a quarterly basis and shall be due forty-five (45) days after the close of
each calendar quarter. If mailed, the Franchise Fee shall be considered paid on the
date it is postmarked. Each Franchise Fee payment shall be accompanied by a
report prepared by a representative of the Grantee showing the basis for the
computation of the franchise fees paid during that period. Any undisputed
Franchise Fee payment which remains unpaid in whole or in part, after the date
specified herein shall be delinquent. For any delinquent Franchise Fee payments,
Grantee shall make such payments including interest at the prime lending rate as
quoted by Chase Bank U.S.A or its successor, from the time of the discovery of
the delinquent payment until the date paid. Any undisputed overpayments made
by Grantee to the Town shall be returned or credited upon discovery of such
overpayment and shall be payable within thirty (30) days of the receipt of written
notice from Grantee.
5.1.1. Change in Amount. The Parties acknowledge that, at present, the Cable
Act limits the Town to collection of a maximum permissible Franchise
Fee of five percent (5%) of Gross Revenues. If, during the term of this
Agreement, the Cable Act is modified so that the Town would otherwise
be authorized to collect a Franchise fee at a rate greater than five percent
(5%) of Gross Revenues, the Town may unilaterally amend this
Agreement to increase the required percentage to be paid by the Grantee to
the Town up to the amount permitted by the Cable Act, provided that: (i)
such amendment is competitively neutral; (ii) the Town conducts a public
hearing on the proposed amendment; (iii) the Town approves the
amendment by ordinance; and (iv) the Town notifies Grantee at least
ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of such an amendment. In the
event a change in state or federal law reduces the maximum permissible
franchise fee percentage that may be collected, the parties agree the
Grantee shall reduce the percentage of franchise fees collected to the
SEC. 26.5.2-5(Cont.1)
lower of: i) the maximum permissible franchise fee percentage; ii) the
lowest franchise fee percentage paid by than any other video service
provider, under state authorization or otherwise, providing service in the
Franchise Area or any other cable provider granted a cable franchise by
the Town pursuant to Title 47; or, iii) such franchise fee percentage as
may be approved by the Town, provided that: (a) such amendment is
competitively neutral; (b) the amendment is in compliance with the change
in state or federal law; (c) the Town approves the amendment by
ordinance; and (d) the Town notifies Grantee at least ninety (90) days
prior to the effective date of such an amendment.
5.1.2 Taxes Not Included. The Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the term
“Franchise Fee” does not include any tax, fee, or assessment of general
applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both
utilities and Cable Operators on their services but not including a tax, fee,
or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against Cable Operators or
Cable Subscribers).
5.2. Franchise Fees Subject to Audit. The Town and Grantee acknowledge that the
audit standards are set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code at 65 ILCS 5/11-42-
11.05 (Municipal Franchise Fee Review; Requests For Information). Any audit
shall be conducted in accordance with generally applicable auditing standards.
The Town and/or its designee may be required to execute a nondisclosure
agreement with the Grantee prior to inspection of the Grantee’s financial records.
Enforcement of such requirements and standards and the penalties for noncompliance
with such standards shall be consistent with 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.05.
5.3. Proprietary Information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
Agreement, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Town agrees to
treat any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to disclose
it to those employees, representatives, and agents of the Town that have a need to
know in order to enforce this Franchise Agreement and who agree to maintain the
confidentiality of all such information. For purposes of this Section, the terms
“proprietary or confidential” include, but are not limited to, information relating
to the Cable System design, customer lists, marketing plans, financial information
unrelated to the calculation of Franchise Fees or rates pursuant to FCC rules, or
other information that is reasonably determined by the Grantee to competitively
sensitive. Grantee may make proprietary or confidential information available for
inspection but not copying or removal by the Franchise Authority’s
representative. In the event that the Town has in its possession and receives a
request under the State of Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/), or
similar law for the disclosure of information the Grantee has designated as
confidential, trade secret or proprietary, the Town shall notify Grantee of such
request and cooperate with Grantee in opposing such request. Grantee shall
indemnify and defend the Town from and against any claims arising from the
SEC. 26.5.2-5(Cont.2)
Town’s opposition to disclosure of any information Grantee designates as
proprietary or confidential.
SEC. 26.5.2-6 TRANSFER OF CABLE SYSTEM OR FRANCHISE OR
CONTROL OF GRANTEE.
6.1. Grantee shall notify the Town of any change in ownership of the Cable System
within 30 days of any transfer of ownership totaling more than 51% of the Cable
System.
SEC. 26.5.2-7 INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.
7.1. Insurance. Throughout the term of this Agreement, Grantee shall maintain, at its
own expense, insurance policies with an insurance company or companies
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois and in forms approved by the
Corporation Counsel and certificates of insurance or other proof evidencing the
payment of premiums therefore against risks as are customarily insured against by
businesses of like size and type, including but not limited to:
7.1.1 A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy to protect,
defend and hold fully harmless the Town, its boards, commissions,
officers, agents and employees against liability for loss or any damages for
personal injury, death and property damage, including loss of use, and
shall defend the Town and said persons in any civil suit occasioned
directly or indirectly by the operation of any franchise granted hereunder
or work or activity of any person or of any type related thereto with a
minimum liability limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of one
person and $3,000,000 for personal injury or death of any two or more
persons in any one occurrence and $500,000 for damage to property
resulting from any one occurrence;
7.1.2. Workmen’s Compensation Insurance within the statutory limits and
Employer’s Liability insurance of not less than $100,000; and
7.1.3. Comprehensive Automobile Liability Insurance to the extent of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence against liability for bodily injury including
death and to the extent of not less than $300,000 per occurrence against
liability for damage to property including loss of use occurring on, arising
out of, or in any way related to the franchise.
The insurance policies shall name the Town of Normal and a its boards,
commissions, officers, agents and employees as insured parties and shall
also contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction
in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the Town not less than 30
days in advance of the effective date thereof. If such insurance is provided
in either case by a policy that also covers the Grantee or any other entity
SEC. 26.5.2-7(Cont.1)
or person than those above named, then such policy shall contain the
standard cross liability endorsement. The provision of insurance under this
Section does not limit the Grantee’s indemnification requirement under
Section 7.2 Nothing herein shall be construed so as to restrict the Council
from reasonably amending the insurance amounts at any time after the
award of a franchise.
7.2. Indemnification. The Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Town, its officers, employees, and agents (the “Indemnitees”) from and against
any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses, and expenses,
including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense (the
“Indemnification Events”), arising in the course of the Grantee constructing and
operating its Cable System within the Town. The Grantee’s obligation with
respect to the Indemnitees applies to Indemnification Events that may occur
during the term of this Agreement, provided that the claim or action is initiated
within the applicable statute of limitations, notwithstanding that the claim may be
made or action filed subsequent to the termination or expiration of this
Agreement. The Town shall give the Grantee timely written notice of its
obligation to indemnify and defend the Town after the Town’s receipt of a claim
or action under this Section. For purposes of this Section, the word “timely”
means within a time period that does not cause prejudice to the respective
positions of the Grantee or the Town. If the Town elects in its own discretion to
employ additional counsel, the costs for such additional counsel for the Town
shall be the responsibility of the Town.
7.2.1. The Grantee is not required to indemnify the Town for any liabilities,
damages, costs, or expense resulting from any conduct for which the
Town, its officers, employees and agents may be liable under the laws of
the State of Illinois.
7.2.2. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee’s duty to indemnify
the Town by reference to the limits of insurance coverage described in this
Agreement.
SEC. 26.5.2-8 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL (PEG)
ACCESS.
8.1. PEG Capacity. The Grantee shall provide capacity for the Town’s Public,
Educational and Governmental (“PEG”) Access Programming through Grantee’s
Cable System consistent with the requirements set forth herein. As of the
Effective Date of this Agreement, the Town utilizes two Channels which are time
shared with the City of Bloomington. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Town and
the Grantee to the extent required by applicable law, the Channel(s) may be
carried on the Grantee’s basic digital service tier. The Town’s PEG programming
shall be provided consistent with Section 611 of the Cable Act, as amended from
time to time.
SEC. 26.5.2-8(Cont.1)
8.2. The Grantee does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of control over
channel(s) by designating it for PEG use. However, the PEG channel(s) are, and
shall be, operated by the Town, and the Town may at any time allocate or
reallocate the usage of the PEG channel(s) among and between different noncommercial
uses and Users. The Town shall be responsible for the editorial
control of the Video Programming on the PEG Channel(s) except to the extent
permitted in 47 U.S.C. §531(e).
8.3. Origination Point. At such time that the Town determines that it wants to establish
capacity to allow its residents who subscribe to Grantee’s Cable Service to receive
PEG access programming originated from Schools and/or Town facilities; or at
such time that the Town determines that it wants to change or upgrade a location
from which PEG access programming is originated; the Town will give the
Grantee written notice detailing the point of origination and the capability sought
by the Town. The Grantee agrees to submit a cost estimate to implement the
Town’s plan within a reasonable period of time. After an agreement to reimburse
the Grantee for its expenditure, the Grantee will implement any necessary system
changes within a reasonable period of time.
8.4. PEG Signal Quality. Provided PEG signal feeds are delivered by the Town to the
designated signal input point without material degradation, the PEG channel
delivery system from the designated signal input point shall meet the same FCC
technical standards as the remainder of the Cable System set forth in this
Agreement.
8.5. Grantee Use of Unused Time. Because the Town and Grantee agree that a blank
or underutilized Access Channel is not in the public interest, in the event the
Town does not completely program a Channel, Grantee may utilize the Channel
for its own purposes. Grantee may program unused time on the Channel subject to
reclamation from the Town upon no less than sixty (60) days notice. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the programming of the Access Channel with text
messaging or playback of previously aired programming shall not constitute
unused time. Text messaging containing out of date or expired information for a
period of thirty (30) days shall be considered unused time. A programming
schedule that contains playback of previously aired programming that has not
been updated for a period of ninety (90) days shall be considered unused time.
Unused time shall be considered to be a period of time, in excess of six (6) hours,
where no community produced programming of any kind can be viewed on an
access Channel. Unused time shall not include periods of time where
programming cannot be viewed that are caused by technical difficulties, transition
of broadcast media, signal testing, replacement or repair of equipment, or
installation or relocation of facilities.
SEC.26.5.2-9 ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE.
9.1. Notice of Violation or Default. In the event the Town believes that the Grantee
SEC. 26.5.2-9(Cont.1)
has not complied with the material terms of the Franchise, it shall notify the
Grantee in writing with specific details regarding the exact nature of the alleged
noncompliance or default.
9.2. Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have 30 days from the
receipt of the Town’s written notice: (A) to respond to the Town, contesting the
assertion of noncompliance or default; or (B) to cure such default; or (C) in the
event that, by nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the 35-day
period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Town of the
steps being taken and the projected date that the cure will be completed.
9.3. Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, and pursuant to the
provisions of Section 9.2 herein, in the event the Town determines that the
Grantee is in default of any material provision of the Franchise, the Town may:
(A) seek specific performance of any provision that reasonably lends itself to
such remedy or seek other relief available at law, including declaratory or
injunctive relief; or
(B) in the case of a substantial or frequent default of a material provision of
the Franchise, revoke the Franchise in accordance with the following:
9.3.1 The Town shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke
the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee.
The notice shall set forth with specificity the exact nature of the
noncompliance. The Grantee shall have 90 days from the receipt of the
notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the
event the Town has not received a response from the Grantee or upon
receipt of the response does not agree with the Grantee’s proposed remedy
or in the event that the Grantee has not taken action to cure the default, it
may then seek termination of the Franchise at a public hearing. The Town
shall cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least 10 days prior to such
public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of the
hearing and stating its intent to request termination of the Franchise.
9.3.2. At the designated hearing, the Town shall give the Grantee an opportunity
to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses,
after which the Town shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be
terminated. The public hearing shall be on the record. A copy of the
transcript shall be made available to the Grantee at its sole expense. The
decision of the Town shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the
Grantee in a manner authorized by Section 10.2. The Grantee may appeal
such determination to any court with jurisdiction within 30 days after
receipt of the Town’s decision.
.
SEC. 26.5.2-9(Cont.2)
9.4. Remedies Not Exclusive. In addition to the remedies set forth in this Section 9,
the Grantee acknowledges the Town’s ability, under Section 3.1 of this Franchise
Agreement, to enforce the Grantee’s compliance with the Town’s requirements
regarding the construction of facilities in the public way and, under Section 4.7 of
this Franchise Agreement, to enforce the requirements and standards, and the
penalties for non-compliance with such standards, consistent with the Illinois
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to permit the Town to exercise such
rights and remedies in a manner that permits duplicative recovery from, or
payments by, the Grantee. Such remedies may be exercised from time to time and
as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by the Town.
SEC.26.5.2-10 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
10.1. Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in
noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement
or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination,
cancellation or revocation of the Franchise), where such noncompliance or
alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood,
tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other
catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, failure of utility service necessary to
operate the Cable System, governmental, administrative or judicial order or
regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the Grantee’s ability to
anticipate or control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting
for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which the
Grantee’s cable or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials or
qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
10.2. Notice. Any notification that requires a response or action from a party to this
franchise within a specific time-frame, or that would trigger a timeline that would
affect one or both parties’ rights under this franchise, shall be in writing and shall
be sufficiently given and served upon the other party by hand delivery, first class
mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or by
reputable overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
To the Town: To the Grantee:
Town of Normal CMN-RUS, Inc.
11 Uptown Circle 3701 Communication Way
PO Box 589 Evansville, IN 47715
Normal, IL 61761-0589 ATTN: President
ATTN: City Manager
SEC. 26.5.2-10(Cont.1)
With a copy to: With a copy to:
Corporation Counsel CMN-RUS, Inc.
Town of Normal 8837 Bond Street
11 Uptown Circle Overland Park, KS 66214
PO Box 589 ATTN: Legal Department
Normal, IL 61761-0589
Recognizing the widespread usage and acceptance of electronic forms of
communication, emails and faxes will be acceptable as formal notification related
to the conduct of general business amongst the parties to this contract, including
but not limited to programming and price adjustment communications. Such
communication should be addressed and directed to the person of record as
specified above. Either party may change its address and addressee for notice by
notice to the other party under this Section.
10.3. Entire Agreement. This Franchise Agreement embodies the entire understanding
and agreement of the Town and the Grantee with respect to the subject matter
hereof and supersedes all prior and contemporaneous agreements, ordinances,
understandings, negotiations and communications, whether written or oral. All
ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with or otherwise impose
obligations different from the provisions of this Franchise Agreement are
superseded by this Franchise Agreement.
10.3.1. The Town may adopt a cable television/video service provider regulatory
ordinance that complies with applicable law, provided the provisions of
any such ordinance adopted subsequent to the Effective Date of this
Franchise Agreement shall not apply to the Grantee during the term of this
Franchise Agreement.
10.4. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion
of this Franchise Agreement is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in
part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and
effect.
10.5. Governing Law. This Franchise Agreement shall be deemed to be executed in the
State of Illinois, and shall be governed in all respects, including validity,
interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State
of Illinois and/or Federal law, as applicable.
10.6. Modification. No provision of this Franchise Agreement shall be amended or
otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument, in writing, duly
SEC. 26.5.2-10(Cont.2)
executed by the Town and the Grantee, which amendment shall be authorized on
behalf of the Town through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by
the Town, as required by applicable law.
10.7. No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement is intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any person, individual, corporation or
member of the public to enforce the terms of this Franchise Agreement.
10.8. No Waiver of Rights. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a
waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, Grantee may have under Federal
or state law unless such waiver is expressly stated herein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Franchise Agreement has been executed by the duly authorized
representatives of the parties as set forth below, as of the date set forth below:
For the Town of Normal: CMN-RUS, Inc.:
By: Christopher Koos By: John Campbell
Name: Christopher Koos Name: John Campbell
Title: President, Board of Trustees Title: Vice President and General Counsel
Date: September 23, 2016 Date: August 16, 2016
SEC. 26.6-1
DIVISION 6 – SPRINT COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY, L.P.
SEC. 26.6-1. WHEREAS, Sprint Communications Company, L.P., a Delaware Corporation
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois (hereafter also designated as Grantee), has
petitioned the Town of Normal, Illinois, asking that the right permission and authority be granted to
it by ordinance to install, maintain, and use a fiber optic cable within certain public rights-of-way
for the purpose of crossing the same; and
SEC. 26.6-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal and Grantee have agreed upon the terms,
provisions, and conditions granting permission and authority to use certain public rights-of-way all
as hereafter set forth.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.6-3. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided, the
right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to Sprint Communications Company,
L.P., upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division to install, maintain, and use a
fiber optic cable within the certain named public rights-of-way for the purpose of crossing the same.
A. Said cable shall cross the following public rights-of-way as the same intersect with
Illinois Central Gulf Railroad right-of-way (now Union Pacific) as it runs through
the Town of Normal: a) Beech Street, b) Cherry Street, c) Maple Street, d) Mulberry
Street, e) Walnut Street, f) College Avenue, g) Linden Street, h) Broadway, i) Fell
Avenue, j) School Street, k) University Street, l) an unnamed alley between
University Street and Main Street, m) Main Street, n) Hovey Avenue, and o)
Division Street. Said cable shall cross the public rights-of-way for an aggregate
distance of 1,588 lineal feet.
B. Said cable shall cross the following public rights-of-way as the same connect with
Norfolk and Western Railroad right-of-way (now Norfolk Southern) as it runs
through Diamond-Star Motors Corporation Subdivision to the Town of Normal:
West College Avenue, a distance of one hundred (100) lineal feet.
SEC. 26.6-4. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority herein
granted for a period of 25 years from and after the date of passage of this ordinance.
SEC. 26.6-5. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of Normal and the regulations
of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.6-6. The Grantee agrees to comply with the Illinois Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 623/5-1). In the event Grantee fails to comply with such
Act, or such Act is repealed or determined invalid as to Grantee, then this Franchise shall
SEC. 26.6-6(Cont.1)
automatically terminate unless Grantor and Grantee reach agreement within 60 days on
compensation to be paid by Grantee to Grantor for the rights granted herein.
SEC. 26.6-7. Reserved.
SEC. 26.6-8. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the Grantee
transfers title or vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of
Normal under the provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized are
removed, and the public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.6-9. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in connection
with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with ordinary travel on
the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned water or sewer pipes then in
place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of the ground
in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks, parkways, or pavements
disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored shall be the same type
construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed; and in the event that any such
sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or otherwise requires repairing
because of such disturbance by Grantee, then Grantee, as soon as climatic conditions will permit,
shall promptly, upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal so to do, cause such sidewalk,
parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good condition as before said sidewalk,
parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.6-10. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal; and
permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee fails or
neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable amount of
time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is necessary to
relocate said cable or structures, the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear the
sole expense of relocation. Upon termination of the privilege herein granted by lapse of time or
otherwise, the Grantee, without cost of expense to the Town of Normal, shall remove the cable and
structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a proper condition under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to
remove the cable and other structures, the Town of Normal will have the choice of either
performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said Grantee or determining what the cost of
said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost, proceeding against the surety bond posted
by Grantee as herein provided, or pursue any other remedies provided by law.
SEC. 26.6-11. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and all
liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the installation,
removal, relocation, alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with the
cable or structures herein authorized and from any and all damages thereto on account of the
location, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways,
tunnels, vaults, sewers, water mains, conduits, pipes, poles, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.6-12. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal a surety bond written by a
company authorized to do business within the State of Illinois in the amount of $10,000. Said bond
SEC. 26.6-12(Cont.1)
shall be in existence during the term of this agreement and shall be conditioned upon Grantee’s
performance of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement. In the event Grantee, after reasonable
notice, fails to perform pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, then the Town of Normal may, in
addition to other remedies, recover on the surety bond. For the Town of Normal to recover from the
surety company under this Section, it is not necessary that the Town of Normal first make any
expenditure or perform any work. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to determine
what cost work be involved to perform any obligation of Grantee hereunder and present said claim
to Grantee and the surety company. The Grantee or the surety company shall make payment to the
Town of Normal on said claim within a reasonable time.
SEC. 26.6-13. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a permit
for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not less than
$1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public liability and
property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Sprint Communications
Company, L.P. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the
Grantee until the cable or structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public
way is restored as herein required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of
Normal as an additional insured.
SEC. 26.6-14. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage to life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof; provided
that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against the Town of
Normal which, by the terms hereof, the Grantee shall be obligated to defend, or against which the
Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal and provided further that
the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its possession relating to said
claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any said claim or suit. The
governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in defending any such claim or
suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity afforded to the Town of Normal, and
further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the Town of Normal for the necessary defense of
any suit not only against the Town of Normal but also against its officers and employees resulting
from this franchise grant.
SEC. 26.6-15. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claims arising out of damage to the fiber optic cable or structures
done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents. Grantee
waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising directly, by subrogation, assignment,
or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect, resulting from damage to the fiber optic
cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and
agents.
SEC. 26.6-16
SEC. 26.6-16. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town of
Normal ordinances, rules and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal rightsof-
way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.6-17. This Agreement shall be in full force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the
company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this Agreement executed
by Sprint Communications Company, L.P.
(Entire Division 6 of Chapter 26 Amended 6/15/09 by Ord. No. 5270)
SEC. 26.7-1
DIVISION 7 – MCI TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION
SEC. 26.7-1. WHEREAS, MCI Telecommunications Corporation, a Delaware Corporation
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois (hereafter also designated as Grantee), has
petitioned the Town of Normal, Illinois, asking that the right, permission and authority be granted
to it by ordinance to install, maintain, repair, replace, and use a fiber optic cable within certain
public rights-of-way for the purpose of crossing the same; and
SEC. 26.7-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal and Grantee have agreed upon the terms,
provisions, and conditions granting permission and authority to use certain public rights-of-way all
as hereafter set forth.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.7-3. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided, the
right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to MCI Telecommunications
Corporation, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division to install, maintain, repair,
replace, and use a fiber optic cable with the certain named public rights-of-way for the purpose of
crossing the same. Said cable shall cross the following public rights-of-way as the same intersect
with Chicago, Missouri, and Western Railroad right-of-way as it runs through the Town of Normal:
a) New Fort Jesse Road, b) Beech Street, c) Cherry Street, d) Maple Street, e) Mulberry Street, f)
Walnut Street, g) College Avenue, h) Linden Street, i) Broadway Avenue, j) Fell Avenue, k) School
Street, l) University Street, m) an unnamed alley between University Street and Main Street, n)
Main Street, o) Hovey Avenue, p) Division Street. Said cable shall cross the public rights-of-way
for an aggregate distance of 1,728 lineal feet.
SEC. 26.7-4. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority herein
granted for a period of 25 years from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.7-5. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, repaired, replaced, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of Normal
and the regulations of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.7-6. The Grantee agrees to pay the Town of Normal as compensation for the
privilege herein granted the sum of $2,000 per year, payable on the 1st day of July of each year,
beginning July 1, 1987, and continuing throughout the term of this Agreement, except as adjusted as
hereafter provided.
SEC. 26.7-7. The compensation rates specified in the preceding Section shall be adjusted in
five-year intervals on the following specified dates: July 1, 1992; July 1, 1997, July 1, 2002; July 1,
2007. The adjustment shall be made by multiplying the then existing contract rate times a factor
equal to the overall change in the Consumer Price Index during the five contract years immediately
SEC. 26.7-7(Cont.1)
preceding the adjustment date. The Consumer Price Index shall be that index designated as CPI-U
(Chicago Index), published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor.
SEC. 26.7-8. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the Grantee
vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of Normal under the
provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized are removed and the
public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.7-9. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in connection
with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with ordinary travel on
the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned water or sewer pipes then in
place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of the ground
in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks, parkways, or pavements
disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored shall be the same or
similar type construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed; and in the event that
any such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or otherwise requires
repairing because of such disturbance by Grantee, then Grantee, as soon as climatic conditions will
permit, shall promptly upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal so to do, cause such
sidewalk, parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good condition as before said
sidewalk, parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.7-10. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal; and
permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee fails or
neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable amount of
time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is necessary to
relocate said cable or structures, the Town shall give Grantee 60 days written notice that relocation
is necessary, and the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear the sole expense
of relocation. If Grantee’s proposed plan of relocation is not acceptable to the Town of Normal, the
Town shall cooperate with Grantee in attempting to relocate Grantee’s cable and other structures on
Town-owned property. Upon termination of the privilege herein granted by lapse of time or
otherwise, the Grantee, without cost or expense to the Town of Normal, shall remove the cable and
structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a proper condition under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to
remove the cable and other structures, the Town of Normal will have the choice of either
performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said Grantee or determining what the cost of
said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost, proceeding against the surety bond posted
by Grantee as hereafter provided, or pursue any other remedies provided by law.
SEC. 26.7-11. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and all
liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the installation,
removal, relocation, alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with the
cable of structures herein authorized, and from any and all damages thereto on account of the
location, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways,
tunnels, vaults, sewers, water mains, conduits, pipes, poles, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.7-12
SEC. 26.7-12. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal a surety bond written by a
company authorized to do business within the State of Illinois in the amount of $10,000. Said bond
shall be in existence during the term of this agreement and shall be conditioned upon Grantee’s
performance of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement. In the event Grantee, after reasonable
notice, fails to perform pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, then the Town of Normal may in
addition to other remedies recover on the surety bond. The Director of Public Works is hereby
authorized to determine what cost would be involved to perform any obligation of Grantee
hereunder, and present said claim to Grantee and the surety company together with a date by which
said performance will begin. The Grantee or the surety company shall make payment to the Town
of Normal on said claim within a reasonable time, but in any event, payment shall be made prior to
the date performance of said obligation is scheduled to begin as set forth in the claim presented by
the Director of Public Works to Grantee and the surety company.
SEC. 26.7-13. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a permit
for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not less than
$1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public liability and
property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Grantee. The
aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the Grantee until the cable or
structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public way is restored as herein
required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of Normal as an additional
insured.
SEC. 26.7-14. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage of life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof; provided
that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against the Town of
Normal which, by the terms hereof, the Grantee shall be obligated to defend or against which the
Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal and provided further that
the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its possession relating to said
claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any said claim or suit. The
governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in defending any such claim or
suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity afforded to the Town of Normal, and
further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the Town of Normal for the necessary defense of
any suit not only against the Town of Normal but also against its officers and employees resulting
from this franchise grant.
SEC. 26.7-15. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claim arising out of damage to the fiber optic cable or structures
done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, except as
hereinafter set forth, Grantee waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising
directly, by subrogation, assignment, or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect,
resulting from damage to the fiber optic cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town of
SEC. 26.7-15(Cont.1)
Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, Grantee retains the right to recover damages from
employees of the Town of Normal for willful and wanton damage to Grantee’s property but said
retention shall in no way create any liability for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.7-16. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town of
Normal ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal
rights-of-way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.7-17. This Agreement shall be in full force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the
company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this Agreement executed
by its proper officers there unto duly authorized under the corporate seal of said company and
attested by its Secretary of Assistant Secretary.
SEC. 26.7-18. Notices required under this agreement shall be sent by the Town of Normal
to MCI Telecommunications Corporation, 1133 19th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036,
Attention: Executive Vice-President, with a copy to the Senior Vice-President and General
Counsel; Grantee shall send notices required under this agreement to Town Clerk, Town of Normal,
Normal City Hall, P.O. Box 589, Normal, Illinois 6l76l.
SEC. 26.8-1
DIVISION 8 – BROMENN HEALTHCARE
SEC. 26.8-1. WHEREAS, BroMenn Healthcare, an Illinois not-for-profit Corporation
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois (hereafter also designated as Grantee), has
petitioned the Town of Normal, Illinois, asking that the right, permission and authority be granted to
it by ordinance to install, maintain, repair, replace, and use a fiber optic cable within certain public
rights-of-way for the purpose of crossing the same; and
SEC. 26.8-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal and Grantee have agreed upon the terms,
provisions, and conditions granting permission and authority to use certain public rights-of-way all
as hereafter set forth.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARDS OF
TRUSTEES FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.8-3. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided, the
right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to BroMenn Healthcare an Illinois
not-for-profit Corporation, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division to install,
maintain, repair, replace and use fiber optic and copper cable within the certain named public rightsof-
way: University Avenue. Said cable shall cross the public rights-of-way for an aggregate
distance of 66 lineal feet.
SEC. 26.8-4. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority herein
granted for a period of ten (10) years from and after the date of passage of this ordinance.
SEC. 26.8-5. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, repaired, replaced, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of Normal
and the regulations of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.8-6. The Grantee agrees to pay the Town of Normal, as compensation for the
privilege herein granted the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, payable on the 2nd day
of January of each year, beginning January 2nd, 1996, and continuing throughout the term of this
Agreement, except as adjusted as hereafter provided.
SEC. 26.8-7. The compensation rates specified in the preceding Section shall be adjusted
annually on January 2nd. The adjustment shall be made by multiplying the then existing contract
rate times a factor equal to the overall change in the Consumer Price Index during the twelve
months immediately preceding the adjustment date. The Consumer Price Index shall be that index
designated as CPI-U (Chicago Index), published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States
Department of labor, or such successor index.
SEC.26.8-8. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the Grantee
vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of Normal under the
SEC. 26.8-8(Cont.1)
provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized are removed and the
public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.8-9. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in connection
with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with ordinary travel on
the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned water or sewer pipes then in
place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of the ground
in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks, parkways, or pavements
disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored shall be the same or
similar type construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed; and in the event that
any such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or otherwise requires
repairing because of such disturbance by Grantee, the Grantee, as soon as climatic conditions will
permit, shall promptly upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal so to do, cause such
sidewalk, parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good condition as before said
sidewalk, parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.8-10. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal; and
permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee fails or
neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable amount of
time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is necessary to
relocate said cable or structures, the Town shall give Grantee 60 days written notice that relocation
is necessary, and the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear the sole expense
of relocation. If Grantee’s proposed plan of relocation is not acceptable to the Town of Normal, the
Town shall cooperate with Grantee in attempting to relocate Grantee’s cable and other structures on
Town owned property. Upon termination of the privilege herein granted by lapse of time or
otherwise, the Grantee, without cost or expense to the Town of Normal, shall remove the cable and
structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a proper condition under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to
remove the cable and other structures, the Town of Normal will have the choice of either
performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said Grantee or determining what the cost of
said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost, or pursue any other remedies provided by
law.
SEC. 26.8-11. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and all
liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the installation,
removal, relocation, alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with the
cable of structures herein authorized, and from any and all damages thereto on account of the
location, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways,
tunnels, vaults, sewer, water mains, conduits, pipes, pole, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.8-12. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a permit
for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not less than
$1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public liability and
property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Grantee. The
aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the Grantee until the cable or
structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public way is restored as herein
SEC. 26.8-12(Cont.1)
required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of Normal as an additional
insured.
SEC. 26.8-13. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage of life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof; provided
that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against the Town of
Normal which, by the Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal
and provided further that the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its
possession relating to said claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any said
claim or suit. The governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in defending
any such claim or suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity afforded to the
Town of Normal, and further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the Town of Normal for
the necessary defense of any suit not only against the Town of Normal but also against its officers
and employees resulting from this franchise grant.
SEC. 26.8-14. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claims arising out of damage to the fiber optic cable or structures
done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, except as
hereinafter set forth. Grantee waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising
directly, by subrogation, assignment, or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect,
resulting from damage to the fiber optic cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town of
Normal, its officer, employees, and agents. Grantee retains the right to recover damages from
employees of the Town of Normal for willful and wanton damage to Grantee’s property but said
retention shall in no way create any liability for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26 8.15. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town of
Normal ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal
rights-of-way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.8-16. This Agreement shall be in full force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the
company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this Agreement executed
by its proper officer there unto duly authorized under the corporate seal of said company and
attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
SEC. 26.8-17. Notices required under this agreement shall be sent by the Town of Normal
to BroMenn Healthcare, Virginia and Franklin Avenues, Normal, Illinois 61761. Attention:
Executive President; Grantee shall send notices required under this agreement to Town Clerk, Town
of Normal, Normal City Hall, P.O. Box 589, Normal, Illinois 61761
(Entire Division 8 Added 9/5/95 by Ord. No. 4331)
SEC. 26.9-1
DIVISION 9 – SUMMIT COMMUNICATIONS, INC.
SEC. 26.9-1. WHEREAS, Summit Communications, Inc. 167 West Fifth Street, Minonk,
Illinois 61760 desires to lay a cable under Linden Street right-of-way in the Town of Normal for the
purpose of providing cable television services to Ironwood apartments; and
SEC. 26.9-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal has the authority to regulate the use of
street rights-of-way in the Town of Normal; and
SEC. 26.9-3. WHEREAS, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11 excludes from the definition of
“community antenna television system” any system which serves only the residents of one or more
apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management and commercial
establishments located on the premises of such dwellings; and
SEC. 26.9-4. WHEREAS, Ironwood Apartments is under common ownership, control or
management; and
SEC. 26.9-5. WHEREAS, Town Code requires a franchise agreement for use and
permanent occupancy of public ways.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.9-6. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided, the
right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to Summit Communications, Inc.,
upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division to install, maintain, repair, replace, and
use a fiber optic cable or co-axle cable for the purpose of crossing Linden Street public right-ofway.
Said cable shall cross Linden Street right-of-way at a point between Northtown Road and
Interstate 55 as approved by the Town Engineer for the sole purpose of providing cable television
services to Ironwood Apartments. Said cable shall cross Linden Street for an aggregate distance of
eighty (80) lineal feet. This Franchise is limited to the one cable crossing described herein and the
limited purpose of providing cable television services to Ironwood Apartments while such
apartments are under common ownership, control or management. No additional crossings or
purposes are authorized without amendment hereto.
SEC. 26.9-7. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority herein
granted for a period of 10 years from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance or until such
time that the Ironwood Apartments cease being under common ownership, control or management
whichever occurs first.
SEC. 26.9-8. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, repaired, replaced, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of Normal
and the regulations of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.9-9
SEC. 26.9-9. The Grantee agrees to pay the Town of Normal as compensation for the
privilege herein granted a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the total gross receipts received by
Grantee from cable services provided via the cable crossing Linden Street. Such payment shall be
in addition to any State or Municipal service, utility, or other tax now and hereafter in effect.
Grantee shall remit payment to the Town of Normal on a monthly basis or as otherwise directed by
the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.9-10. The Town of Normal shall on reasonable notice have the right to audit
Grantee’s financial records to determine compliance with this Division. Grantee shall annually
submit a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing in detail the gross
receipts of Grantee derived from services provided via the Linden Street Cable.
SEC. 26.9-11. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the
Grantee vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of Normal
under the provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized are removed
and the public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.9-12. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in
connection with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with
ordinary travel on the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned water or
sewer pipes then in place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the
surface of the ground in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks,
parkways, or pavements disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored
shall be the same or similar type construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed;
and in the event that any such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or
otherwise requires repairing because of such disturbance by Grantee, then Grantee, as soon as
climatic conditions will permit, shall promptly upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal so
to do, cause such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good condition as
before said sidewalk, parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.9-13. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal; and
permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee fails or
neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable amount of
time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is necessary to
relocate said cable or structures, the Town shall give Grantee 60 days written notice that relocation
is necessary, and the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear the sole expense
of relocation. If Grantee’s proposed plan of relocation is not acceptable to the Town of Normal, the
Town shall cooperate with Grantee in attempting to relocate Grantee’s cable and other structures on
Town-owned property. Upon termination of the privilege herein granted by lapse of time or
otherwise, the Grantee, without cost or expense to the Town of Normal, shall remove the cable and
structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a proper condition under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to
remove the cable and other structures, the Town of Normal will have the choice of either
performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said Grantee or determining what the cost of
said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost, proceeding against the surety bond posted
by Grantee as hereafter provided, or pursue any other remedies provided by law.
SEC. 26.9-14
SEC. 26.9-14. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and all
liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the installation,
removal, relocation, alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with the
cable of structures herein authorized, and from any and all damages thereto on account of the
location, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways,
tunnels, vaults, sewers, water mains, conduits, pipes, poles, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.9-15. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal a surety bond written by a
company authorized to do business within the State of Illinois in the amount of $10,000. Said bond
shall be in existence during the term of this agreement and shall be conditioned upon Grantee’s
performance of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement. In the event Grantee, after reasonable
notice, fails to perform pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, then the Town of Normal may in
addition to other remedies recover on the surety bond. The Director of Public Works is hereby
authorized to determine what cost would be involved to perform any obligation of Grantee
hereunder, and present said claim to Grantee and the surety company together with a date by which
said performance will begin. The Grantee or the surety company shall make payment to the Town
of Normal on said claim within a reasonable time, but in any event, payment shall be made prior to
the date performance of said obligation is scheduled to begin as set forth in the claim presented by
the Director of Public Works to Grantee and the surety company.
SEC. 26.9-16. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a permit
for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not less than
$1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public liability and
property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Grantee. The
aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the Grantee until the cable or
structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public way is restored as herein
required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of Normal as an additional
insured.
SEC. 26.9-17. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage of life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof; provided
that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against the Town of
Normal which, by the terms hereof, the Grantee shall be obligated to defend or against which the
Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal and provided further that
the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its possession relating to said
claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any said claim or suit. The
governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in defending any such claim or
suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity afforded to the Town of Normal, and
further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the Town of Normal for the necessary defense of
any suit not only against the Town of Normal but also against its officers and employees resulting
from this franchise grant.
SEC. 26.9-18
SEC. 26.9-18. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claim arising out of damage to the cable or structures done in
whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, except as hereinafter
set forth, Grantee waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising directly, by
subrogation, assignment, or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect, resulting from
damage to the cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers,
employees, and agents. Grantee retains the right to recover damages from employees of the Town
of Normal for willful and wanton damage to Grantee’s property but said retention shall in no way
create any liability for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.9-19. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town of
Normal ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal
rights-of-way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.9-20. This Agreement shall be in full force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the
company’s written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this Agreement executed
by its proper officers there unto duly authorized under the corporate seal of said company and
attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
SEC. 26.9-21. Notices required under this agreement shall be sent by the Town of Normal
to Summit Communications, Inc., 167 West Fifth Street, Minonk Illinois 61760, Attention:
Executive Vice-President. Grantee shall send notices required under this agreement to Town Clerk,
Town of Normal, Normal City Hall, P.O. Box 589, Normal, Illinois 6l760.
SUMMIT COMMUNICATIONS, INC.
SEC. 26.10-1
DIVISION 10 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEE
SEC. 26.10-1 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Division, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
A. Gross Charges means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Town, and
for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind
or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or
any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. “Gross charges” for private line service
shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the Town, charges for
the channel mileage between each channel point within the Town, and charges for
that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the Town.
However, “gross charges” shall not include:
1. any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made under:
a. the fee imposed by this Section,
b. additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under Section 9-221
or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act,
c. amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code,
d. the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
e. 911 surcharges, or
f. the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
2. charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Town;
3. charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but
is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes
the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
4. charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
SEC. 26.10-1(Cont.1)
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the Town;
6. charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the
extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such
services;
7. bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale
at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectable, as determined
under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the
tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
8. charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
9. charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Town.
B. Public Right-of-Way means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-ofway
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the Town has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the
location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public Rightof-
Way" shall not include any real or personal Town property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Town
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the public right-of-way.
C. Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State, or any like term, means and
includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or
by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is
SEC. 26.10-1(Cont.2)
located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this State.
D. Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
E. Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless
telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems,
and the like, “service address” shall mean the location of the customer’s primary
use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois
where bills are sent.
F. Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services,
private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission
of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, “telecommunications”
shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. “Telecommunications”
shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall
not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the
ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use
of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for
resale. “Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47
U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Town
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
SEC. 26.10-1(Cont.3)
G. Telecommunications provider means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2)
any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or
controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
H. Telecommunications retailer or retailer or carrier means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this Section. The Town may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining
a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Town,
furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the Town.
I. Wireless telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in Section 704© of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. §332©(7), as now or hereafter
amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
SEC. 26.10-2 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
A. Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Division shall register with
the Town within 30 days after the effective date of this Division or becoming a
telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the
Town, provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a
return pursuant to Sec. 26.10-4(C) of this Division shall be deemed to have
registered in accordance with this Section.
B. Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Town pursuant to
Sec. 26.10-2(A) has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form
or current return as required by Sec. 26.10-4(C), as the case may be, to the Town
within thirty (30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the
information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form
or most recent return on file with the Town.
SEC. 26.10-3 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEE.
A. A Town telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%) of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the Town for telecommunications originating or received in the Town.
B. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this
Division, the Town infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be
SEC. 26.10-3(Cont.1)
the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the
Town by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance
fee provided under this Division does not, however, serve as a limitation on
the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
C. The Town telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this
Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in Sec. 26.10-4
of this Division.
SEC. 26.10-4 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an
additional charge in an amount equal to the Town infrastructure maintenance fee
attributable to that customer’s service address.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the City Manager the infrastructure maintenance
fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the Town not later than
the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the
customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an
amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the Town infrastructure maintenance
fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and
remitting the fee.
C. Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the Town shall be accompanied
by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Town Treasurer, which shall contain
such information as the Town Treasurer may reasonably require.
D. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this
Division and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications
retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications
retailer to the Town. The charge imposed under Sec. 26.10-4(A) by the
telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Division shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services until
paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original
charge for such services.
E. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid
that was not due under the provisions of this Division, whether as a result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this Division, from
the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided,
however, the Town Treasurer may request, and telecommunications retailer shall
provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit
may be made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment
unless, (1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the
SEC. 26.10-4(Cont.1)
Town within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2) the credit
derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer
during the applicable statutory period of limitations.
F. Amounts paid under this Division by telecommunications retailers shall not be
included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described immediately
below:
1. “gross charges” for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
2. “gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in
Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
3. “gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as
prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
4. “gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public
utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
G. The Town shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of
all telecommunications retailers subject to this Division to determine whether the
telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the Town for the Town
infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the Town
infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Town by the telecommunications
retailer shall be paid to the Town plus five percent (5%) of the total amount of the
underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the Town in
conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the
Town within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for
same.
H. The Town Treasurer, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
Division, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and
shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to SEC.
26.10-2 of this Division of such regulations.
SEC. 26.10-5 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS. Nothing in this Division shall
excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited
to:
A. generally applicable taxes; and
B. standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public
rights-of-way, including standards relating to free standing towers and other
structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided; and
SEC. 26.10-5(Cont.1)
C. any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable
taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights-of-way; and
D. compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or
structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way.
SEC. 26.10-6 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES. Any franchise, license,
or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the Town entered into before
the effective date of this Division regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the
extent waived.
SEC. 26.10-7 PENALTIES. Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Division shall be subject
to fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation.
SEC. 26.10-8 ENFORCEMENT. Nothing in this Division shall be construed as
limiting any additional or further remedies that the Town may have for enforcement of this
Division.
SEC. 26.10-9 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Division is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Entire Division 10 of Chapter 26 Added 10/20/97 by Ord. No. 4476, effective 1/1/98)(Entire
Division 10 of Chapter 26 Readopted 3/18/02 by Ord. No. 4783)
SEC. 26.11-1
DIVISION 11 – LEVEL 3 COMMUNICATIONS, LLC
SEC. 26.11-1. WHEREAS, Level 3 Communications, LLC, a Limited Liability
Company organized under the Laws of the State of Delaware authorized to do business in the
State of Illinois (hereafter also designated as Grantee), has petitioned the Town of Normal,
Illinois, asking that the right, permission and authority be granted to it by ordinance to install,
maintain, repair, replace, and use a fiber optic cable within certain public rights-of-way for the
purpose of crossing the same; and
SEC. 26.11-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal and Grantee have agreed upon the
terms, provisions, and conditions granting permission and authority to use certain public rightsof-
way all as hereafter set forth.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.11-3. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided,
the right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to Level 3 Communications
LLC, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division to install, maintain, repair,
replace, and use a fiber optic cable with the certain named public rights-of-way for the purpose
of crossing the same. Said cable shall cross the following public rights-of-way as the same
intersect with Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way as it runs through the Town of Normal: a)
W. Division, b) US 51/Center Street, c) US 51/Main, d) S. University Street, e) E. Vernon St., f)
S. School Street, g) S. Fell Ave., h) Broadway, i) Linden, j) E. College Ave., k) E. Mulberry St.,
l) N. Beech, m) E. Willow St., AKA Fort Jesse Rd., n) Towanda Rd., and o) any other right of
way authorized by the Town Engineer. The permission and authority herein granted shall not be
exercised and no work done until a permit authorizing the same shall have been issued by
Grantor and the payment of any applicable fee and tax. (Amended 5/2/2016 by Ord. No. 5637)
SEC. 26.11-4. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority
herein granted for a period of 20 years from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.11-5. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, repaired, replaced, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of
Normal and the regulations of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.11-6. The privilege herein granted may not be transferred or assigned to any
other person or entity without the written consent of Grantor; provided, however, that Grantee
need not obtain the consent of the Grantor for an assignment or transfer to a subsidiary, parent or
affiliate of Grantee, to a purchaser of all or substantially all of the assets of Grantee, or to an
entity with or into which Grantee may merge or consolidate.
SEC. 26.11-7. Grantee acknowledges that Grantor has enacted an ordinance imposing a
telecommunication infrastructure maintenance fee and that Grantee is a telecommunications
SEC. 26.11-7(Cont.1)
retailer as defined in that ordinance. Grantee represents that it does not have any service
addresses within the corporate limits of Grantor such that would require it to pay the
telecommunication infrastructure maintenance fee as of the date of this Agreement. Grantee will
notify Grantor should it obtain service addresses within the corporate limits of Grantor in the
future. Grantee understands that it will be required to pay a telecommunication infrastructure
maintenance fee at that time and that nothing in this Agreement intends to waive payment of that
fee if and when it becomes applicable to Grantee.
SEC. 26.11-8. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the
Grantee vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of
Normal under the provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized
are removed and the public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.11-9. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in
connection with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with
ordinary travel on the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned facilities
then in place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of
the ground in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks, parkways,
or pavements disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored shall be
the same or similar type construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed; and
in the event that any such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or
otherwise requires repairing because of such disturbance by Grantee, then Grantee, as soon as
climatic conditions will permit, shall promptly upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal
so to do, cause such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good
condition as before said sidewalk, parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.11-10. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal;
and permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee
fails or neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable
amount of time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is
necessary to relocate said cable or structures, the Town shall give Grantee 60 days written notice
that relocation is necessary, and the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear
the sole expense of relocation. If Grantee’s proposed plan of relocation is not acceptable to the
Town of Normal, the Town shall cooperate with Grantee in attempting to relocate Grantee’s
cable and other structures on Town-owned property. Upon termination of the privilege herein
granted by lapse of time or otherwise, the Grantee, without cost or expense to the Town of
Normal, shall remove the cable and structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a
proper condition under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the
failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to remove the cable and other structures, the Town of
Normal will have the choice of either performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said
Grantee or determining what the cost of said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost,
proceeding against the surety bond posted by Grantee as hereafter provided, or pursue any other
remedies provided by law.
SEC. 26.11-11. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and
all liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the negligent or
SEC. 26.11-11(Cont.1)
wrongful act of Grantee, its’ employees and agents during the installation, removal, relocation,
alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with the cable of
structures herein authorized, and from any and all damages thereto on account of the location,
construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways, tunnels,
vaults, sewers, water mains, conduits, pipes, poles, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.11-12. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal a surety bond written by a
company authorized to do business within the State of Illinois in the amount of $10,000. Said
bond shall be in existence during the term of this agreement and shall be conditioned upon
Grantee’s performance of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement. In the event Grantee, after
reasonable notice, fails to perform pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, then the Town of
Normal may in addition to other remedies recover on the surety bond. The Director of Public
Works is hereby authorized to determine what cost would be involved to perform any obligation
of Grantee hereunder, and present said claim to Grantee and the surety company together with a
date by which said performance will begin. The Grantee or the surety company shall make
payment to the Town of Normal on said claim within a reasonable time, but in any event,
payment shall be made prior to the date performance of said obligation is scheduled to begin as
set forth in the claim presented by the Director of Public Works to Grantee and the surety
company.
SEC. 26.11-13. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a
permit for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not
less than $1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public
liability and property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Grantee. The
aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the Grantee until the cable
or structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public way is restored as
herein required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of Normal as an
additional insured.
SEC. 26.11-14. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage of life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof;
provided that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against
the Town of Normal which, by the terms hereof, the Grantee shall be obligated to defend or
against which the Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal and
provided further that the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its
possession relating to said claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any
said claim or suit. The governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in
defending any such claim or suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity
afforded to the Town of Normal, and further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the
Town of Normal for the necessary defense of any suit not only against the Town of Normal but
also against its officers and employees resulting from this franchise grant.
SEC.26.11-15
SEC. 26.11-15. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claim arising out of damage to the fiber optic cable or structures
done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, except as
hereinafter set forth, Grantee waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising
directly, by subrogation, assignment, or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect,
resulting from damage to the fiber optic cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town
of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, Grantee retains the right to recover damages from
employees of the Town of Normal for willful and wanton damage to Grantee’s property, but said
retention shall in no way create any liability for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.11-16. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town
of Normal ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal
rights-of-way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.11-17. This Agreement and any amendments to the agreement shall be in full
force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the company’s written and unconditional acceptance of
all the provisions of this Agreement executed by its proper officers there unto duly authorized
under the corporate seal of said company and attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
(Amended 5/2/2016 by Ord. No. 5637)
SEC. 26.11-18. This Agreement may only be amended in writing.
SEC. 26.11-19. Grantee shall take all necessary steps as to insure that the location of its
fiber optic line and all other structures is on record with JULIE or such other State-wide-One-
Call Notice System as may be in place pursuant to the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/l et. seq.)
SEC. 26.11-20. Grantee agrees any litigation involving this agreement shall be filed and
prosecuted in McLean County, Illinois.
SEC. 26.11-21. Notices required under this agreement shall be sent by the Town of
Normal to Level 3 Communications, LLC, Attention: Director, Intercity Network, Attn: General
Counsel, 1025 Eldorado Blvd., Broomfield, CO 80021. Grantee shall send notices required
under this agreement to Town Clerk, Town of Normal, Normal City Hall, P.O. Box 589, Normal,
Illinois 6l761.
(Entire Division 11 Added 6/7/99 by Ord. No. 4598)
SEC. 26.12-1
DIVISION 12 – McLEODUSA TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, INC.
SEC. 26.12-1. WHEREAS, McLeodUSA Telecommunications Services, Inc. organized
under the Laws of the State of Iowa authorized to do business in the State of Illinois (hereafter
also designated as Grantee), has petitioned the Town of Normal, Illinois, asking that the right,
permission and authority be granted to it by ordinance to install, maintain, repair, replace, and
use a fiber optic cable within certain public rights-of-way; and
SEC. 26.12-2. WHEREAS, the Town of Normal and Grantee have agreed upon the
terms, provisions, and conditions granting permission and authority to use certain public rightsof-
way all as hereafter set forth.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES FOR THE TOWN OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SEC. 26.12-3. That for the mutual and other valuable considerations as herein provided,
the right, permission, and authority are hereby given and granted to McLeodUSA
Telecommunications Services, Inc. upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Division
to install, maintain, repair, replace, and use a fiber optic cable within the certain named public
rights-of-way. Said cable may occupy the following public rights-of-way: All as set forth on
plans on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. A general depiction of said plans is attached
hereto as Exhibit A. The permission and authority herein granted shall not be exercised and no
work done until a permit authorizing the same shall have been issued by Grantor and the
payment of any applicable fee and tax.
SEC. 26.12-4. The above described uses of the public ways shall exist by authority
herein granted for a period of 20 years from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance.
SEC. 26.12-5. The exact location of said privilege shall be as shown on prints attached
hereto, which by reference are made a part of this Division. Said cable shall be installed,
maintained, repaired, replaced, and used in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of
Normal and the regulations of the Public Works Director.
SEC. 26.12-6. The privilege herein granted may not be transferred or assigned to any
other person or entity without the written consent of Grantor.
SEC. 26.12-7. Grantee acknowledges that Grantor has enacted an ordinance imposing a
telecommunication infrastructure maintenance fee and that Grantee is a telecommunications
retailer as defined in that ordinance. Grantee understands that it will be required to pay a
telecommunication infrastructure maintenance fee in accordance with Town Code and that
nothing in this Agreement intends to waive payment of that fee.
SEC. 26.12-8. In the event the privilege herein granted is terminated, expires, or the
Grantee vacates the premises, the Grantee shall nevertheless remain liable to the Town of
SEC. 26.12-8(Cont.1)
Normal under the provisions hereof until all cable and supporting structures herein authorized
are removed and the public way is restored as herein required.
SEC. 26.12-9. All structures hereafter installed shall be so placed and all work in
connection with such installation shall be so performed as not to interfere unreasonably with
ordinary travel on the highways of the Town of Normal or with any municipally owned facilities
then in place or hereafter placed. Grantee, after doing any excavating, shall leave the surface of
the ground in the same condition as existed prior to such excavation. All sidewalks, parkways,
or pavements disturbed by Grantee shall be restored by it; and the surface to be restored shall be
the same or similar type construction as that previously existing prior to its being disturbed; and
in the event that any such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement shall become uneven, unsettled, or
otherwise requires repairing because of such disturbance by Grantee, then Grantee, as soon as
climatic conditions will permit, shall promptly upon receipt of notice from the Town of Normal
so to do, cause such sidewalk, parkway, or pavement to be repaired or restored to as good
condition as before said sidewalk, parkway, or pavement was disturbed by Grantee.
SEC. 26.12-10. This grant of authority is subject to amendment, modification, or repeal;
and permission and authority herein granted may be revoked by the Town of Normal if Grantee
fails or neglects to comply with this grant of authority, but only after being given a reasonable
amount of time to cure any defaults. Upon the determination by the Town of Normal that it is
necessary to relocate said cable or structures, the Town shall give Grantee 60 days written notice
that relocation is necessary, and the Grantee shall relocate the cable and structures and shall bear
the sole expense of relocation. If Grantee’s proposed plan of relocation is not acceptable to the
Town of Normal, the Town shall cooperate with Grantee in attempting to relocate Grantee’s
cable and other structures on Town-owned property. Upon termination of the privilege herein
granted by lapse of time or otherwise, the Grantee, without cost or expense to the Town of
Normal, shall remove the cable and structures herein authorized and restore the public way to a
proper condition under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. In the event of the
failure, neglect, or refusal of said Grantee to remove the cable and other structures, the Town of
Normal will have the choice of either performing said work and charging the cost thereof to said
Grantee or determining what the cost of said work shall be and billing the Grantee for said cost,
proceeding against the surety bond posted by Grantee as hereafter provided, or pursue any other
remedies provided by law.
SEC. 26.12-11. Grantee shall hold and save the Town of Normal harmless from any and
all liability and expense, including judgments, costs, and damages, arising out of the installation,
removal, relocation, alteration, repair, maintenance, restoration, or any other way connected with
the cable or structures herein authorized, and from any and all damages thereto on account of the
location, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public ways, bridges, subways,
tunnels, vaults, sewers, water mains, conduits, pipes, poles, and other utilities.
SEC. 26.12-12. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal a surety bond written by a
company authorized to do business within the State of Illinois in the amount of $10,000. Said
bond shall be in existence during the term of this Agreement and shall be conditioned upon
Grantee’s performance of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement. In the event Grantee, after
reasonable notice, fails to perform pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, then the Town of
SEC. 26.12-12(Cont.1)
Normal may in addition to other remedies recover on the surety bond. The Director of Public
Works is hereby authorized to determine what cost would be involved to perform any obligation
of Grantee hereunder, and present said claim to Grantee and the surety company together with a
date by which said performance will begin. The Grantee or the surety company shall make
payment to the Town of Normal on said claim within a reasonable time, but in any event,
payment shall be made prior to the date performance of said obligation is scheduled to begin as
set forth in the claim presented by the Director of Public Works to Grantee and the surety
company.
SEC. 26.12-13. Grantee agrees to furnish the Town of Normal, prior to issuance of a
permit for this privilege, a copy of proof of insurance (certificate of insurance) in an amount not
less than $1 million combined single limit with said insurance covering all liability, both public
liability and property damage, that may result from the granting of this privilege to Grantee. The
aforementioned insurance coverage shall be maintained at all times by the Grantee until the cable
or structures described in this grant of authority are removed and the public way is restored as
herein required. The aforementioned insurance coverage shall name the Town of Normal as an
additional insured.
SEC. 26.12-14. Grantee shall, at its own expense, defend all suits and does agree to
indemnify and save harmless the said Town of Normal and its officers and employees from and
against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the granting of authority
herein to Grantee or imposed upon or assumed by it, or by reason of or in connection with any
damage of life, limb, or property as a result of any of the structures constructed by it under or by
virtue of this Agreement, and shall save and keep harmless the Town of Normal from any and all
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind, that may arise by reason thereof;
provided that notice in writing shall be immediately given to Grantee of any claim or suit against
the Town of Normal which, by the terms hereof, the Grantee shall be obligated to defend or
against which the Grantee has hereby agreed to save and keep harmless the Town of Normal and
provided further that the Town of Normal shall furnish to said Grantee all information in its
possession relating to said claim or suit, and cooperate with said Grantee in the defense of any
said claim or suit. The governing body of the Town of Normal may, if it so desires, assist in
defending any such claim or suit. The Grantee will not rely upon governmental immunity
afforded to the Town of Normal, and further agrees that it will pay the costs incurred by the
Town of Normal for the necessary defense of any suit not only against the Town of Normal but
also against its officers and employees resulting from this franchise grant.
SEC. 26.12-15. The Grantee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Normal
against any and all damages and claim arising out of damage to the fiber optic cable or structures
done in whole or in part by the Town of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents, except as
hereinafter set forth, Grantee waives all claims against the Town of Normal, whether arising
directly, by subrogation, assignment, or otherwise, for any and all damages, direct or indirect,
resulting from damage to the fiber optic cable or structures done in whole or in part by the Town
of Normal, its officers, employees, and agents. Such indemnification shall not include damage or
injury which arise out of the Town of Normal's willful misconduct, including the failure by the
Town of Normal, or its agents and employees to contact the Illinois JULIE system prior to
excavation or construction. Grantee retains the right to recover damages from employees of the
SEC. 26.12-15(Cont.1)
Town of Normal for willful and wanton damage to Grantee's property but said retention shall in
no way create any liability for the Town of Normal.
SEC. 26.12-16. Unless otherwise provided herein, Grantee agrees to abide by all Town
of Normal ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the use of municipal property, municipal
rights-of-way, and other matters.
SEC. 26.12-17. This Agreement shall be in full force upon receipt by the Town Clerk of
the company's written and unconditional acceptance of all the provisions of this Agreement
executed by its proper officers there unto duly authorized under the corporate seal of said
company and attested by its Secretary or Assistant Secretary.
SEC. 26.12-18. This Agreement may only be amended in writing.
SEC. 26.12-19. Grantee shall take all necessary steps as to insure that the location of its
fiber optic line and all other structures is on record with JULIE or such other State-Wide-One-
Call Notice System as may be in place pursuant to the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/l et. seq.)
SEC. 26.12-20. Grantee agrees any litigation involving this agreement shall be filed and
prosecuted in McLean County, Illinois.
SEC. 26.12-21. Notices required under this agreement shall be sent by the Town of
Normal to McLeodUSA Telecommunications Services, Inc., OSP Engineering, 2910 Westown
Parkway, Suite 300, West Des Moines, Iowa 50266; Attention Mr. Kelly Wingfield, Permit
Manager. Grantee shall send notices required under this agreement to Town Clerk, Town of
Normal, Normal City Hall, P.O. Box 589, Normal, Illinois 6l761.
(Entire Division 12 Added 6/21/99 by Ord. No. 4601)
SEC. 27.1-1
CHAPTER 27 - THE CODE
DIVISION 1 - GENERAL
SEC. 27.1-1 TITLE. This Code shall be known as the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal of 1969. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood
to refer to the position of same under its appropriate heading, its article heading, if any, and to the
penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Code
by title in any legal document or ordinance of the Town hereafter.
SEC. 27.1-2 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS. Whenever any word in any section of this
Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not be used. When any subject matter party or persons is referred to in this Code by
words importing the singular person or number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons, and females as well as males, and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included. The words, "person, firm or corporation" shall be deemed to include any association or
organization of any kind. Words in the present shall be deemed to include the future.
SEC. 27.1-3 PENALTIES. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this Code the prosecuting officer may elect under which
to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense, provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever in this Code the doing of any act or the omission to do an act constitutes a breach
of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or penalty declared for such
breach, any person who shall be convicted of any such breach shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor
more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be
considered as a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. (Amended 6/3/02 by
Ord. No. 4797)
SEC. 27.1-4 OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES. Whenever in this Code reference is made
to a town officer or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though it were followed by the
words "of the Town of Normal", and shall be taken to mean officer or employee of this Town
having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
SEC. 27.1-5 INTENT. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Town Council
may be fully carried out.
SEC. 27.1-6 REFERENCE TO CODE. Any additions or amendments to this Code when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to make the same a part of this
SEC. 27.1-6(Cont.1)
Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Municipal Code of
the Town of Normal of 1969 shall be understood to include them.
SEC. 27.1-7 PENALTIES - AMENDMENTS. In case of amendment of any section of
this Code containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so
provided in such other section shall be held to relate to this section so amended or the amending
section whether re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.
SEC. 27.1-8 RECORDING AMENDMENTS. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to
keep at least one copy of the Municipal Code of Normal of 1969, which he shall make in the
following manner:
Whenever an ordinance which amends or makes an addition to the Code is passed and
approved, he shall note on the margin of the section of sections amended that such
amendment has been made, with a reference to the place in the amendment book hereinafter
described where the amendment may be found; and in case of an addition, he shall mark in
the appropriate place a notation that such an addition has been made, with a similar
reference to the aforesaid amendment book.
The Town Clerk shall also keep a separate book containing every amendment or addition
passed to this Code, with a reference on each copy of such amendment or addition as to the
place in the record of ordinances where the original ordinance may be found.
The above-mentioned records shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances which the
Clerk is required to keep by statute.
SEC. 27.1-9 SEVERABILITY. If any part, provision, portion, article, section or
subdivision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town of Normal or application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding does not affect other provisions or applications of the Code Section or Ordinances which
can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and the provisions of each Code
Section or Ordinance are severable unless otherwise provided. (Amended 11/18/96 by Ord. No.
4421)
SEC. 27.2-1
DIVISION 2 - PRINTING
SEC. 27.2-1 AUTHORIZATION. This ordinance, the Municipal Code of the Town of
Normal of 1969, shall be printed and published in book or pamphlet form.
SEC. 27.2-2 DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES. All copies of the Municipal Code of the
Town of Normal of 1969 belonging to the town shall be deposited with the Town Clerk. He shall
deliver one copy thereof to the Town President, one to each member of the Town Council and
copies to such other persons as the Town Council may direct.
SEC. 27.2-3 PRESENTATION OF COPIES. The Town President shall have the power
to extend to or reciprocate the courtesies of other municipalities by presenting to them a copy of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal of 1969, bound at the expense of the Town, as to him may
seem suitable; and he shall have the power to present two copies of this Code to the Illinois
Municipal League.
SEC. 27.2-4 SALE OF CODE. This Code shall be sold to the general public at a price of
$120.00 per copy. Supplements shall also be sold at a charge established by the City Manager.
Fees shall be paid to the Town Treasurer. Copies of this Code and supplements shall be supplied by
the Town Clerk. (Amended 9/19/83)(Amended 3/6/89)
SEC. 27.3-1
DIVISION 3 - REPEALING CLAUSE
SEC. 27.3-1 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES - EXCEPTIONS. All general
ordinances passed by the President and Town Council prior to March 1, 1969, except as are
expressly excepted from repeal herein, and except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal, are hereby repealed (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section) from which are excluded the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchises and other ordinances granting
special privileges to persons or corporations; contract ordinances; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; ordinances
setting speed limits; ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections, ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by the Town and all special ordinances.
SEC. 27.3-2 PENDING SUITS. No new ordinances shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance, or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance or in any way
whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
penalty so incurred, or any right accrued or claims arising before the new ordinance takes effect,
save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform, as far as possible, to the ordinance in force
at the time of proceeding. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a
new ordinance, such provision may by consent of the party affected be applied to any judgment
pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as abating any action
now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the town herein repealed; or as
discontinuing, abating, or modifying or altering any penalty, accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the town under any section at
the time of the passage of this ordinance.
SEC. 27.3-3 JURISDICTION. (Deleted 11/18/96 by Ord. No. 4421)
SEC. 27.4-1
DIVISION 4 - EFFECTIVE DATE
SEC. 27.4-1 TIME OF TAKING EFFECT. This ordinance, the same being herein
designated as the "Municipal Code of the Town of Normal of 1969" shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage, approval and publication in book form. Passed this 21st day of April,
1969.
APPROVED: ______________________________
President of the Board of
Trustees of the Town of
Normal, McLean County, Illinois.
ATTEST:
_______________________________
Town Clerk
SEC. 27.5-1
DIVISION 5 - RE-ADOPTION OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE
SEC. 27.5-1. Re-adoption by Ordinance No. 1338, on the 4th day of February 1975, as
follows:
"AN ORDINANCE READOPTING THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE TOWN OF NORMAL,
1969, AS AMENDED AS AN EXERCISE OF HOME RULE POWER
WHEREAS the Town of Normal has a population of more than 25,000 and is therefore a
"Home Rule Unit" under the 1970 Illinois Constitution; and
WHEREAS the Illinois Constitution of 1970 provides that a Home Rule Unit may exercise
any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs, including but
not limited to the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety,morals and
welfare; to license, to tax; and to incur debt; and
WHEREAS the Town has in full force and effect a codified set of those ordinances of the
Town which are of a general and permanent nature, which said codified set is known and
designated as the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended; and
WHEREAS a substantial portion of said Code has been adopted pursuant to statutory
authorization conferred by the Legislature of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS there are or may be certain portions of said Code which go beyond the authority
conferred by the Legislature of the State of Illinois or in some other way differ in content,
form, substance or procedure from the content, form, substance or procedure provided by
statute; and
WHEREAS it is determined and found that the continuation in full force and effect of the
Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as amended or as may hereafter be
amended is a matter pertaining to the government and affairs of the Town; and
WHEREAS to the extent that the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended goes beyond the authority conferred on the Town of Normal, Illinois by the
General Assembly of the State of Illinois or to the extent that said Code differs in content,
form, substance or procedure from provisions of statute, it is the intent of the President and
Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal to readopt said Code as an exercise of the Home
Rule powers conferred by the l970 Illinois Constitution;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN
OF NORMAL, ILLINOIS:
SECTION ONE. That the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal, Illinois, 1969, as
amended, three copies of which have been on file and available for public use, inspection
and examination in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Normal, Illinois for a period
SEC. 27.5-1(Cont.1)
of fifteen (15) days prior to the adoption of this ordinance and a copy of which said Code is
incorporated herein by reference be and the same is hereby readopted.
SECTION TWO. That this ordinance and the Municipal Code of the Town of Normal,
Illinois, 1969, readopted hereby, is determined to be urgent and necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the people of the Town of
Normal, Illinois and therefore shall take effect immediately upon its passage.
SECTION THREE. That the Town Clerk be and she is hereby authorized and directed to
publish this ordinance in pamphlet form, notwithstanding the fact that this ordinance shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage.
APPROVED:_____________________________
President of the Board of
Trustees of the Town of Normal,
Illinois
ATTEST:
___________________________
Town Clerk
SEC. 28.1-1
CHAPTER 28 - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
DIVISION 1 - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SEC. 28.1-1 PURPOSE. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to
the Town by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 IL. Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2,
5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
A. to prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
B. to protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
C. to promote and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
from the hazards of flooding;
D. to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and
utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. to maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for
creating blight areas;
F. to make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
G. to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains
in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce
soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities,
provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance community and economic development.
SEC. 28.1-2 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions
are adopted:
A. Base Flood. The flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Sec. 28.1-3 of this ordinance.
B. Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Sugar
Creek, North Branch Sugar Creek, North Branch Sugar Creek Tributary, West
Branch Sugar Creek, West Branch Sugar Creek Tributary, Skunk Creek, East
Tributary Skunk Creek, and Linden Street Drain shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of McLean County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated July 16, 2008.
C. Basement. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level)
on all sides.
SEC. 28.1-2(Cont.1)
D. Building. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a
roof, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid
storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers
installed on a site for more than 180 days.
E. Critical Facility. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage
to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater
damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include:
emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals,
retirement homes, senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material
storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous, or toxic substances).
F. Development. Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to
1. demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building,
or any structural alteration to a building;
2. substantial improvement of an existing building;
3. installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparation of a site for a
manufactured home, or installation of a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days;
4. installation of utilities and construction of roads, bridges, culverts, or similar
projects;
5. construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
6. drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
alterations of the ground surface;
7. storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks;
and
8. channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
“Development” does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
SEC. 28.1-2(Cont.2)
G. Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
H. Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
I. FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
J. Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or
the runoff of surface waters from any source.
K. Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
L. Flood Insurance Rate Map. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
M. Flood Insurance Study. An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
N. Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) are synonymous. Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the Town that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the Town are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map of McLean County, Illinois, and Incorporated Areas prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated July 16, 2008. The floodplains
of those parts of unincorporated McLean County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Town or that may be annexed into the Town are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for McLean County by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated July 16, 2008. Floodplain
also includes those areas of known flooding, as identified by the Town.
O. Floodproofing. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate,
property and their contents.
P. Floodproofing Certificate. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry/floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
SEC. 28.1-2(Cont.3)
Q. Flood Protection Elevation or “FPE.” The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
R. Floodway. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Sugar Creek, North Branch Sugar Creek,
North Branch Sugar Creek Tributary, West Branch Sugar Creek, West Branch Sugar
Creek Tributary, Skunk Creek, East Tributary Skunk Creek, and Linden Street Drain
shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for McLean
County, Illinois, and Incorporated Areas prepared by FEMA and dated July 16, 2008.
The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the Town shall be according
to the best data available from Federal, State, or other sources.
S. Freeboard. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a
factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development,
unknown localized conditions, wave actions, and unpredictable effects such as those
caused by ice or debris jams.
T. Historic Structure. Any structure that is
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
U. IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
V. Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Sec. 1-7
of this ordinance.
W. Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built
on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to required utilities.
SEC. 28.1-2(Cont.4)
X. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
Y. New Construction. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
Z. New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
AA. NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
BB. Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer. A vehicle which is
1. built on a single chassis;
2. four hundred (400) square feet or less in size; and
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
CC. Repetitive Loss. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two or more
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time
of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%)
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
DD. SFHA. See definition of floodplain.
EE. Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement, was within
one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring
of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
FF. Structure. (see Building).
SEC. 28.1-2(Cont.5)
GG. Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance,
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred, regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes “Repetitive
Loss” (see definition).
HH. Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure
taking place subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (a) before the
improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term includes
structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work done. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project
for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
II. Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community’s floodplain management regulations constitutes a violation. A
structure or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local
permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
SEC. 28.1-3 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. This Ordinance’s protection standard is the
base flood. The best available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the
best available data, the party may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the
existing data with better data and submit it to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
IDNR/DWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Sugar Creek and Skunk Creek shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of McLean
County, Illinois, and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated July 16, 2008.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO
Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
of McLean County, Illinois, and Incorporated Areas.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an “A
Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of McLean County, Illinois, and
SEC. 28.1-3(Cont.1)
Incorporated Areas shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed to
determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated McLean
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town or that may be
annexed into the Town shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles of the
Flood Insurance Study of McLean County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated July 16, 2008.
SEC. 28.1-4 DUTIES OF THE TOWN ENGINEER. The Town Engineer shall be
responsible for the general administration of this Code and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the Town meet the requirements of this Code.
Specifically, the Town Engineer shall
A. Process development permits in accordance with Sec. 28.1-5;
B. Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated
floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of Sec. 28.1-6;
C. Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to Sec.
28.1-7 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) or flood-proof certificate;
D. Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of Sec. 28.1-8;
E. Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health
Standards of Sec. 18.1-8;
F. If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Sec. 28.1-9 are met and
maintain documentation of any variances granted;
G. Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined in Sec. 28.1-
11 as necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter;
H. Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state,
and federal permits;
I. Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse;
J. Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures
and floodplain construction techniques;
K. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base
flood data and to improve the administration of this Ordinance;
SEC. 28.1-4(Cont.1)
L. Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and
federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject
to this chapter;
M. Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this Ordinance and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain; and
N. Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or
submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the
floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map.
SEC. 28.1-5 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental
body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this Code.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by
1. drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions;
2. existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation
or filling;
3. the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
4. the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of Sec. 28.1-7 of this chapter; and
5. cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or
architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Town Engineer shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown by survey data to have been higher than the base
flood elevation as of the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to the requirements
of this chapter. Any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance
Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The Town Engineer shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first
Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. The Town Engineer shall be responsible
for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity.
The Town Engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
SEC. 28.1-6
SEC. 28.1-6 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING
DAMAGES. Within the floodway identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for McLean County,
Illinois, and Incorporated Areas and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been
delineated, the following standards shall apply
A. except as provided in Sec. 28.1-6(B), no development shall be allowed which, acting
in combination with existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in
flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following
specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the following
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
a. the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile
elevation in excess of 1.0 feet;
b. the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile
elevation in excess of one-half (0.5) foot at a point one thousand
(1,000) feet upstream of the proposed structure;
c. there are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in water
surface profile;
d. the proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve straightening,
enlarging, or relocating the existing channel;
e. the design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an
IDNR/OWR permit; and
f. the design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following condition of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3:
a. the permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the following condition of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4:
a. the utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year flood
elevation or attached to an existing bridge;
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.1)
b. a utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be constructed above
the low cord elevation of the bridge;
c. no supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake, or
stream;
d. supporting towers, including foundation and poles, shall be designed
and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris;
e. all disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades and revegetated;
f. all Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Code,
and federal requirements must be met.
4. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5:
a. the boat dock must not extend more than fifty (50) feet into a
waterway and no more than one quarter (1/4) of the width of the
waterway and shall not extend beyond the navigational limits
established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers;
b. the width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten (10) feet;
c. for L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion parallel to
the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the landowner’s
shoreline frontage nor fifty (50) feet;
d. docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of property
lines into the waterway or come within ten (10) feet of the projected
property line;
e. dock posts must be marked by reflective devices;
f. the boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water;
g. metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units unless
they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously
stored pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not
permissible;
h. this permit does not authorize any other related construction activity,
such as shore protection or fill;
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.2)
i. non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will
minimize obstruction to flow; and
j. at any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of
Engineers.
5. Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6:
a. the following activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit:
(1) the construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream;
(2) the construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures;
(3) the construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures;
(4) the construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and
carports;
(5) the placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in
any dimension. Only one such building on a property is
authorized by this statewide permit; and
(6) the raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the
placement or fill is not involved.
6. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7:
a. any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section, shall not
extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent bank
protection;
b. the velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the
channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures;
c. outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.3)
ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation;
d. disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be
restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of construction.
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8:
a. in all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the river,
lake, or stream, and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three (3) feet of cover shall be
provided. The river, lake, or stream bed shall be returned to its
original condition;
b. disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to
their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction;
c. any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS
5), shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of
water to be crossed; and
d. if blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the crossing, the
permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 9:
a. Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas: stone
and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement
filled bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation, and
treated timber. Urban areas are defined as: areas of the State where
residential, commercial, or industrial development currently exists or,
based on land use plans or controls, is expected to occur within ten
(10) years. (The Department should be consulted if there is a
question of whether or not an area is considered urban).
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.4)
b. In addition to the materials listed in Sec. 28.1-6(A)(8)(a), other
materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided
all other conditions of this permit are met;
c. The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto bodies,
garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would
cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act
(415 ILCS 5);
d. The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one
thousand (1000) feet;
e. All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist
anticipated forces of current and wave action;
f. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or
the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project;
g. Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the bank;
h. Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width and
cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream
of the site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank,
toe of the bank, or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than
ten percent (10%) nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2)
cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank
may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to lessen the quantity of
material required.
i. If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
j. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of
construction.
k. In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the structure
shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined by
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.5)
the normal pool elevation, unless:
(1) it is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
(2) the volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot.
l. Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state,
and federal laws and rules, and shall not be placed in a floodway.
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting
the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10:
a. The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of the local floodplain ordinance;
b. The principle structure to which the project is being added must have
been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988);
c. The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto
another property;
d. Must not involve the placement of any fill material;
e. No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty (50) feet of the
bank of the stream channel;
f. The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions;
g. Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure shall
be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must
be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review; and
h. Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction.
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11:
a. The affected length of the stream shall not, either singularly or
cumulatively, exceed one thousand (1000) feet;
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.6)
b. The project shall not include the construction of any new channel; all
work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel;
c. The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to that
of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site;
d. Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland and
shall be either:
(1) removed from the floodway;
(2) used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and
provided the cross-sectional area of the natural channel would
not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%), nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
lineal foot of streambank;
(3) used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not
increased;
(4) used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of the
levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
(5) placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the
approval; or
(6) used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded
or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the
following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit No. 12:
a. A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document that
the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that:
(1) No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.7)
backwater induced by the existing structure; and
(2) There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
b. A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening
as the existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing
piers and the proposed pier extensions must be in line with the
direction of the approaching flow upstream of the bridge.
c. The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the approach
roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency
flood headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance
study completed or approved by IDNR/OWR).
d. The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as
permitted by the Department’s Statewide Permit No. 9 (Minor
Shoreline, Channel and Streambank Protection Activities) or
Statewide Permit No. 11 (Minor Maintenance Dredging Activities).
e. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this
permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13:
a. No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any)
for which the work is being performed has received all required
federal, state, and local authorizations.
b. The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from
the stream and floodway within one year of their placement and the
area returned to the conditions existing prior to the beginning of
construction. Any desired subsequent or repetitive material
placement shall not occur without the review and approval of the
IDNR/OWR.
c. The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not cause
erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to
adjacent properties. For locations where there are structures in the
upstream floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such
SEC. 28.1-6(Cont.8)
that all water surface profile increases due to the temporary project
are contained within the channel banks.
d. This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of any
solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike
across any channel or floodway.
e. No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and
documents that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of
Special Condition No. 3 of this statewide permit. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that no
buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater induced by
the temporary structure.
f. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this
permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
g. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the
removal of the temporary construction.
h. Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as
defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
13. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely in a
flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in (A) may be permitted only if:
1. a permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); and
2. sufficient data has been provided to FEMA, when necessary, and approval
obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
SEC. 28.1-7 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of Sec. 28.1-6, all buildings to be
located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
1. construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building valued at more than $1,000 or seventy (70) square feet;
SEC. 28.1-7(Cont.1)
2. substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or
equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be
figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
3. repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be
figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
4. installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home
on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage); and
5. installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.
6. repetitive loss to an existing building.
B. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with
the following:
a. the lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation;
b. the fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before
compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
c. the fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding
by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1
vertical;
d. the fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris or
refuse materials; and
e. the fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and, when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
incorporated; or
SEC. 28.1-7(Cont.2)
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the following:
a. the building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls,
or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters;
b. the lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or
above the flood protection elevation;
c. if walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or by having a
minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more than one
foot above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings
shall provide a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for
every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below
the base flood elevation;
d. the foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed,
certified, and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining
structures so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris;
e. the finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished exterior
grade;
f. all structural components below the flood protection elevation shall
be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
g. water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
h. the area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for
parking or building access and not occupied as habitable space; and
i. in lieu of (f) – (h) above, the design methods to comply with (f) – (h)
maybe certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect; or
3. The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood
protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. the building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
SEC. 28.1-7(Cont.3)
b. any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening
on each wall having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch per one (1) square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be
no more than one (1) foot above grade;
c. the interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;
d. the interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade
of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four
(4) feet at any point;
e. an adequate drainage system must be instilled to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of
time after a flood event;
f. portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
g. utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
C. Manufactured homes, or travel trailers to be installed on site for more than 180 days,
shall be:
1. elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with Sec.
28.1-7(B); and
2. shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 IL Adm. Code 870.
D. Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation)
provided a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that:
1. below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood;
2. the building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact
from debris and ice; and
3. floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and
SEC. 28.1-7(Cont.4)
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the
purpose of this subsection.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of Sec.28 1-7(C) unless the
following conditions are met:
1. the vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck;
2. the hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
3. the vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and
porches;
4. the vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or
seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
5. the vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four
hundred (400) square feet;
6. the vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
7. air-conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for
movement of the floodplain;
8. propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quickdisconnect
and above the 100-year flood elevation;
9. the vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park
model; and
10. the vehicle must either:
a. entirely be supported by jacks; or
b. have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the
ground and be supported by a block in a manner that will allow the
block to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds, or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an
existing residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
1. the garage or shed must be non-habitable;
SEC. 28.1-7(Cont.5)
2. the garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and
cannot be modified later into another use;
3. the garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permits;
4. the garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory to an
existing principle structure on the same lot;
5. below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials
not susceptible to flood damage;
6. all utilities, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation;
7. the garage or shed must have at lease one permanent opening on each wall
not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for every one (1) square foot of floor area;
8. the garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in market
value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five hundred (500)
square feet;
9. the structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning;
10. all flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.)
shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
11. the lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of
the flood insurance implications.
SEC. 28.1-8 SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS. The
Town Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official
actions related to land management use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit
developments (PUD), and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions
shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards of Sec. 28.1-6
and Sec.28.1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
1. the base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where the base
flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be
responsible for calculating the base flood elevation);
2. the boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
SEC. 28.1-8(Cont.1)
3. a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed
plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 IL Compiled Statutes 205/2).
Streets, block lots, parks, and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in
such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever
possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
B. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to
the requirements of Sec. 28.1-6 and Sec. 28.1-7, the following standards apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals,
explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other
hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless such
materials are stored in a storage tank or flood-proofed building constructed
according to the requirements of Sec. 28.1-7;
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
4. New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight; and
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be
located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative
site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three (3) feet
above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is
greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall
be provided to all critical facilities.
C. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood
flows or to increase potential flood damages.
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the Town shall notify adjacent communities in writing
SEC. 28.1-8(Cont.2)
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
SEC. 28.1-9 VARIANCES. Whenever the standards of this Ordinance place undue
hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Building Board of
Appeals for a variance. The Building Board of Appeals shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Town Council. The Town Council may attach
such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
Ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. the development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
2. an exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. the relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. there will be no additional threat to public health or safety or no creation of a
nuisance;
5. there will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or
relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
6. the applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern
inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
7. all other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Building Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protection standards of SEC. 28.1-7 that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage;
2. increase the risks to life and property; and
3. require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the
applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of Sec. 28.1-7 and Sec. 28.1-7 of
this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a
site or building included on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois
Register of Historic Places may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of Sec. 28.1-9 (A)(1-5) subject to the following:
SEC. 28.1-9(Cont.1)
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a
certified historic structure.
SEC. 28.1-10 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The degree of protection required by this
Code is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This Code does not imply that development either inside
or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This Code does not create liability
on the part of the Town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from
proper reliance on this Code or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
SEC. 28.1-11 PENALTY. Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of
this Code. Upon due investigation, the Town Engineer may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this Code exists. The Town Engineer shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
1. The Town shall make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this Code or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with the Code;
2. Any person who violates this Code shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven-hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense;
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues; and
4. The Town shall record a notice of violation with the Recorder of Deeds.
B. The Town Engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a
Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
The Town Engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the
subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for
the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances
requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
SEC. 28.1-11(Cont.1)
hearing is held by the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee and shall state:
1. the grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and
2. the time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on
his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action to
prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the
person or persons responsible.
SEC. 28.1-12 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. This Code repeals
and replaces other Codes adopted by the Town Council to fulfill the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program including: Ordinance No. 3879 approved November 6, 1989. However,
this Code does not repeal the original resolution or Code approved to achieve eligibility in the
program. Nor does this Code repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this Code and other Code easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
SEC. 28.1-13 SEPARABILITY. The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be
deemed separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this Code shall not affect the validity of the
remainder.
SEC. 28.1-14 EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval and publication, as required by law.
(Comprehensive Amendment 1/2/01 by Ord. No. 4704)(Comprehensive Amendment 5/21/08 by
Ord. No. 5190)
SEC. 28.2-1
DIVISION 2 - STREAM BUFFER REGULATIONS
SEC. 28.2-1 FINDINGS. The President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal
hereby find:
Vegetated buffers adjacent to stream systems provide environmental protection and resource
management benefits that include the following:
A. Restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of water
resources.
B. Removing pollutants delivered from urban stormwater.
C. Reducing erosion and sediment entering streams.
D. Stabilizing stream banks.
E. Providing infiltration of stormwater runoff.
F. Maintaining base flow of streams.
G. Contributing to the organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic
ecosystem.
H. Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic organisms.
I. Providing riparian wildlife habitat.
J. Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity.
SEC. 28.2-2 PURPOSE. The President and Board of Trustees, therefore, declare that the
purpose of this division is to protect, establish and maintain vegetation in buffer and wetland areas
by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection and maintenance of vegetation
along all stream systems within our jurisdictional authority. Furthermore, it is the intent of the
President and Board of Trustees to establish minimal, acceptable requirements for the design of
buffers to protect the streams, wetlands, and floodplains of the Town; to protect the water quality of
watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other significant water resources within the Town; to protect the
Town’s riparian and aquatic ecosystems; and to provide for the environmentally sound use of the
Town’s land resources.
SEC. 28.2-3 DEFINITIONS. When used in this division the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
A. Active Channel. The area of the stream channel that is subject to frequent flows
(approximately once per one and a half years) and that includes the portion of the
channel below the floodplain and the floodway.
SEC. 28.2-3(Cont.1)
B. Base Flood. The flood having a one per cent probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The Base Flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
C. Best Management Practices. Conservation practices or management measures that
control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal
wastes, toxins, sediment, and runoff. (Also identified as BMP’S)
D. Buffer. A vegetated area, including trees, shrubs, and herbaceous vegetation, that
exists or is established to protect a stream system, lake or reservoir. Alteration of this
area is strictly limited.
E. Development.
1. Any manmade alteration of property for any purpose including but not
limited to clearing, stripping, grading, filling and construction activities.
2. Subdivision or the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
parcels.
3. The combination of any two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of property for
any purpose.
4. The preparation of land for any of the above purposes.
F. Flood Plain. Those areas that are subject to inundation by the base flood and
identified as such on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map of McLean County,
Illinois, and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
G. Floodway. That portion of the flood plain identified as such on the most recent
Flood Insurance Rate Map for McLean County, Illinois, and Incorporated Areas
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, a copy of which is on file
in the Office of the Town Clerk
H. Nontidal Wetlands. Property not influenced by tidal fluctuations that are inundated
or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
I. Nonpoint Source Pollution. Pollution that is generated by land use activities (rather
than pollution from an identifiable or discrete source) and is conveyed to waterways
through natural processes, such as rainfall, stormwater runoff, or groundwater
seepage rather than direct discharges.
J. One Hundred Year Floodplain. Those lands subject to inundation by the 100-year
flood or the flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
SEC. 28.2-3(Cont.2)
K. Person. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois
and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its
agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of
the foregoing.
L. Protected Property. Any property within the corporate limits of the Town of Normal
or within the one and one-half mile planning jurisdiction outside the Town corporate
limits, (1) designated as a stream system on the stream buffer map attached hereto as
Appendix A together with the buffer areas defined in this division based on stream
order; and (2) any stream system located and identified by the Public Works Director
based on field observation or on information supplied to the Director, together with
the buffer areas defined in this division based on stream order.
M. Pollution. Any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or detrimental to:
1. Public health, safety or welfare.
2. Domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate
beneficial uses.
3. Livestock, wild animals or birds.
4. Fish or other aquatic life.
N. Stream Channel. Part of a watercourse either naturally or artificially created that
contains an intermittent or perennial base flow of groundwater origin. Base flows of
groundwater origin can be distinguished by any of the following physical indicators:
1. Hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soil, or other hydrologic indicators in the
area(s) where groundwater enters the stream channel in the vicinity of the
headwaters, channel bed, or channel banks.
2. Flowing water not directly related to a storm event.
3. Historical records of a local high groundwater table, such as well and stream
gauge records.
O. Stream Order. A classification system for streams based on a stream hierarchy. The
smaller the stream, the lower its numerical classification. For example, a first-order
stream does not have tributaries and normally originates from springs and/or seeps.
P. Stream System. A stream channel together with one or both of the following:
1. 100-year floodplain.
2. Hydrologically related nontidal wetland.
SEC. 28.2-3(Cont.3)
Q. Streams. Perennial and intermittent watercourses identified through site inspection
and the McLean County Stream Order Map.
R. Water Pollution Hazard. A land use or activity that causes a relatively high risk of
potential water pollution.
SEC. 28.2-4 OBLIGATION TO COMPLY.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake, initiate or cause to occur on any
Protected Property in the Town of Normal or within the one and one-half mile
planning jurisdiction of the corporate limits any of the following activities without
first complying with the requirements of this division and obtaining a site
development permit from the Town for such activity:
1. Development of land.
2. Timber harvesting activities.
3. Surface mining operations except that the design standards shall not apply to
active surface mining operations that are operating in compliance with an
approved Illinois Department of Natural Resources – Land Reclamation
Division surface mining permit.
B. The obligation to comply with this division shall not apply in the following
instances:
1. That part of any development for which a waiver or variance is granted
pursuant to the terms of this division.
2. Agricultural operations as defined in Town Zoning Code.
3. Any development for which a valid building or site development permit or
subdivision plan was issued or approved prior to the effective date of this
division, and such permit or plan has not expired.
4. All property zoned R-1A, R-1B, Single Family Residence District prior to the
effective date of this division.
SEC. 28.2-5 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
A. Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the
property or his authorized agent to the Public Works Department on a form furnished
for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner and developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant
together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm and shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $125.00 (A separate filing fee shall not be required for
applications processed as part of the subdivision process). Each application shall
SEC. 28.2-5(Cont.1)
include certification that any site development shall be in accordance with the plans
approved upon issuance of the permit.
A licensed professional engineer shall sign each application for more than five acres.
B. The application shall set forth an informative, conceptual and schematic
representation of the proposed activity by means of maps, graphs, charts, or other
written or drawn documents so as to enable the Public Works Director an opportunity
to make a reasonably informed decision regarding the proposed activity and whether
it complies with this division.
C. The application shall contain the following information for the proposed activity:
1. Location or vicinity map.
2. Field delineated and surveyed streams, springs, seeps, bodies of
water, and wetlands (include a minimum of 200 feet into adjacent
properties)
3. Field delineated and surveyed forest buffers.
4. Limits of the ultimate 100-year floodplain.
5. Hydric soils mapped in accordance with the NCRS soil survey of the
site area.
6. Steep slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent for areas adjacent to and
within two-hundred (200) feet of streams, wetlands and other water
bodies.
7. A narrative of the species and distribution of existing vegetation
within the buffer zone required by this division.
D. A buffer plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the required application meeting
the design, management and maintenance requirements of this division (Sec. 28.2-6
and Sec. 28.2-7).
E. Review and Approval. Each application for a site development permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
1. The Public Works Director will review each application for a site
development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
division. The Director may also refer any application to the McLean County
Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or
public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and
comment. Within ninety (90) days after receiving an application, the Public
Works Director shall in writing:
SEC. 28.2-5(Cont.2)
a. Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance with
the provisions of this division and issue the permit;
b. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as
may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this division,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions;
c. Request changes and/or additional information, necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this division, and indicate the procedure
for submitting a revised application; or
d. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the
procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
2. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site
unless:
a. The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and
planned unit development, has been approved by the Town where
applicable, and
b. All relevant federal and state permits (i.e., for floodplains and
wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject to soil
disturbance.
F. Expiration of Permit. Every site development permit shall expire and become null
and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one
year or is not completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that
the Town may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties
have prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time
limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. The Town may require modification of the stream
buffer plan to prevent any increase in water pollution or sediment runoff resulting
from any extension.
G. Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Public Works Director as
provided in Section 28.2-5, to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule and hold a public hearing after
giving notice thereof as required by law. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
render a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. Factors to be considered
on review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed
development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands,
any comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention
facilities; possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and
domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways;
nature and type of soil which when disturbed by the proposed development activities
may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and
SEC. 28.2-5(Cont.3)
excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or
removal of vegetation. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final.
H. Retention of Plans. Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall
be retained by the Town.
SEC. 28.2-6 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BUFFERS. A buffer for a stream system shall
extend along both sides of a stream and include a minimum distance adjacent to wetlands,
floodplains and slopes. The buffer width shall be adjusted to include contiguous sensitive areas, such
as steep slopes or erodible soils, where development or disturbance may adversely affect water
quality, streams, wetlands, or other water bodies.
A. The buffer shall begin on each side of the stream bank of the active channel and
floodway in accordance with the following minimum criteria.
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.1)
1. The required width for all buffers (i.e., the base width) shall be in the areas
described below:
Stream Order 1 10 feet from the centerline on each side.
Stream Order 2 25 feet from the centerline on each side.
Stream Order 3 50 feet on each side of the stream bank of the active
channel and floodway.
Stream Order 4 100 feet on each side of the stream bank of the
active channel and floodway.
Stream Order 5 100 feet on each side of the stream bank of the
active channel and floodway.
Stream Order 6 100 feet on each side of the stream bank of the
active channel and floodway.
2. Steep slopes. The buffer width shall be modified if steep slopes are within
close proximity to the stream and drain into the stream system. In those
cases, the buffer width shall be adjusted by either Method A or Method B
below.
METHOD A
Percent Slope To total width of Buffer
15-17% add 10 feet
18-20% add 30 feet
21-23% add 50 feet
24-25% add 60 feet
METHOD B
Type of Stream Use
Percent Slope Water Contact/ Sensitive
Recreational Use Stream Habitat
0 to 14% no change add 50 feet
15 to 25% add 25 feet add 75 feet
greater than 25% add 50 feet add 100 feet
3. 100-Year Floodplain. Where the floodplain extends beyond the minimum
buffer width as specified above, then buffers shall be extended to encompass
the entire 100-year floodplain and a zone with a minimum width of twentyfive
(25) feet beyond the edge of the floodplain.
4. Wetlands Or Critical Areas. When wetland or critical areas extend beyond
the edge of the required buffer width, the buffer shall be adjusted so that the
buffer consists of the extent of the wetland plus a twenty-five (25) foot zone
extending beyond the wetland edge.
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.2)
5. The buffer width may be reduced at some points as long as the average width
of the buffer meets the minimum requirement. This averaging of the buffer
may be used to allow for the presence of an existing structure or to recover a
lost lot, as long as the streamside zone (Zone 1) is not disturbed by the
reduction and no new structures are built within the 100-year floodplain. The
Public Works Directors may require the submission of additional information
to evaluate the proposed width reduction. Such reduction shall only be
allowed where no feasible alternative exists.
B. Water Pollution Hazards. The following land uses and/or activities are designated as
potential water pollution hazards and must be set back from any stream or waterbody
by the distance indicated by the width of the buffer or the width indicated below,
whichever is greater.
1. Storage of hazardous substances – (150 feet).
2. Above ground or underground petroleum storage facilities – (150 feet).
3. Drainfields for sewage disposal and treatment systems are not allowed in the
stream buffer if the stream buffer is in a floodplain.
4. Solid waste landfills or junkyards – (300 feet).
5. Subsurface discharges from a wastewater treatment plant are not allowed in
the stream buffer.
6. Land application bio-solids – (200 feet).
C. The stream buffer shall be composed of three distinct zones with each zone having its
own set of allowable uses and vegetative targets as specified in this division.
SEC.28.2-6(Cont.3)
1. Zone 1, Streamside Zone.
a. Protects the physical and ecological integrity of the stream
ecosystem.
b. Begins at the edge of the stream bank of the active channel and
extends twenty-five (25) feet or the width of the stream buffer from
the top of the bank, whichever is less.
c. Allowable uses within this zone are highly restricted to:
1. Flood control structures
2. Utility rights-of-way
3. Hiking and biking paths
4. Road crossings, where permitted
d. Target for the streamside zone is undisturbed natural vegetation.
2. Zone 2, Middle Zone.
a. Protects key components of the stream and provides distance between
upland development and the streamside zone.
b. Begins at the outer edge of the streamside zone and extends a
minimum of fifty (50) feet or to the middle of the stream buffer
whichever is less. Additional buffer width is specified in Sec. 28.2-
6(A)(1).
c. Allowable uses within the middle zone are restricted to:
1. Biking or hiking paths.
2. Stormwater management facilities with the approval of the
Town.
3. Recreational uses as approved by the Town.
4. Limited tree clearing with approval from the Town.
d. Targets mature native vegetation adapted to the region.
2. Zone 3, Outer Zone.
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.4)
a. Provides a traditional greenspace between development and
sensitive Zone 1 and 2 areas, preventing encroachment of impervious
cover into the buffer, and filters runoff from residential and
commercial development.
b. Begins at the outward edge of Zone 2 and provides a minimum width
of twenty-five (25) feet between Zone 2 and the nearest permanent
structure, or the width of the stream buffer whichever is less.
c. Restricts permanent structures or impervious cover with the exception
of paths.
d. Encourages the planting of native vegetation to increase the total
width of the buffer.
D. Stream Restoration. In cases in which the Public Works Director determines that a
waterway is significantly degraded, he may authorize or require stream restoration
rather than protection of the waterway in its existing condition. Significant
degradation shall be determined by the presence of any of the following:
1. Erosion present to the degree that waterway banks are unstable.
2. Sedimentation present to the degree that aquatic plant life is restricted.
3. History of flooding
4. Bank scour caused by high water velocity
5. Channelization
6. Presence of non-native, invasive plant species
Stream Restoration is the process of returning a waterway and its surrounding
ecosystem to a close approximation of its condition prior to disturbance. Stream
restoration may include activities such as re-meandering a channelized waterway,
re-vegetating a waterway with appropriate native plantings, and re-grading a
waterway to mitigate scouring and erosion problems.
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.5)
E. Stream buffer areas may grow into their natural vegetative state, but methods to
enhance the vegetation may be required when deemed necessary by the Public Works
Director to ensure the preservation and propagation of the buffer area. Buffer areas
may also be enhanced through reforestation or other growth techniques as a form of
mitigation for achieving buffer preservation requirements. The Public Works
Director may require planting of vegetation from the following list:
Stream buffer plant list:
The following plants are acceptable for replanting in the buffer area.
Flood Tolerant Native Northern Illinois Trees
River birch Betula nigra
Hophornbeam Carpus caroliniana
Green ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica
American larch Larix laricina
Red mulberry Morus rubra
Sycamore Platinus occidentalis
Eastern cottonwood Populus deltoids
Swamp white oak Quercus bicolor
Black willow Salix nigra
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
White cedar Thuja occidentalis
American elm Ulmus americana
Flood Tolerant Native Northern Illinois Shrubs
False indigo Amorpha fruticosa
Red chokeberry Aronia arbutifolia
Buttonbush Cephalanthus occidentalis
Silky dogwood Cornus amomum
Gray dogwood Cornus racemosa
Red-osier dogwood Cornus serica
Cockspur hawthorn Crataegus crus-galli
Spicebush Lindera benzoin
Ninebark Physocarpus opulifilius
American black currant Ribes americanum
Wild gooseberry Ribes missouriense
Swamp rose Rosa palustris
Peachleaf willow Salix amygdaloides
Pussy willow Salix discolor
Sandbar willow Salix interior
Elderberry Ambucus canadensis
Meadowsweet Spirea alba
Arrowwood viburnum Viburnum dentatum
Nannyberry Viburnum lentago
Highbush cranberry Viburnum trilobum
Flood Tolerant Native Northern Illinois Vines
Groundnut Apios americana
Virgin’s bower Clematis virginiana
Riverbank grape Vitis riparia
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.6)
Seed Mixes:
Detention Basin Seed Mix. (For saturated soils in a wetland or pond with
highly fluctuating water levels and poor water quality associated with
urban stormwater wetlands and ponds.)
Permanent Grasses/Sedges:
Brown fox sedge Carex vulpinoidea
Barnyard grass Echinochloa crusgalli
Blunt spike rush Eleicharis obtusa
Fowl manna grass Glyceria striata
Common rush Juncus effuses
Torrey's rush Juncus torreyi
Rice cut grass Leersia oryzoides
Switch grass Panicum virgatum
Great Bulrush (softstem) Scirpus validus creber
Temporary Cover:
Redtop Agrostis alba
Seed oats Avena sativa
Annual rye Lolium multiflorum
Forbs and Shrubs:
Wingstem Actinomeris alternifolia
Common water plantain Alisma subcordatum
Swamp milkweed Asclepias incarnata
Bidens, various Bidens sp.
Buttonbush Cephalanthus occidentalis
Rosemallow, various Hibiscus sp.
Monkey flower Mimulus ringens
Ditch stonecrop Penthorum sedoides
Smartweed Polygonum pensylvanicum
Common arrowhead Sagittaria latifolia
Wetland Edge Seed Mix. (For sites with stable saturated soil conditions
and good water quality.)
Permanent Grasses/Sedges:
Bottlebrush sedge Carex lurida
Sedge, various Carex sp.
Brown fox sedge Carex vulpinoidea
Great spike rush Eleocharis palustris major
Canada wild rye Elymus canadensis
Fowl manna grass Glyceria striata
Rice cut grass Leersia oryzoides
Dark green rush Scirpus atrovirens
Chairmaker's rush Scirpus pungens
Great bulrush (softstem) Scirpus validus creber
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.7)
Temporary Cover:
Seed Oats Avena sativa
Annual rye Lolium multiflorum
Wingstem Actinomeris alternifolia
Slender false foxglove Agalinis tenuifolia
Common water plantain Alisma subcordatum
Swamp milkweed Asclepias incarnate
Panicled aster Aster simplex
Bidens, various Bidens sp.
Wild senna Cassia hebecarpa
Common boneset Eupatorium perfoliatum
Sneezeweed Helenium autumnale
Blue flag iris Iris virginica shrevei
Great blue lobelia Lobelia siphilitica
Seedbox Ludwigia alternifolia
Monkey flower Mimulus ringens
Wild golden glow Rudbeckia laciniata
Common arrowhead Sagittaria latifolia
Blue vervain Verbena hastate
Ironweed, various Vernonia sp
Forbs:
Wet-to-Mesic Prairie Seed Mix. (For sites with medium to wet soils.)
Permanent Grasses/Sedges:
Big bluestem grass Andropogon gerardii
Blue joint grass Calamagrostis canadensis
Canada wild rye Elymus canadensis
Switch grass Panicum virgatum
Indian grass Sorghastrum nutans
Prairie cord grass Spartina pectinata
Temporary Cover:
Redtop Agrostis alba
Seed oats Avena sativa
Annual rye Lolium multiflorum
Timothy Phleum pretense
Forbs:
Heath aster Aster ericoides
New England aster Aster novae-angliae
White wild indigo Baptisia leucantha
Partridge pea Cassia fasciculata
Tall coreopsis Coreopsis tripteris
Illinois tick trefoil Desmodium illinoense
Rattlesnake master Eryngium yuccifolium
Bottle gentian Gentiana andrewsii
SEC. 28.2-6(Cont.8)
Sneezeweed Helenium autumnale
Sawtooth sunflower Helianthus grosseserratus
Roundheaded bush clover Lespedeza capitata
Marsh blazing star Liatris spicata
Prairie bergamot Monarda fistulosa
Wild quinine Parthenium integrifolium
False dragonhead Physostegia virginianum
Common mountain mint Pycnanthemum virginianum
Yellow coneflower Ratidbida pinnata
Black-eyed susan Rudbeckia hirta
Wild golden glow Rudbeckia laciniata
Sweet black-eyed susan Rudbeckia subtomentosa
Compass Plant Silphium laciniatum
Cup Plant Silphium perfoliatum
Prairie Dock Silphium terebinthinaceum
Early Goldenrod Solidago juncea
Stiff Goldenrod Solidago rigida
Wrinkled Goldenrod Solidago rugosa
Spider-Wort Tradescantia ohioensis
Hairy tall ironweed Vernonia altissima taeniotriche
Culver’s Root Veronicastrum virginianum
Golden Alexanders Zizia aurea
Invasive Species:
The following plants are exceptionally invasive and will damage native
ecosystems. Most of these plants are on the Illinois Banned Species list
and are illegal to buy, sell, or plant, in the State of Illinois.
Tree of Heave Ailanthus altissima
Autumn Olive Eleagnus embellatus
Tartarian Honeysuckle Lonicera tartarica
Glossy Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula
Common Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
Saw-toothed Buckthorn Rhamnus arguta
Dahurain Buckthorn Rhamnus davurica
Japanese Buckthorn Rhamnus janponica
Chinese Buckthorn Rhamnus utilis
Kudzu Pueraria lobata
Round-leaved Bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus
Japanese Honeysuckle Lonicera japonica
SEC. 28.2-7
SEC. 28-2.7 BUFFER MANAGEMENT & MAINTENANCE.
A. The buffer, including wetlands and floodplains, shall be managed to enhance and
maximize the unique value of these resources. Buffers shall be vegetated either in
their natural state or using appropriate, nursery stock vegetation as noted in Sec.
28.2-6(E). Soil disturbance in buffer areas shall be minimized. Every attempt should
be made to reduce or eliminate cut and fill activities, topsoil respread, and soil
compaction. Maintaining existing and/or development of buffer areas in naturally
occurring soils is preferred. Where necessary, invasive species removal may be
allowed prior to establishment of native vegetation. Management includes specific
limitations on alteration of the natural conditions of these resources. The following
practices and activities are prohibited within Zones 1 and 2 of the buffer unless prior
approval is obtained from the Public Works Director.
1. Clearing of existing vegetation.
2. Soil disturbance by grading, stripping or other practices.
3. Filling or dumping.
4. Drainage by ditching, under-drains or other systems.
5. Use, storage, or application of pesticides, except for spot spraying of noxious
weeds or non-native species consistent with recommendations of the Town.
6. Housing, grazing, or other maintenance of livestock.
7. Storage or operation of motorized vehicles, except for maintenance and
emergency use approved by the Public Works Director.
B. The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted in the buffer
with specific design or maintenance features, subject to review and approval of the
Public Works Director.
1. Roads, bridges, paths, and utilities:
a. An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no economically
feasible alternative to the proposed road, bridge, path, or utility is
available.
b. The right-of-way shall be the minimum width needed to allow for
maintenance access and installation.
c. The angle of the crossing shall be perpendicular to the stream or
buffer in order to minimize clearing requirements.
SEC. 28.2-7(Cont.1)
d. The minimum number of road crossings shall be used with no more
than one crossing for every 1,000 feet of buffer for stream
classification three (3) or greater.
2. Stormwater Management, Structures and Facilities
a. An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no economically
feasible alternative to the proposed stormwater management facility
is available and that a project is either necessary for flood control or
significantly improves the water quality or habitat in the stream.
b. In new developments, which include stream order three (3) or higher,
on-site and non-structural alternatives will be preferred over larger
facilities within the stream buffer.
c. When constructing stormwater management facilities, the area
cleared will be limited to the area required for construction and
adequate maintenance access as outlined in the most recent edition of
the Illinois Urban Stormwater Manual published by the United States
Department of Agriculture – Natural Resources Conservation
Service.
d. Material dredged or otherwise removed for a stormwater management
facility shall be stored outside the buffer.
3. Stream restoration projects.
4. Water quality monitoring and stream gauging.
5. Individual trees within the buffer that are in danger of falling, causing
damage to dwellings or other structures, or causing blockage of the stream
may be removed.
6. Other timber cutting techniques approved by the Town may be undertaken
within the buffer under the advice and guidance of IDNR if necessary, to
preserve the buffer from extensive pest infestation, disease infestation, or
threat from fire.
C. All preliminary plans and final plats shall clearly:
1. Show the extent of any buffer on the subject property.
2. Label the buffer.
3. Provide a note stating that disturbance and use of the buffer area is subject to
restrictions pursuant to Town Code.
SEC. 28.2-7(Cont.2)
4. Provide an ingress/egress easement to the stream buffer area in favor of the
Town of Normal for stream buffer inspection purposes.
D. The Public Works Director shall inspect the buffer annually and immediately
following severe storms for evidence of sedimentation deposition, erosion, or
concentrated flow channels and recommend to the buffer owner corrective actions to
ensure the integrity and function of the buffer.
E. Buffer areas may be allowed to grow into their vegetative target state naturally, but
methods to enhance the successional process such as active restoration may be used
when approved by the Public Works Director to ensure the preservation and
propagation of the buffer area. Forest buffer areas may also be enhanced through reforestation
or other growth techniques as a form of mitigation for achieving buffer
preservation requirements.
F. Permanent boundary markers, in the form of signage approved by the Town of
Normal be installed prior to final approval of the required clearing and grading plan.
Signs shall be placed at the edge of the middle zone.
SEC. 28.2-8 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
A. The Public Works Director and the Director’s designee are authorized and
empowered to enforce the requirements of this division in accordance with the
procedures of this section.
B. The Public Works Director or designee shall make inspections as hereinafter required
and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the site development permit as
approved. Applicant shall maintain and make available upon demand the approved
stream buffer plan bearing the stamp of approval of the Town. In order to obtain
inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved plan and this division, the
permittee shall notify the Town within two (2) working days of the completion of the
construction stages specified below:
1. Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control measures
(including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding with any
other earth disturbance or grading,
2. After stripping and clearing (if over one acre),
3. After rough grading (if over one acre),
4. After final grading,
5. After seeding and landscaping deadlines (if over one acre), and
SEC. 28.2-8(Cont.1)
6. After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of sediment
controls.
If site development is to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice
and request inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each
phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within
five working days after notice is received by the Town from the permittee, the
permittee may continue work at his/her own risk without presuming acceptance by
the Town. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in writing.
C. Special Precautions.
1. If at any stage of the development the Town determines by inspection that the
nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is
likely to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland,
or drainage structure, the Town may require, as a condition of allowing the
work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as is
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. “Special
precautions” may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed
slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing,
compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control,
and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering
geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any
development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Town may
specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require
that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to insure completion
of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
D. Amendment of Plans. Major amendments of the site development permit or stream
buffer plan shall be submitted to the Public Works Director and shall be processed
and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plan. Field
modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the Public Works Director by
written authorization to the permittee. The Town Engineer shall be authorized to
determine the level of modification.
E. Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event any person holding a site
development permit pursuant to this division violates the terms of the permit, or
carries on site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the
health, welfare, or safety of the public or so as to be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to property, the Town may suspend or revoke the site
development permit.
SEC. 28.2-8(Cont.2)
1. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by the
Town and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person performing the
work. The stop-work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the
specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work may
be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals at which the conditions of
sub-paragraph Sec. 28.2-8(E)(2) below can be met.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until
a hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered
mail, and shall state:
a. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation in
clear and concise language; and
b. The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked or the plan
modified. In making its decision the Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue
written findings of fact supporting its decision.
F. Penalties.
1. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this division or any
approved stream buffer plan shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000.00 for each violation. Every day that such violation(s) continue will
be considered a separate offense.
2. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements in any application,
record, or plan required by this division shall upon conviction be punished by
a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation.
G. Injunctive Relief. If a property owner or permit holder fails after ten days notice to
correct any violation of this division or violation of any approved permit and stream
buffer plan, the Public Works Director may make application to the Circuit Court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this division or other equitable relief
necessary in order to secure compliance with this division. If the Public Works
Director is authorized to enter onto private property to restore a
stream buffer, the Owner shall be liable for damages in an amount equal to twice
the cost of restoring the buffer.
SEC. 28.2-9
SEC. 28.2-9 VARIANCES.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, in accordance with the following procedures,
authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
division.
1. A verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit stating fully
the grounds of the petition shall make application for any exception and the
facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site
development permit application. In order for the petition to be granted, it
shall be necessary that the Zoning Board of Appeals find all of the following
facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical
conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this division;
b. That the exception is necessary for reasonable use of the site and in order
to avoid a substantial loss in value of the site; and
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
2. Each application for an exception shall be referred to the Public Works
Director for review. The Town shall transmit its recommendations to the
Zoning Board of Appeals which shall review such recommendations prior to
granting or denying the exception.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application
for exception within thirty (30) days after receiving application. After public
hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the site development
permit application with the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary, or
it may disapprove such site development permit application and exception
application, or it may take such other action as appropriate in order to meet
the purpose and intent of this division.
SEC. 28.2-10 CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODES AND REGULATIONS. Where the
standards and management requirements of this buffer division are in conflict with other laws,
regulations and policies regarding streams, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, timber
harvesting, land disturbance activities, or other environmental protective measures, the more
restrictive code or regulation shall apply.
SEC. 8.2-11 SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this division shall be deemed
severable and the invalidity of any portion shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions. (Entire Division 2 Added 4/21/08 by Ord. No. 5190)
SEC. 28.3-1
DIVISION 3 - EROSION, SEDIMENT CONTROL AND
GRADING REGULATIONS
SEC. 28.3-1 FINDINGS. The President and Board of Trustees of the Town of Normal
hereby find:
A. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for
certain non-agricultural uses including but not limited to the construction of dwelling
units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and
highways, the modification of stream channels and drainage-ways, and the creation
of recreational facilities;
B. The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways
endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing
traction of road vehicles;
C. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-out fills, and
embankments;
D. Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt
rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands, and reservoirs;
E. Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes,
promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and other desirable
aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove;
F. Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage capacity of
floodplains and natural depressions, resulting in increased chances of flooding at risk
to public health and safety;
G. Development, if not controlled, causes increases in peak storm water runoff rates
which can lead to increased stream bed and stream bank erosion and flooding in
receiving streams;
H. Erosion and stream bank instability caused by altered stream flow rates due to
development can create unsafe conditions, adverse environmental impacts, and other
conditions that require costly repairs or preventative measures to protect private and
public structures and facilities;
I. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 1977, and
subsequent amendments, commonly known as the Clean Water Act require local
erosion control and storm water management; and
J. Local erosion and sediment control regulation is required under the facilities
planning area amendment submitted by the Bloomington-Normal Water
SEC. 28.3-1(Cont.1)
Reclamation District and approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
SEC. 28.3-2 PURPOSE. The President and Board of Trustees therefore declares that the
purpose of this division is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the
environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the Town of Normal or
within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of Normal. It is the intention of this division
that the delivery of sediment from sites affected by land disturbing activities be limited, as closely as
practicable, to that which would have occurred if the land had been left in its natural undisturbed
state.
SEC. 28.3-3 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this division certain terms used herein are
defined as set forth below:
A. Building Permit. A permit issued by the Town for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure or building.
B. Certify or Certification. Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests,
where required, have been performed and that such tests comply with the applicable
requirements of this division.
C. Clearing. Any activity that removes vegetative ground cover.
D. Cubic Yards. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of “average end areas.”
E. Excavation. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated,
or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting there from.
F. Existing Grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
G. Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited,
placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting there from.
H. Final Grade. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
I. Grading. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
J. Natural Drainage. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
SEC. 28.3-3(Cont.1)
K. Parcel. All contiguous land in one ownership.
L. Permittee. Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
M. Person. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois
and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its
agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of
the foregoing.
N. Removal. Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or killing
by spraying.
O. Site. A lot or parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof where grading work
is performed as a single unified operation.
P. Site Development. Any clearing, stripping, removal of vegetation, or any grading of
soil or any construction or demolition of a structure occurring on a site.
Q. Site Development Permit. A permit issued by the Town for Site Development.
R. Stream. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or man-made
drainage-way which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline in or into which
surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
S. Stripping. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover including tree
removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
T. Vacant. Land on which there are no structures or only structures that are secondary
to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
U. Town. The Town of Normal, McLean County, Illinois.
V. Wetlands. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. For the purpose of this division, the Illinois Department of Conservation
National Wetlands Inventory maps shall define wetlands.
SEC. 28.3-4 GENERAL PRINCIPLES. It is the objective of this division to control soil
erosion and sedimentation caused by site development activities. Measures taken to control soil
erosion and offsite sediment runoff shall be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported from
the site by a storm event of five-year frequency or less. The following principles shall apply to all
site development activities within the Town and to the preparation of the submissions required under
Sec. 28.3-5 of this division:
A. Development shall be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create
the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may
SEC. 28.3-4(Cont.1)
be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be
followed as closely as possible.
B. Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas
immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands shall be left
undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of watercourses, when
permitted, shall include appropriate stabilization measures.
C. Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from any necessary
development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond, or wetland.
Preventative measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas to erosion and
sedimentation.
D. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed for the shortest practical time
during development.
E. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate
sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior to site development and
maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing
development.
F. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be based on
assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute
to erosion and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits involved.
G. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the
requirements of continuing maintenance shall be considered.
H. Provision shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil
and surface conditions during and after development. Drainage ways shall be
designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities and rates of
discharge will not create additional erosion on-site or off-site and in a manner which
will not cause flooding or other hardships off-site.
I. Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional as soon as
practical during development.
J. Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses shall be
vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to development. The protective
cover shall be properly replaced and maintained in accordance with all other
applicable local, State, and national codes/laws during site development until the
permanent vegetation and structures have become functional.
K. All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be properly
disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by either wind or
water. Wastes generated from the placement of concrete, asphalt or similar materials
will be properly controlled such that no sediment from said items will
SEC. 28.3-4(Cont.2)
be allowed to enter the sewer systems, water ways or other bodies of water. The
Developer, Owner or his/her agent shall provide details regarding the locations of
appropriate washout areas prior to the start of any work involving said items and
shall be responsible for ensuring the wastes resulting from usage of said items are
disposed of in an approved manner.
L. All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked
onto public or private roadways. Any sediment tracked onto public or private
roadways shall be removed as soon as possible but not later than the end of the
workday during which said sediment is tracked onto the public or private roadway.
M. All developments, subdivisions, or other construction sites approved by the City
Council after the passage of this ordinance which are required by State or Federal
law to create and maintain a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall submit said
plan to the Engineering Department prior to any work being performed. The Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be maintained per Federal and State
regulations. Any revisions to the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be
provided to the City within three (3) working days of their implementation. All
inspection reports and other reports required by Federal or State law shall be
maintained per Federal and State laws and provided to the Engineering Department
upon demand for said items.
N. All construction sites or additions to subdivisions approved by the City Council
under construction at the time of passage of this Ordinance must comply with the
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan submitted by the developer or his/her
representative, per State and/or Federal Regulations regarding National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permits. The owner, builder or his/her representative
should contact the developer to obtain a copy of the Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan, determine what requirements are set forth in the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan, and implement said measures. The owner, builder or
his/her representative shall provide the Town with an Erosion Control Plan outlining
the erosion and sediment control measures to be used on their lot. The Town reserves
the right to require further erosion and sediment control measures on a lot by lot
basis.
SEC. 28.3-5 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall
commence or perform any site development which meets the following provisions
without having first obtained a site development permit from the Public Works
Department of the Town.
1. Any site development that will affect an area in excess of 5,000 square feet;
2. Any site development that will affect an area in excess of 1,000 square
feet if the activity is within 25 feet of a lake, pond, stream, or wetland; or
SEC. 28.3-5(Cont.1)
3. Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed 100 cubic yards.
B. Exceptions. A permit shall not be required for any of the following provided that the
person responsible for any such development shall implement necessary soil erosion
and sediment control measures to satisfy the principles set forth in Sec. 28.3-4 of this
Code:
1. Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of one (1)
single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in excess of five
(5) acres for which a building permit has been issued by the Town, provided
the area disturbed by site-development activity is less than one (1) acre;
2. Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation
measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Soil and
Water Conservation District, and including the construction of agricultural
structures;
3. Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing
dwelling or structure.
C. Application for Permit. Application for a site development permit shall be made by
the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the Public Works Department on
a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such
firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as provided below.
Each application shall include certification that any site development shall be in
accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
Each application shall include the gross area of the site and the impervious area
included within the site and the area of the site to be disturbed.
A licensed professional engineer shall sign each application for more than one acre.
FEE SCHEDULE
1. Subdivisions with Public Improvements – Fee is included in Inspection Fee.
2. Sites less or equal to one (1) acre: the fee is $35.00.
3. Sites greater than one (1) acre and less than or equal to fifty (50) acres: the
fee is $35.00 for the first acre plus $20.00 / acre for each additional acre or
part thereof up to 50 acres total.
4. Sites greater than fifty (50) acres: the fee is $35.00 for the first acre plus
$20.00 per acre for each additional acre up to fifty (50) acres, plus $5.00
per acre for each acre or part thereof over 50 acres total.
SEC. 28.3-5(Cont.2)
D. Submissions. Submitted permit applications shall be in conformance with site
development guidelines of Chapter 13 of the Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements.
E. Bonds. The applicant for a permit to develop five acres or more is required to file
with the Town a performance bond or bonds, letter of credit or cash in an amount
deemed sufficient by the Town to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping,
maintenance of improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment
control measures for such period as specified by the Town, and engineering and
inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site.
F. Review and Approval. Each application for a site development permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
1. The Public Works Director will review each application for a site
development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
division. The Director may also refer any application to the McLean County
Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or
public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and
comment. Within ninety (90) days after receiving an application, the Town
shall in writing:
a. Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance
with the provisions of this division and issue the permit;
b. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
division and issue the permit subject to these conditions;
c. Request changes and/or additional information necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this division and the procedure for
submitting a revised application; or
d. Disapprove the permit application and indicate the deficiencies and
the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
2. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site
unless:
a. The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and
planned unit development, has been approved by the Town where
applicable, and
b. All relevant federal and state permits (i.e., for floodplains and
wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject to soil
disturbance.
SEC. 28.3-5(Cont.3)
3. The application for an Erosion and Sediment Control permit for a site which
includes a structure shall not alleviate the applicant from the responsibility of
obtaining all other permits which may be required by local or state laws.
G. Expiration of Permit. Every site development permit shall expire and become null
and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one
year or is not completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit, except that
the Town may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties
have prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time
limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. The Town may require modification of the erosion
control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or off-site sediment runoff resulting
from any extension.
H. Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Public Works Director as
provided in SEC. 7.25-5(F), to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule and hold a public hearing after
giving 15 days notice thereof. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days after the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall
include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities
on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands; any comprehensive
watershed management plans; or the use of any retention facilities; possible
saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff
surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and type of
soil which when disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth
movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and
unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of
vegetation. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final.
I Retention of Plans. Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall
be retained by the Town, in accordance with Town record retention procedures.
SEC. 28.3-6 DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
A. Applicability. All site development is subject to the permit requirements of this
division shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this
Sec. 28.3-6.
B. Responsibility. The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to
persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the Town or its officers or agents
will not be made liable for such damage, by (1) the issuance of a permit under this
division, (2) compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions
attached to it by the Town, (3) failure of Town officials to observe or recognize
hazardous or unsightly conditions, (4) failure of Town officials to recommend denial
of or to deny a permit, or (5) exemptions from the permit requirements of this
division.
SEC. 28.3-6(Cont.1)
C. Site Design Requirements.
1. On-site sediment control measures, as specified in Chapter 13 of the Town’s
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements shall be
constructed and functional prior to initiating site development.
2. Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and diversions,
and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with requirements of Chapter 6 of the Town’s Manual of Practice
for the Design of Public Improvements.
3. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measures
within 7 calendar days following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance,
consistent with Chapter 13 of the Town’s Manual of Practice for
the Design of Public Improvements.
4. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be
maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of their
intended function.
5. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of
within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved with permanent soil
stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting
from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to
prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
D. Handbooks Adopted by Reference. The standards and specifications contained in
latest editions of Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
(the Yellow Book, issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,) or as
superceded by the Illinois Urban Manual (the Blue Book, developed and issued by
the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service
and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the Illinois Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (the Green Book,
issued by the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts), are
hereby incorporated into this division and made a part hereof by reference for the
purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under site development
and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under this division. In the
event of conflict between provisions of said manuals and of this division, the division
shall govern.
E. Maintenance of Control Measures. All soil erosion and sediment control measures
necessary to meet the requirements of this division shall be maintained by the owner
and the owner’s successors and assigns during the period of land disturbance and
development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance.
If a change in owner or developer occurs during the period of land disturbance and
development of the site, the subsequent or successor owner or developer shall be
required to obtain a new erosion control permit.
SEC. 28.3-6(Cont.2)
F. Inspection.
1. The Town shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either
approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion and
sedimentation control plan as approved. The applicant shall maintain and
make available upon demand plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the Town. In order to obtain
inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment
control plan, the grading or building permit, and this division, the permittee
shall notify the Town within two (2) working days of the completion of the
construction stages specified below:
a. Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to
proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading,
b. After stripping and clearing (if over one acre),
c. After rough grading (if over one acre),
d. After final grading,
e. After seeding and landscaping deadlines (if over one acre), and
f. After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of sediment
controls.
If site development is to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall
give notice and request inspection at the completion of each of the above
work stages in each phase or area. If an inspection is not made and
notification of the results given within five working days after notice is
received by the Town from the permittee, the permittee may continue work at
his/her own risk, without presuming acceptance by the Town. Notification of
the results of the inspection shall be given in writing.
G. Special Precautions.
1. If at any stage of any development site the Town determines by inspection
that the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing
permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or
drainage structure, the Town may require, as a condition of allowing the
work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions be taken as is
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril.
“Special precautions” may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level
exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing,
SEC. 28.3-6(Cont.3)
compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control,
and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering
geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because a development site is
not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to
protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large developments or
where unusual site conditions prevail, the Town may specify the time of
starting grading and the time of completion or may require that the operations
be conducted in specific stages so as to insure completion of protective
measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
H. Amendment of Plans. Major amendments of the site development or erosion and
sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the Town and shall be processed
and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field
modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the Town by written
authorization to the permittee. The Town Engineer shall be authorized to determine
the level of modification.
SEC. 28.3-7 ENFORCEMENT.
A. Exceptions. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, in accordance with the following
procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth
in this division:
1. A verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit stating fully
the grounds of the petition shall make application for any exception
and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with
the site development permit application. In order for the petition to be
granted, it shall be necessary that the Zoning Board of Appeals find all of the
following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical
conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record, that it is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this division;
b. That the exception is necessary for reasonable use of the site and in
order to avoid a substantial loss in value of the site; and
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject property.
2. Each application for an exception shall be referred to the Town for review.
The Town shall transmit its recommendations to the Zoning Board of
SEC. 28.3-7(Cont.1)
Appeals which shall review such recommendations prior to granting or
denying the exception.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application
for exception within thirty (30) days after receiving application in the manner
provided with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may approve the site development permit application with the
exceptions and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site
development permit application and exception application or it may take such
other action as appropriate.
B. Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event any person holding a site
development permit pursuant to this division violates the terms of the permit or
carries on site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the
health, welfare, or safety of the public or so as to be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to property, the Town may suspend or revoke the site
development permit.
1. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by the
Town and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person performing the
work. The stop-work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the
specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work may
be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals at which the conditions of
sub-paragraph 28.3-7B(2)(b) below can be met.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until
a hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by
registered mail, and shall state:
a. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation in
clear and concise language; and
b. The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Violations and Penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or
maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or site development or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this division. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
Code, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
SEC. 28.3-7(Cont.2)
division is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.
Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $2500 for each
offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
division shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to
commission of the violation or to bear the expense of such restoration.
D. Severability. The provisions and sections of this division shall be deemed to be
severable, and the invalidity of any portion of this division shall not affect the
validity of the remainder.
E. Injunctive Relief. Failure to obtain a site development permit as required by this
Code or failure to comply with the conditions of such permit or the variance or
exception conditions shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code. The Town
Director of Public Works may, if the property owner or permittee fails after notice to
correct such violation, make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this Code or such other relief or order as the Court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this Code.
(Entire Division 3 Added 4/21/08 by Ord. No. 5190)